A COMPLETE HISTORY Of the MOST Remarkable Providence, BOTH OF Judgment and
Mercy, Which have Happened in this PRESENT AGE.

EXTRACTED From the Best WRITERS, the AUTHOR'S own OBSERVATIONS, and the
Numerous RELATIONS sent him from diverse Parts of the Three KINGDOMS.

To which is Added, Whatever is Curious in the Works of Nature and Art.

THE Whole Digested into One VOLUME, under Proper Heads; being a Work set on
Foot Thirty Years ago, by the Reverend Mr. POOL, Author of the SYNOPSIS
CRITICORUM: And since Undertaken and Finished,

By WILLIAM TVRNER, M. A. Vicar of WALBERTON, in SUSSEX.

Recommended as useful to Ministers in Furnishing Topics of Reproof and
Exhortation, and to Private Christians for their Closets and Families.

One Generation shall praise thy Works to another, and shall declare thy mighty
Acts.
Psalm. 145.4. LONDON: Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven, in Jewen-Street.
MDCXCVII.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Chichester.
My LORD,
THE Dedication of Books to some Worthy Persons, seems to be very natural: For
though Men of Great Abilities and Fame may appear in the World, without any such
Patrons to make Way for their Admittance; yet we that are in a Lower Sphere,
stand in need of a Person of Figure and Value, to give some Countenance to such
Undertakings.

It Is to you, My Lord, I therefore make my Application, whose Genius, according
to what I have heard, and from that short Conversation I have had with you, I
judge suitable to the Toil and Greatness of that Province you are called to
Preside over. This is a Work I acknowledge, if faithfully Discharged, may,
perhaps, offend and exasperate some; and if not impartially Executed, the God
of Heaven will be Displeased, and your own Conscience be Disobliged.

But I come not here so much to be your Monitor, as with this small Present (a
Token of my Spiritual Fealty) to bid your Lordship Welcome into our Diocese:
Where I pray you may do much Good, and enjoy many Good Days; and at last, in
God's good time, may be removed to a better place. I am,

My LORD, Your most Humble, Obedient, and Faithful Son, WILLIAM TURNER.

TO THE Courteous Reader.
THE Work I have undertaken, is so difficult and obnoxious to Doubt and Error,
so slippery and obscure, that it must be confessed, by any Man of a solid
Judgment, that I have been bold, to make an Adventure upon such a Subject: But
the Genius of it being so generally acknowledged, it will admit of much Candor
and Alleviation, from all Men of an honest Principle, and sober Understanding.
It Is true, I have scaled the Mountains, and scrabbled above the Clouds, and
opened a little the Curtains that hid and separated the Secrets of Heaven from
Common View; and sometimes, likewise, have dived into the profoundest Secrets
and Depths of Nature, and at a distance looked into the Divine Councels, and
made Enquiry into the Affairs of the other World; but with so much Modesty, and
so little Pragmaticalness, that it will not be easy for any, but a man of a
contentious Spirit, to find out Matter to accuse me of. If there be any that
will take upon him to be my Adversary, I challenge him to outvy me; and if he
can (as I question not but he may) find out new Matter, and a better Method, I
shall thank and commend him for his Industry. But if Men can only pick out a
single Paragraph, or particular Circumstance, and nibble at it with their
Teeth, and bawl loud with their Tongues, and proceed no further; it is a poor
Game for a Man of good Sense to play at. But I hope this Book will not meet
with any Reader of this Tribe: But if it do, I desire and entreat him to go on
with my Observations to the end, and put all the (...), and strange Appearances
of Providence, Nature, and Art, into one Text, and meditate seriously upon
them, and try to solve all the Difficulties of them, and give us one more
System of Philosophy, that may give a full Satisfaction to Humane Reason, in
these Things to the World's end. What I have done, was undertaken with a
Probity of Intention, and managed with such a Competency (or Portion and
Pittance) of Reason and Prudence, as I was endowed with: And no Man is
answerable for more than he has received. I have been true and just to all
Parties, Jews and Gentiles, and the Church of God; to Protestants, Papists,
Dissenters of all sorts, (so far as I know) never daring wittingly, and
willingly, to tell a Lie in the Cause of God, or for Gods ^ Glory. And, no Body
can in Justice tax me for Partiality in that Point; for the Discourse must
always suit with the Text, and a History of Providence must be as extensive as
the Subject itself; And it is plain, that the Divine Care and Government is
spread over the whole Creation; God commands his Sun to shine, and his Rain to
fall, upon just and unjust; and therefore I resolved at the first Enterprise of
this Work, Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine agentur: I Will make no
difference, but speak Truth of all Men that the Sun shines upon, and the Divine
Providence is concerned with. Let those little Narrow-Soul'd Christians, that
appropriate their Faith and Charity to a Canton, live in a little Corner of the
World by themselves, they are hardly worthy to enjoy the Benefit and Influence
of an Universal Sun, and Gospel, and Government. For my part, I have long ago
challenged the Epithet of Catholic, so far as it is lawful and commendable: But
else, I protest against a real Heretic, or Schismatic, as unworthy of Catholic
Favor and Communion. As to the Work itself, it is of no dishonorable Original;
all the Historians that ever writ, almost, have given a Touch upon it, both
Ethnic and Christian; many Christians have made Essays upon it, but none more
particularly (that I know of) than Mexico, Camerarius, Pontanus, Delrio, Dr.
Beard, Dr. Tho. Tailour, Mr. Clark, Mr. Mather, etc. And of late, in our own
Church and Nation, Dr. More, Mr. Glanvile, and Mr. Baxter, etc. I have tried
what I could, to comprize the Substance of all in a little room, and given my
Reader the Extract of my Collections here, in one Volume; and to them have
added, my own Observations, and other Relations never before in Print: For
which I stand Indebted and Obliged to several Friends, and some worthy
Personages, who have given in their fresh Informations and Encouragements to
this Undertaking, from diverse Parts of the Three Kingdoms.

A Work of this Nature was set on Foot about Thirty Years ago, by Mr. Pool,
Author of the Synopsis Criticorum; but or what Reason I know not, it was laid
aside, and nothing has since appeared on that Subject, but a small Essay
(written by Mr. Increase Mather, Rector of Harvard College, in New England) to
invite some others to go on with the Work, and finding that 'twas not attempted
by any other Hand, I was resolved to go on with it, as being fully satisfied,
that a Work of this kind, must needs be of Great Use; especially to such pious
Minds as delight to observe the Manifestations which God does give of himself,
both in his Works of Creation and Providence; the former are sufficient to
render those who have no other Instructers, inexcusable, as we are taught by
the Apostle, Romans 1.20. And the Excellency of the latter consists in this, That
they are the real Accomplishments of his written Word: So that to Record
Providence, seems to be one of the best Methods that can be pursued, against
the abounding Atheism of this Age: For by Works of Providence, the Confession
of a God, and the Truth of his Word, have been extorted from those very Persons
who have boldly denied it. Memorable is that Passage of Aeschyles the Persian,
in Traged. who relating his Country-mens Discomfiture by the Greeks, gives us
this Observation, That when the Grecians pursued them furiously over the great
River Strymon, which was then frozen, but began to thaw, he did, with his own
Eyes, see many of those Gallants, whom he had heard before, maintain so boldly,
that there was no God; every one upon their Knees, with Eyes and Hands lifted
up, begging for Mercy; and that the Ice might not break 'till they got over.

The Scepticks of this Age, may possibly call such a Passage in Question; but
what can the most obdurate Atheist say, to those Providence about the Jews;
which were so clearly foretold in the Scriptures, and part of 'em are visible
to their own Eyes? Is not this sufficient to convince them of the Being of an
Omniscient God, that the Sacred Scriptures are his Revealed Will, and that
Christianity is the only true Religion? We doubt not, but those Men who are
able to hold out against such a convincing Demonstration, will flout at this
Undertaking, and expose it all they can; but they may remember the Conquest
which Truth made over their great Champions, my Lord Rochester, Sir Alan
Broderick, and Sir Duncomb Colchester, (all mentioned in the following Work)
Providence which merit their Thoughts, and may serve to stop their Mouths.

To Name all my Authors, would be tedious, in the Front of the Book; and the
more unnecessary, because the Reader will find most of them cited in the Work
itself: Which, I believe, will not be either unprofitable, or unpleasant, to
any one that reads with Judgment; nor unsatisfactory to any that reads without
Prejudice. I pray my Reader's Candor, if any particular Relation be not
reduced to its proper Head; or if there be any Repetition of the same Story,
without necessity; or any other Error of the Press, that is venial; I crave
that I may have but due Grains of Allowance made to me, as are commonly made in
such Cases: For I am at least Forty Miles distant from the Press, and cannot,
with any Convenience to my other Concerns, attend the Ingress of it into the
World. I grant, the Work is not, Omninibus numeris absolutum, in every respect
answerable to the first Proposals; but so are almost all the Undertakings of
finite Reason, upon some Account or other, short of the first Intentions: To be
perfectly Wise, is the Property of God Almighty. For my part, I am very
sensible of the Depths I have here taken upon me to fathom, and do declare
openly to the World, That the Ways of God are unsearchable, and his Footsteps
cannot perfectly be traced: He does so tread upon the deep Waters, and
sometimes flies upon the Wings of the Wind, and hides himself in Clouds from
common view, employing Spirits for his Angels, and Flames of Fire, at other
times, for his Messengers: (For, so I think, we may justly invert the Order of
our common Translation) that I declare freely my Comment is infinite short of
my Text, and my Paraphrase does not, and cannot reach my Subject: And indeed,
who can by searching, find out the Almighty to Perfection? If some studious and
skilful Reader, would cause this Book to be Interleaved, and add some New Heads
of his own, and make a Supply for the Defects of the Old Ones, it might, in
process of time, be made exceeding useful for Common Places.

In the mean time, I desire my Reader only, to look over all these Secondary
Causes, and little Instruments that are moved here below, and look up to, and
fix his Eye upon the Spring and Original Wheel, that gives Motion to all the
rest. And if there be any thing within the Cope of our Horizon, that will give
Satisfaction to the Brain on Man, this will certainly do it: And if it do not,
the next Step is a sinful Curiosity, and dangerous; and whatsoever is more than
that, comes of Evil. From which Evil, the God of Heaven deliver us all. Amen.

WILLIAM TURNER.

A Practical Introduction TO THE History of Divine Providence: Being the
Author's MEDITATIONS On On The Being of a GOD. On The Works of Creation and
Providence. On The Existence of a Separate Soul. On The Ministry of Angels.
And, On The Future State, etc.

I. The Being of a GOD.
NOtwithstanding the Being of a GOD is laid down as the First Principle of our
Faith and Religion, owned, acknowledged, and believed by all; yet because in
this debauched Age, there want not some Monsters that question this Article,
and are ready (if not with their Tongues, yet with their Hearts) to deny the
Lord that made them, I shall, by way of Introduction to the following History
of Divine Providence, 1. Prove, That there is a God.

I confess, I konw not any, that I suspect guilty of professed, yet since there
want not Arguments to implead (too) many (at least) accessory to Pratical
Atheism, I go, tho sadly, to my ABC, to lay down the First Rudiments of
Christianity.

1. Then I may prove it from the Book of Nature. Come thy ways, unbelieving
Atheist, and turn over this Great Volume of the Divine Creation; see what a
Bible Nature herself presents thee with, unclasp'd and opened, the Letters (for
the most part) capital and legible, that he who runs may read, a God in every
Leaf, in every Line, in every Creature. Go, gaze awhile at the next little
Fly, or Flower, or (but) Spire of Grass thou meetest with; see the curious
Workmanship, Artifice, Wisdom, and Power there is discernable in the make of
it, and resolve me, what Man, with all his Wit and Skill, is able to make the
like, to exceed or equallize it? Job 12.7, 8, 9.

Or, if that will not do, take but one of thy Fellow-Beings, Man, into a
studious Disquisition; dissect him in all his several Parts, tell his Bones,
his Nerves, Veins, Ligaments, with all the Branches, Postures and Uses of them.
Trace his Nourishment from his Hands to his Teeth, to his Palate, to his
Stomach, to his Guts and Milkey Veins, to his Liver, to his Vena Cava, to the
right Ventricle of his Heart; thence into the Vena Arteriosa, and so into the
Lungs, and so into the Arteria Venosa; and thence again into the left Ventricle
of the Heart, and so into his Arteries and Veins, and whose Body at last. (I
speak not of the dreggy part of Nourishment.)

But what should I talk of the Whole Man; take but one of his smallest Parts,
his Eye; see its variety of Colors, warry, glassy, and chrystalline Humors;
consider the Ends and Uses of them, the one to defend the bordering Parts from
dryness, to break the Brightness of Objects, continually flowing in, and to
greaten the Representations of them; the other to prepare Nourishment for the
Chrystalline, and to give to passage for the Species to the Retina, that it may
refract them from Perpendiculars; the last to receive and collect the
Representations of Things. See its Muscles, six in number; the first to lift,
the second to press down; the third to move the Eye inwards, the fourth
outward; the two last to roll and which it about to the outward and inner
Corner. See its Nerves, a seeing and moving Pair; those to carry the Faculty of
Seeing with the Species from the Brain, or the Visible Represeatation of Things
to the Brain; those to stir and move them to and fro. See its Coats, the Tunica
Admata, fastening the Eye to the Socket; the Scleretica, divided again into the
Cornea and Choroides, and Retina; all which have their particular Uses:
Consider their Situation in the most eminent place, like Watchmen, in long
Sockets, for the better Safeguard sake. Consider the Eye-lidsof how soft a Coat
they are made, left they hurt that tender part; how loose to shut and open,
that they may be in a constant readiness to cover it from harm or danger; how
eminent in place, to overshadow the Picture, and render it more illustrious.
Consider how between the Mus^es and sundry Vessels, there is Fat interspersed,
left for want of Heat and Moisture, the Motion of the Eye should be hindered.
And lastly, take Notice of that little portion of Flesh, placed at the great
Corner of the Eye, spongy to liquor it, but placed over a Hole which goes into
the Nose-Bone, to stop a continual Weeping. Consider these things; and withal,
that the Hundredth part has not been told thee: And say, if the Finger of a
GOD be not plainly discernable in all this? Take some time, now and then, to
know thyself, and view but the Contexture of thy Body, how thou art trusted
with Bones and Sinews, how curiously thou art wrought in every Part, in every
Limb; and speak the Truth, if a wiser Hand than thine, than any Creature's, be
not concerned there?

2. If thou distrustest thy own Judgment, ask thy Neighbors: If thy own
Convictions be not sufficient in the Case, we will give thee leave enough to
consult others. Go ask thy Fathers, and they will tell thee, and thy
Forefathers, thy furthermost Ancestors, and they will account to thee, what God
did in their Days, and in the Old Time before them. Nay, enquire of the Nations
round about, he, Spain, and Turkey, and the barbarous Tartary, the wild
Africans, and ignorant Americans, and they will all confess, with one Mouth,
this undeniable Truth, That there is a God: It Is a Universal Dictate of Nature,
implanted in all Breasts, inserted in all Commonwealths, of as large a Spread
as Reason and Mankind in the World. Romans 1.19.

3. From Miracles: Prithee, Reader, answer me, whether or no, those Wonders in
Nature, which we call Miracles, be nothing else but a mere Lie and Forgery? If
not; then how comes the World to be so generally imposed on? How comes not only
the Christian, but Jewish Religion to be confirmed and ratified in so fixed a
posture as they have been amongst Men? Or what makes our Scriptures and Annals,
and Books of History, so big with them? If yea; then, I hope, they speak a
Divinity, and a supernatural Power concerned in the performance of them. If it
be indeed certain, (that is constantly reported among us for a Truth) That
Nature's Bounds are sometimes broken, and the ordinary Method of Things and
Actions is crossed and turned quite another way, if ever the Sun stood still,
or Angels were seen in an Embassy from Heaven; if ever God appeared in a
flaming Bush, or talked with Man in Clouds and Thunder; if ever Sin were
immediately punished with a Shower of Brimstone; if ever Diseases were cured
with a Word, and the Dead raised to Life by a Groan or Prayer; if ever
Blasphemies were smitten with present Vengeance, and those who have denied, or
palpably injured the God of Heaven, have smarted immediately for the Guile and
Sin, (as our own Age and Country, if we will not deafen our Ears, and wink with
our Eyes, will afford us, now and then, a notorious Instance;) I say, if these
Things are so, resolve me, who it is so able and bold, as to transgress the
Laws of Nature? And I am sure it can be no other than a God, Consider these
Things, raise up thy Thoughts into an admiration of Him, with that Heathen
King, Nebuchadnezzar, when he saw the Children saved in the burning Furnace,
Dan. 4.23.

This Knowledge of God is insufficient to save and bless us: Here, it is true,
we may know so much as will reader us inexcusable; but yet not enough to
instruct and edify us unto perfect Salvation. In the Scripture we may take a
more deliberate View of him, we may acquaint our selves better with him, we may
see him look through the Lattices, and commune with his Church in a free and
familiar way; entertaining a Patriarch in solemn Discourses, appearing in
Visions, in Dreams, by Prophets, by Vrim, by Oracles to his Children and People.

Having briefly proved the Being of a GOD, I shall next prove that GOD is a
Spirit.

I hope I need not spend time here, in proving the Existence of a Spirit. --
That there are such Things in Nature, i. e. immaterial Beings, Substances naked
of any Matter, or Corporeal Parts, invisible to the Eye, undiscernable to the
Touch, without Flesh and Bones, as ordinary Creatures have; Beings hidden from
our outward Senses, either filling or traversing the World, unseen, unobserved
for the most part, by our weak Intellectuals; is so certain a Truth, attested
by the whole Bulk of Holy Writ, by a ^ong Train of History and Tradition, both
amongst Jews, Heathens, and Christians, by the Suggestions of our own Souls, (
the very exact Character and Pourtraicture of immaterial Spirits) that I need
not now employ my Pen, to enlarge upon this Subject, (only) I shall prove, that
GOD is a Spirit.

1. Because he is the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9. He it is, who is the prime
Parent of all such Spiritual and Immaterial Substances, out of his Bosom did
they all come, ripened to that Maturity and Perfection of an Existence in the
World; 'twas he made the Angels, and Man little lower than them, breathing into
his Nostrils a more sublime and defecated Substance, than any could be squeezed
out of his dreggy Body, and outward gross material Part: And what must he be
then, but a Spirit himself?

2. It Is impossible he should be made up of Matter, and material Parts, when he
is the Creator of the whole World: For how should a Body be able to stand and
fix his Presence to a particular Place, when he must be present at the making
of every particular Piece and Member of the Creation, and that in a short time,
if not in an Instant? A Body, we know, must be circumscribed, limited to a
Space, so far it may take up, and no further: here it may be, and not there; or
there, and not here, at the same time. But God, at the make of the World, must
stretch his Presence to a wide (if not immense) Capacity ^^e must be able to
climb the Sun, and fathom the Depths, to walk about the Spheres, and pierce the
thicker Bodies; he must search those Beings he makes within and without, must
see the outward shape and the inward form. And what can this be but a Spirit?

3. He searches the Hearts, and knows the Thoughts afar off: Those outward
Cases we wear, those thick Covers of our Bodies do not hide us from his
Knowledge. Jer. 17.10. His Eye walks to and fro upon the Earth, scanning the
Actions of Thoussands with a Glance, in a Moment turning over the whole Book of
the Creation, which his own Hand wrote and folded up, and reading any Page and
Line, with a single Cast of his Omniscience. And what is this but a Spirit?

4. He is invisible. Exodus 33.20. He said, Thou can not see my Face, Job.
1.18. God may please sometimes to pourtray himself, and shadow out his
Excellency to us with a visible Form, may appear in a Flame, or mask his Glory
with a Cloud, but never come in his own proper and genuine Dress. If he speaks
to us, it is but a borrowed Lisping from our own Faculties; if he be seen by us,
it is but in a Coat borrowed from some of his Creatures, Job. 5.37. No, God
himself, as he is in his own Nature pure and sparkling Essence, is not obvious
to our Senses, never was caught by the Hand, Eye, of Ear, of living Men, and
therefore is a Spirit, and to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth. According to
our Apprehensions of God's Nature, so are commonly our Devotions to him; and
indeed this is founded upon a sound Maxim, sc. That as God is in his own
Nature, so he requires a suitable Worship, a Worship correspondent to those
Properties he has; he is good, and therefore would have us do, and be good:
And so in whatever Attributes are given to him, if they are communicable to the
Creature, he is to be imitated by us: Be ye Followers of God, as dear Children,
like your heavenly Father. And therefore as God is a Spirit, so he requires
such a Worship. God's Motto in this respect is the same with Solomon's, My Son,
give me thy Heart: A pure Aim after God's Glory, a sincere Compliance with our
Duty, an upright pursuance of Holiness and Piety, are the Whole, or the M^rrow
of our Religion. We should not only bring our Lips, our Hands, our Knees, our
Ears, or Our Bodies, to our Devotions; but as the Psalmist, My Soul follows
hard after thee. And Psalm. 62.1. Truly my Soul waits upon God. Reader, it is
certain, when we have to do with God, a Spirit, an immaterial Substance, we
have not to do with a Man like our selves, but a Quick-eyed Being. Omnisciency
itself, a God all Sight, that sees within, as well as without us. Methinks,
such a Thought should strike us with an awful Reverence of his Majesty: Such a
Meditation as the Psalmist takes up, ( Psalm. 139.1.) might seize us with a
filial Dread, and possess our Hearts with Trembling, in our daily Comportment
before him; it might awaken our Affections, to go hand in hand, and move
jointly with our ordinary Duty.

Inward Religion is the only acceptable Devotion to the Father of Spirits, and
therefore no running now to Mount Guizem, no matter now for traveling to the
Old Jerusalem, no matter for running to the Stalls for a Kid or Hetfer, to the
Altar with an Offering or Sacrifice: No matter now for these Ceremonies,
Washings, Cleansings, etc. used by the ancient Jews; Touch not, taste not,
handle not, and all the pompous Trade of a Ceremonious Worship once enjoined to
the Old Church, and now imposed by the Antichristian, is now an illegitimate, a
base-born Service, usurped by Sacrilegious People, who make it no Crime to
steal from Christ's Prerogative, and put themselves instead of him, Head of the
Church,

It Is true, we may, and must Worship yet with Hand and Knee, we may yet attend
upon a Font, and wash in Water, and wait upon a Sacramental Table; we may eat
Bread, and drink Wine, as Signs and Seals of spiritual and abstruse Mysteries:
But these are derived to us by a Divine Institution, they come with a Mandamus
from God himself; and we have so few Ceremonies besides, except those which are
natural, and serve lively to express the inward Motions of our Hearts; and so
much inward spiritual Devotion is required with them. That our Religion may
deservedly pass under the Title of Spirit and Truth.

Learn we then to put an evenness of proportion between our outward and inner
Man: To compose not only our Shape and Visage, but our Heart and Soul to the
Knowledge and Presence of an All-seeing God: Learn we to call upon our Spirits,
and summon our Affections, when we address our selves to the Father of Spirits.
Think what a thin, pure, subtle, spacious Nature, the Sun and Light are of;
how they pierce through the Air, dart their Beams through the Clouds, pierce
the Windows, and shine into our Houses, Chambers, the Corners of our
Habitations; and think God Almighty is a purer, a finer, a more spiritual
Substance, and therefore can see through us, scan our Thoughts, and try our
Reins afar off. Heb. 4.12, 13.

II. Meditations on the Works of Creation and Providence.
IT IS the Prerogative of Human Nature, that we have not only a lofty Figure and
Visage, but Intellectuals too, far superior to all the Brutish kind: And this
Endowment bestowed upon us by him that made us, for very wise and good Ends:
Not to be more ingen^ously wicked and dishonest, to immerge our selves deeper
in the Concerns and Pleasures of a Material and Sensual World; but to live
above it. My Design then in these Meditations, ( having already proved the
Being of a God) is to climb a Jacob's Ladder, to satisfy a little the
Curiosity of my Nature, to inform myself first of all, and then my Fellows (so
far as soberly and modestly I may) with all the Phenomena of the Aetherial
Region: To acquaint myself and others with the outward Face of Heaven first of
all, and all the visible Furniture of the outward Court; those glorious
Spangles of Stars and Planets, those fiery Meteors, and other strange
Exhalations and Vapors, that occur to our Senses and common Observations.

And this is not for bare Contemplation only; but with a Design to make as
Natural, Genuine, and Reasonable Deductions for Practice as possible.

Be pleased then to contemplate awhile with me, the Beauty of the outward
Parts of Heaven, and thence make Conjecture at the Wisdom of him that made the
World, and the Provision he has made in the highest Heavens, for all that love
and obey him in Truth. It cannot be improper, certainly, to ascend Pisgah by
degrees; we may see the outward Skirts of Heaven, from the Foot of the Mount:
When we can get to the Top, our Desire is to take a Prospect of the whole
Hemisphere; to leave the Stars, whilst we make Enquity after all the Invisible
Host of the Middle Region, that are employed about us, either as Friends or
Enemies: And this is attempted in the following Survey of that Spiritual and
Invisible World, where those Dii Medioxami, Intermediate Agents are employed,
as Reporters and Transporters, Monitors, Couriers, Apparitors, Guardians,
Adversaries, between this and the other World. For certainly it is lawful,
whilst we live here, to peep out of our Prison, and take Acquaintance, in what
degree lawfully we can, with Angels and naked Spirits. Upon the score of our
Kindred and Alliance to them, and Concernment with them, we are obliged so far;
we must do it, or we are not only Disingenuous, but blind to our own Interest.
And why does the Almighty use to frequently and remarkably in the World, those
Intelligent and Spiritual Ministers in the Exercise of his Providence, if we
might not Enquire after them, and take Acquaintance with them. Is he ashamed of
his Spiritual Train and Family? Or are they so mighty strange and foreign to
our Natures, or so very far above us, that we must run away like People
affrighted out of our Wits, to hide from all such Apparitions in Corners of
thick Darkness: But why should we be so ungrateful to those Angelical
Creatures, as to suppress all those Occurrences of History, all those
conspicuous Remarks of the Divine Providence, wherein their Footsteps are
plainly visible, not only to their Grief and Dishonor, but to the great
Encouragement of Atheism and Infidelity in the World. Thus far, I humbly
conceive, we may safely climb our Scala Coeli, to the Veil that interposeth
between us and the Inner Court, to the Gate of the New Jerusalem, and no
farther. The Lord guide us, the Angels guard us in all our Ways, 'till we are
got safe into that place, where we shall be satisfied with Glories, which now
we little know or comprehend, where we shall be sweetly surprised, and bravely
entertained with Joyous Company, and Glorious Objects, and tread not only the
Moon, but all the Starry Globes under our Feet.

In my Essay on the Works of Creation, my Design is to take Measure by the
Sublimity of our Aspect, and the Excellency of the Object, for the Order and
Method of my Thoughts. Both these seem naturally disposed to determine my
Choice of the Heavens and Heavenly Bodies, and the Appurtenances that are more
nearly related to them, and depend upon them, for the Subject of my present
Discourse, leaving this Globe of Earth, the very Sediment of the Creation, and
the most dreggy part of the World, for my future Thoughts and Meditations. And
because in all our Disquisitions and Actions, we ought to propound to our
selves, for our Main End, the Glory of God, I shall consider,

1. The Greatness of the Heavens. 2. The Quality of them. 3. Their Situation.
4. The Stars and Planets. 5. Other inferior Appurtenances, Comets, Thunder,
Lightning, Air, Winds, Storms, and Tempests, Hail, Rain, Snow, and Frosts,
extraordinary Signs and Apparitions, etc. 6. The Continuation of them. 7. Their
Extensiveness and Universality. And Lastly, Because amongst all these the Sun
is the most admirable, most conspicuous, and most glorious Body, I shall assign
a particular Meditation upon this great and excellent Luminary by itself.

But so I shall manage my Discourse from the Beginning to the End, as to
intermix it all along with Practical Remarks and Inferences; as accounting it
but a poor Exercise, to expend our best Thoughts upon barren Speculations.

1. Of the Greatness of the Heavens.
BY the Heavens, I mean not the Supreme Emperial Part, not the Seat of the
Blessed, which is out of sight, and the reach of Humane Sense, but the outward,
lower, visible Parts of the Heavenly Orbs, those Parts which may be seen: And
how great these are, you cannot expect, that we should be able certainly to
tell you; they are very great, that we all know; so vast, that they comprehend
within the Cavity of them, the whole Universe, besides all the Earth, Seas,
Air, and every thing that belongs to them. Astronomers say, the Primum Mobile
is 1960 times bigger than the Earth; whatever it is, the Magnitude is wonderful,
past our Fathom, and enough to fill us with the admiration of him that made it.

2. Of the Quality of the Heavens.
OF such a subtle, diaphonous Nature, that it will not terminate our sight, a
Man may see through it, if the distance did not hinder; more thin and
perspicuous than the Air itself, clearer than the Crystal, or the finest
Glass, Ezekiel. 1.22. Rev. 21.11. Rev. 4.6. So immutable, that for near upon 6000
Years it has not been impaired, or decayed, or altered with continual Exercise
and Motion. Every thing here below the Moon is subject to change: The outward
and courser Arches of the Heavens suffer no damage; even Stones and Monuments,
in this lower World, die with Age: the Posts and Pillars, the outward Scaffold
of the World above, is in its own Nature, by the Law of the Supreme Architect,
immortal, I mean so, that no Creature can endamage them, 'till the God that
made them, forbid them to be any more. The nearer to God and Heaven, the more
pure, firm and lasting, the Constitution of the Creature is. If the outward
Heavens are such, what is the Seat of the Blessed, which (if terminated in any
place) lies beyond them! What are the Angels that tread that Floor, those
Arches under Feet! What is God himself that made them, and looks after them!

The Figure also is very wonderful; so vastly great, and yet exactly round;
without any Unevennesses, or Angles, and Turnings, of a perfect Circular
Figure. Circulus (said the Philosophers) est Divinum quid. And the Egyptians
pourtrayed one of their Divinities (named Kneph) as a beautiful Man, with
Feathers on his Head, a Girdle, and a Scepter in his Hand, with an Egg (the
Hieroglyphick of the World) proceeding out of his Mouth. And some of them did
adore the Circle of the Heavens, as an expression of his Power and Perfections.
And it is true, there is no Figure so capacious as the Round One; because (as I
said) it admits no Corners, no Unevenness, etc. Nor is there any Being so
perfect as God, without any Infirmity or Defect. How great then in Power and
Wisdom must this God be, that stretched out the Heavens like a round Canopy,
and hung it over this lower World, in so exact and circular a Figure, that no
inequality can be found in it!

3. Of the Situation of the Heavens.
ALL this Great Body, hung with an innumerable Number of Stars and Planets
(each Body big enough to make a World of) all this hung upon nothing; no
material Arches, no visible Pillars to support it! Nothing but the Power of him
that made it. It surpasses Human Skill, the Wit of all Men in the World, to
hang a little Ball, or an Egg-shell in the Air, without somewhat material to
support it. God has not only hung the Earth, (but the Heavens also) upon
nothing. What cannot the God of all the World do! Let him but speak the Word,
and he can make a World stand without Pillars! His Word is enough for a World
to stand upon, and shall poor sneaking Man be afraid to venture upon his
Promise! He spoke the Word, and the World was created; he spoke the Word, and
the Heavens were stretched forth over the empty places! He may speak the Word
Ten thousand times, and Man shall despond and be afraid to venture out any
further than he can stand upon his own Legs. If St. Peter step forth upon the
Sea at the Voice of his Savior, he begins to sink: And if the Sinner do but
essay to trust upon the Word of the Almighty, when no outward supply is ready
at hand, his Faith fails him, and he sinks into Despair. So long as we have
Money in our Pockets, or a Remedy in sight, we can keep our Feet; but in
Poverty, Distress, and Danger, all the Promises in the Gospel, sealed with the
Word and Oath of a God, are not Ground enough for Man to set his Foot upon.

4. Of the Stars and Planets.
WHich deserve to be considered, 1. As many. How many I know not. You have
heard the Phrases, As the Stars of Heaven for multitude, and as the Sands upon
the Seashore: Used promiscuously, sometimes one, sometimes the other.
Astronomers have long ago reckoned up 1022 of them that are visible; and it is
concluded, those that are invisible are far the greater number, Psalm. 147.4. He
tells the Number of the Stars, and calls them all by their Names. If the
Stars of Heaven be so numerous, what are the Inhabitants that dwell beyond! I
grant, it is a little Flock that goes to Heaven, compared with the many, many
damned Souls that go to Hell, but as God said to Abraham, Genesis 15.5. Look now
toward Heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou be able to number them, etc. The
number of them that stand about the Throne, is ten thousand times ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands stand before him! Rev. 5.11. He shows Mercy to
thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commands. And let not any think,
that amongst so many Children, God will forget or overlook any of them, he
knows them all, and will lose none of them. He calls his own Sheep by Name, and
leads them out, John 10.3. He counts our wanderings, puts our Tears into a
Bottle, the very Hairs of our Head are all numbered. There Is not a Word in our
Mouth, nor a Thought in our Heart, but he knows it altogether. Such Knowledge
is too great for us; it may put us into wonder, and strike us with an awful
Reverence of the Divine Omnipotence and Wisdom. Consider then a little Sinner,
how many thy Sins are, how many the Mercies of God bestowed upon thee, how many
Invitations thou have had to Repentance, and how many Repulses thou have given
to the Messages of Heaven; and withal, how, if they were ten thousand times ten
thousand more, God knows and remembers them all; and then say with Job, 9.2.
How should Men be just with God?

2. Their Greatness: Indeed, they seem little to us, because they are a great
way off: Distance of Place gives Disadvantage to the Prospect; but he that
says they are no bigger than they seem, is as wise as that Philosopher, that
thought the Sun was no bigger than his Head. The Learned and most Skilful
Astronomers, do generally conclude it for a demonstrative Truth, that the least
Star in the Firmament is bigger than the Earth we live upon: And yet these so
great Bodies are carried so high, supported only with the Hand of the Almighty,
let not the penitent Sinner then say, can God raise me up from the Grave of
Sin, from Things below, and set me up on high, and bring me safe to Heaven. Tho
thou lie now among the Potsherds, sunk deep into Sin and Misery, yet God is
able to lift thee, and thousands more, and carry thee as upon Eagles Wings, and
set you as Stars in Heaven, there to shine for ever and ever.

3. Distance from one another (especially the Planets) and from the Earth. The
Moon is next to us, Mercury next, Venus in the third place, the Sun fourth,
Mars the fifth, Jupiter the sixth, Saturn highest; the Fixed Stars above them
all. Were they all in the same Orb, they would move together at the same time,
and make no Distinction of Day and Night, of Winter and Summer, or not so much
as would serve for our Necessities; And should they be all so low, as the
lowest; or should he that holds them there, let them fall thence by the reverse
of his Decree, or the withdrawing of his constant Providence, they would soon
set this World on Fire, and send us off the Stage, and burn the Universe into a
Scroll: Should God draw back the Hand of his Omnipotence but one moment, the
Stars would fall upon our Heads, and make this whole World into a Hell in the
twinkling of an Eye! How necessarily do we depend upon the Divine Mercy for our
Safety and Security every Hour we live. More ways than one (than a thousand)
does he keep Death and Destruction from us. Let us consider a little, this
excellent Favor: So many Globes as big as Worlds, and most of them far
greater, hanging over our Heads all the Days of our Life, and we still walking
safe under them; how much (methinks) do we owe to the Power and good Providence
of God for saving our Lives in such imminent Danger. Were those excellent
Bodies subject to the like Irregularities as we are, apt to go out of their
place, to leave their Orbs, to disobey the Will of him that made them, as Man
generally is, what a dangerous Condition should we be in! Damocles, who sat
down to Table at a Feast, with a naked Sword hanging over his Head, with a
Horse-hair, had no such reason of an awful fear upon him, as we have, if he
that governed the Stars were a Man, and not God.

4. Their Light: Which is so great in all, that if but one of the Stars or
Planets (except the Moon, which has none but borrowed Light) were not kept at
a distance from us, they would certainly dazzle our weak Eyes into absolute
blindness; or if removed much farther off, would not serve our Necessities. But
of this more hereafter.

5. Motion: Incredibly swift, insomuch, that, as Lessius says, such Stars as
are near the Equinoctial Line, do move every Hour Forty millions of Miles,
every Million being 1000000, and so in one Hour move more than comes to 2000
times the Compass of the Earth. The Sun (says the same Author) in the compass
of one Hour, goes in its motion 1000000 Miles; whereupon it is certain, that in
the same space of time it equals the Compass of the Earth in its Course, above
Fifty times. What an amazing Wonder of Omnipotence is this! Let those
Atheistical Sinners think of it, that call daily for a Miracle to prove the
Being of a God. Here Is a Miracle, that presents before us every Day! And every
Man that has Eyes in his Head (if he has Brains too) may see it, and wonder!
Why, what would Men have a God to do, more than this! If he should make a fresh
Creation of a World every Hour, Men might still wink and disbelieve; and still
call for fresh Miracles! As if the Almighty Jehovah had nothing else to do,
than humor the silly Passions of Hard-hearted Sinners, of pitiful incredulous
Worms! Well! it will not be long, but God will justify himself to these Men,
before Angels and Devils, and show that he did not leave himself without
Witness in the World.

6. Influences: Which are diverse, and some of them not known to us, or
discoverable to us. I shall mention some.

1. Warming these sublunary Bodies, and infusing such a Heat into them, as is
necessary for Life and Motion; insomuch, that without it, there would be no
Generation, no Motion, no Life in the Creatures of this World. Take away but
the Sun out of the Firmament, and no Spring would appear, Man would be no more,
the Acts of Accretion, Growing, Feeling, Moving, Seeing, Living, would all
cease presently. Sol and Homo generant hominem. Nay, were the Sun removed but
as far from us as the Fixed Stats, England would be Ireland, and all our Year
prove a cold Winter; our very Senses would prove chill, and our Reasons follow
hard after them: For, Temperamentum animi sequitur temperamentum Corporis: What
an excellent God have we to deal with, who accommodates us so kindly,
seasonably, suitably with Fire and Fuel from Heaven, not only to ferment the
Clouds in order to Rain, to dissolve the Snow and Hail, to warm the Air that
pierces our Bodies, to foment the Earth, and make it fruitful, but also
cherish our Human Bodies, and makes our Souls more pleasant which dwell in such
warm Stoves. If all the Wood and combustible Matter on the Earth were heaped
together, to make one Pile, in order to a great Bonfire, for the benefit of the
Earth, it would not do so much good (but would come infinitely short) as the
Stars and Planets of Heaven. Besides, if the Warmth of the lower Orbs be so
friendly and beneficial to our Natures, What is the Grace of God that comes
down from the Inner Heaven, the Light of his Countenance, to our Inner Souls!
If the Sun with its pleasant Rays makes the sublunary World smile, and laugh
and sing, shall not the Special Grace and Favor of the Almighty, much more put
Gladness into our Hearts! And make us cheerful in the Service of our Maker! If
the presence of the Hosts of Heaven, the Sun, Moon, and Stars be so
comfortable, what is the Presence of the Lord of Hosts, the blessed God, the
Communion of the holy Jesus, the Influences of the Spirit of Grace, the Company
of Angels, Cherubim, and Seraphim! Let us say as Psalm. 4. Many say, who will
show us any good? -- etc. Besides, if the outward Court of this World be so
comforted with the Warmth of the outward Parts of Heaven; is there nothing in
the Emperial Orbs, in the Inner Chambers to refresh and comfort the Church of
God! Is the Atrium Gentium so pleasant, and is the Sanctum Sanctorum (the Holy
of Holies) devoid and desolate!

2. The Flux and Reflux. Ebb and Flowing of the Sea; that indeed depends, as
generally concluded, upon the Moon only: But that is such a Wonder in Nature,
that it sufficiently illustrates the Power and Wisdom of God, Psalm. 107.21, 22,
23. Oh that Men would praise the Lord, etc. Thus God who daily makes the great
and wide Seas to Ebb and Flow, is able also to make the like Changes and
Vicissitudes in the World, in the Church! He turns Man to Destruction; again,
he says, return, ye Children of Men, etc. Psalm. 90.3, 5, 6. Psalm. 107.31, 32.
etc.

3. Other secret Influences and Operations unknown to us, as to Weather,
Health, Plenty, and it may be, Wars and Peace, Prosperity and Afflictions, Life
and Death: For so far Astrologers go; but -- I would be wise unto Sobriety; and
not peer too far, lest I should be taxed for Curiosity; in all this the Glory
of God appears.

5. Of Comets, Thunder and Lightning, Air and Winds, Storms and Tempests, Hail,
Rain, Snow, and Frosts, extraordinary Signs and Apparitions.
I Shall here speak of the other inferior Appurtenances of Heaven, I choose to
range them under that Notion, because I intend not so much a Lecture of
Philosophy, as a plain Discourse of Divinity. I mean the Comets, Thunder and
Lightning, Wind and Air, Vapors and Exhalations, Storms and Tempests, Hail,
Rain, and Snow, strange Apparitions and Phenomena. I hope my time will not be
quite lost, nor I censured for impertinent, in treating on these Things; God
himself therefore exhibiting them, that we might duly meditate upon them, and
deduce Inferences thence for his Glory.

1. Comets and Blazing Stars, or whatever else of that Nature appears in the
Heavens above us. I pass over those Meteors of lesser moment, Falling-Stars,
Burning Lances, Flying Dragons, Skipping Goats, Ignes Fatui, and Licking
Fires, as Exhalations of inferior wonder. Comets are the most stupendous. I
hope, no Body amongst Christians, is so silly as Democritus, who took them for
the Souls of the Saints, triumphing in Glory; or, as others, Fires carried
thither by Spirits, only to astonish the World.

Whatever they are generated of (for I will not meddle here with the Physical
Consideration) their meaning is something; the God of Nature, who is so wise,
as to make nothing in vain, without all doubt, puts them in the Heavens for
some Sign or other: Nor dare I be peremptory, to sign the particular
signification. I humbly conceive, the most that we can read in those Celestial
Hierogliphicks, is, that God is going to do some great Thing in the World; and
that at the hanging out of those Flags, it behooves Men to enquire into their
Lives, and search their ways more narrowly, and prepare -- to meet their God,
who is coming to Judge the World in Equity, and makes these Flames of Fire his
Harbingers to prepare his Way, and give Notice of his coming. I shall not
trouble you with particular Instances of these kind of Meteors; the Scripture
tells us, at the Birth of our Savior a Star appeared; which, perhaps, was the
Comet spoken of by Heathen Authors in the Days of Augustus, of a stupendous
Greatness; upon which the Tibertine Sibyl showed the Emperor the Divinity of
our Savior, in these words, Hic Puer Major te est, Ipsum adora. Our last great
Comet, I doubt not, was of extraordinary signification, not to us only, but to
whole Europe, and farther, so far as it was conspicuous. What a gracious God
have we, that never scarce goes about any great Commotions or Changes in the
World, but he gives Warning beforehand! As if not willing to take us tardy! He
shows his Signs in the Heavens above, when he is about to do any great Work in
the Earth beneath! And therefore, as Darius in the Case of Daniel, Chap. 6.26,
27. Let Men tremble and fear before this God, for he is the Living God, and
steadfast for ever, his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed; and his
Dominion shall be even unto the end; he delivers and rescueth, and works
Signs and Wonders in Heaven and Earth.

2. Thunder and Lightning: Called by the Psalmist the Voice of God, and by some
supposed to be that Trumpet that shall sound at the Last Day, to raise the
Dead, and to call to Judgment.

I will not trouble you with declaring the strange and diverse Effects of this
kind of Meteor, its hurting of things inward, when the outward are safe;
shattering the Bones, when the Flesh is left sound; melting the Blade of the
Sword, when the Scabbard is free; breaking the Vessel, when the Wine slows not
away; exempting poisonous Creatures from their Venom, and infusing it into
those who are not so; striking Men dead, and leaving them in the same posture
it found them, as if still alive, etc. It is enough to say, that it is a
stupendous Meteor, and may well be called the Voice of the Divine Excellency
-- Job 37.2, 3, 4, etc. Job 26.6-14. It is said of Nero, that a Thunderbolt
fell upon his Table, and struck the Cup out of the Emperor's Hand. And we have
known in our Age, some strong Towers, and high Buildings demolished to the very
Ground, with Lightning. Some Men struck dead, some lamed, some blinded; Trees
clove asunder. A Learned Divine of our Nation, tells of a profane Person,
walking abroad with another upon the Lord's Day, when it thundered; his
Companion telling him of it, made Answer, -- It Is nothing but a Knave Cooper
beating of his Tubs: But he had not gone much farther, but himself was struck
dead. This may teach us to put on a Reverential Awe of the Divine Majesty at
such Seasons. That Emperor (Caligula) who used to brave it out, as if he meant
to vie with the Almighty, and cry -- (...), was an Instance of the Divine
Patience, but no safe Example for Imitation. The Psalmist is more ingenuous,
Psalm. 29. -- etc. Give unto the Lord (O ye mighty) give unto the Lord Glory and
Strength. And Psalm. 97.1, 2, 3, 4. To see all the lower World covered with
thick Clouds, and the Cracks of Thunder shake the very Pillars of the Earth,
and terrible Flashes and Corruscations of Lightning, with a speedy pace fly
from one end of the Heavens to the other; is so like the Voice of God, and a
Type or Shadow of that black gloomy Day, which shall put a Period to the World,
that it may well be a Memento of our Duty and Reverence we owe to the Divine
Majesty; and may well put that Question into our Mouths, -- Who shall be able
to stand, when God appears? When this great and terrible God, shall by the
Sound of this Trumpet, or the Voice of an Archangel, Summon the World to
Judgment, who shall dare to appear before him! If the Giving of the Law, and
the Enacting, or rather Promulgation of our Religion upon Mount Sinai was so
dreadful, -- as Exodus 19.16. -- Chap. 20.18, 19. -- What will the Great Assizes
be, when all the Men that ever lived in the World, shall be called to give up
their last Account, and receive their Final Doom! Then, Oh! -- Come ye
Mountains and fall upon us, and ye Rocks cover us, and hide us from the Wrath
of the Lamb! Then Oh! where will the Heart and Stoutness of the presumptuous
Sinner show itself! How will he that braved it here with the Almighty, be able
then to stand his Ground, and maintain his Cause! Psalm. 50.1, 2, 3, 4.

3. Air and Winds: Which what to make of, we know not; it is such an invisible,
and yet real Meteor, that it will puzzle the Natural Reason of the most subtle
Philosopher, to tell the Nature of it. The Air is so like the Nature of the
Souls in our Bodies, or a Spirit in general, that we know little more of either
one or other, than what we know by the sensible Effects, John 3.8. The Wind
blows where it lists, etc. If Man be so dim in Naturals, with what Face can
he boast his Knowledge of Spiritual Objects! We neither know the Air that
surrounds us everywhere, nor the Wind that whistles in our Ears, nor the Souls
that lodge in our own Bodies! We are so blind so near home! And it is enough to
make us blush at our own Weakness; and such Ignorance should make us Humble;
and such Humility should make us Learn: And 'till we are thus qualified, we are
not fit to learn.

What a proud Lump of Clay is foolish Man, that cannot comprehend Things so
near him, Things merely natural, Things so common and ordinary; and yet will
call every Point of his Religion, even the sublimest Mysteries, to the Tribunal
of mere Reason; and determine in particular Branches and Pu^ctilio's, as
peremptorily and decisively, as if be had been Privy Counselor to the
Almighty; and judge others censoriously, unkindly, for differing from him but
in the lesser, doubtful, difficult Points of Religion; and prosecute severely
for not knowing and believing with equal clearness as himself.

But besides, -- We are often wondering at the Nature of God himself; and cannot
tell how to frame a Notion of a Being everywhere present. Is not the Air and
Wind a fit Emblem to shadow forth this Attribute of the Divinity to us? Is not
the Air in every Creviss of our Houses? in our Nostrils? in our very Bowels?
Does it not fill the World? and enter into the smallest Pores of our Bodies?
And yet it is but a Creature, and we see it not. Why should we think it such an
impossible thing for the God of Heaven to fill all Places with his Presence,
and yet be limited to no Bounds, nor visible to any Eyes? The same word that we
use to signify Air, is used also to express the Spirit of God by, in almost
all the Languages, viz. Spiritus, Latin; (...), Greek; (...), amp;c. And we
find the Spirit of God choosing sometimes to come down and show himself under
this Representation, as 1 Kings 19.11, 12. to Elijah in a still small Voice,
Qu. only the whistling Noise of a calm Air: But Acts 2, 2. to the apprehension,
in the sound of a rushing mighty Wind.

I have one thing more to remark upon this Meteor, as tending very much to set
forth the Glory of God; and that is, its diverse Uses and Effects. It Is a wonder
that such a thin, tenuious, invisible Body as that is, should serve for such
diverse and excellent Purposes. Consider them and wonder. It carries all the
Fowls of the Air, (which would be no more able to fly without it, than the
Fishes of the Sea to swim without Water;) it bears up the heavy Clouds, and
fans, purges, and transports them from place to place; so that we say truly, as
Psalm. 18.10. That the Divine Glory does ride upon the Cherubs, and flies upon
the Wings of the Wind: -- It is a faithful Messenger in the Hand of the
Almighty, to bring Tokens of Kindness, or Judgments to a People: One while
Flies and Caterpillars innumerable, Frogs and Lice; Plagues and Pestilential
Infections; another while Quails and Manna, Flesh, and feathered Fowl, Rain,
Plenty, and Prosperity: In short, it fans our Lungs, and walks to and fro
through our Nostrils every moment, and we are not able no breath without it:
And yet this so useful, so necessary, so common a Creature we cannot see, we
cannot comprehend: In God we live, move, and have our Being; he is within us,
and without us, and we know him not: And no Absurdity in all this?

4 I might add to these Storms and Tempests, not as specifically different from
them, but yet such as may require a Consideration by themselves. I mean those
more violent Irruptions of Wind and Vapors, or other watery Exhalations
commixed, as either by their suddeness, or violence, or surprising and contrary
Motion, seem prodigious, or prove hurtful to us. These are sometimes so
dreadful, that they overturn Trees, Houses, Cities; overrun whole Countries
with a Deluge of Waters; drowning or swallowing up the Inhabitants; rending
sometimes Rocks asunder, and carrying them into the midst of the Sea; sometimes
dividing parcels of Land from the Continent, and carrying them into the Ocean,
for Islands; of which Histories are full of Examples. All that I shall remark
upon this Particular is, that as the Storms are of God's sending, so they are
subject to his Government, Nah. 1.3, 4. The Lord has his way in the Whirlwind,
etc. vide Psalm. 107.25, 26, 27, -- 29. And Psalm. 148.8. The stormy Wind
fulfilling his Word. You know the Story, Mat. 8.23, 24, 25, 26. 27. But that
which I drive at in these Quotations, is this, That he who rules the raging of
the Sea, and sti^leth the violent Storms of the Wind and Waters, is able also
to appease the Madness of a People; to bush the Noise and Tumult of the World
into a deep Silence; to turn our Spears into Pruning Hooks, and our Swords into
Plough-shares; to give us instead of a Storm a Calm; in our own Breasts, in our
Houses and Families, in our Churches and Nations! Had not we best then in such
Cases, arise from ou^ sleep every one, and call upon his God -- as Jonah 1.4,
5, 6. And if our Lord seem to sleep too, let us go and awaken him, in good
earnest, and say, Lord save us, or we perish. And then he that keeps Israel,
and never slumbers nor sleeps, will arise and scatter our Enemies, and show
himself mighty in our Salvation; upon the Ungodly he will rain down Snares,
Fire, and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest: This shall be the Portion of
their Cup. Psalm. 11.6. For the righteous Lord loves Righteousness, his
Countenance does behold the upright.

5. Hail, Rain, Snow, and Frosts, etc. I will not stay now to show the
particular Usefulness of all these in their Kind, Order, and Seasons; not if I
cared to spend time upon it, have I Skill to do it perfectly. Something might
be said, which perhaps every one is not well sensible of, concerning the
Wisdom, as well as the Power and Goodness of God, in using such a diverse
Method in Manuring of the Earth, and Nursing of Sublunary Bodies. I shall
conclude this, with only that emphatical Exhortation of the Psalmist, 147.12.
ad finem, Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Zion, -- For he has
strengthened the Bars of thy Gates: He has blessed thy Children within thee. --
He makes Peace in thy Borders: And fills thee with the finest of the Wheat,
-- He sends forth his Commandment upon Earth: His Word runs very swiftly.
-- He gives Snow like Wool: he scatters the Hoar-frost like Ashes. -- He
casts forth his Ice like Morsels: Who can stand before his Cold? -- He
sends out his Word and melts them: He causes his Wind to blow, and the
Waters to flow. -- He shows his Word unto Jacob: His Statutes and Judgments
unto Israel. -- He has not dealt so with any Nation: And as for his Judgments,
they have not known them. Praise ye the Lord.

6. To pass over Eclipses, Conjunctions, and Rain-bows, etc. I shall instance
only in Extraordinary Signs and Apparitions; as that of Angels appearing to
Arbaham, to Lot, to Jacob, to Manaoh, to David, to diverse others; the
extraordinary Chasms of Light in the Heavens, at our Savior's Baptism, his
Transfiguration, his Ascension; the Cloud and Pillar of Fire to the Israelites;
the Darkness at our Savior's Passion; the Holy Ghost in the Likeness of a
Dove; the Apparition exhibited to Saul, to St. Stephen; the Revelations of St.
John; the Prodigies before the Destruction of Jerusalem; Armies conflicting in
the Air; with a Thousand more such Wonders, which I list not to relate
particularly. I confess, they are often mixed with false incredible Relations,
yet not therefore all to be rejected. Our Savior has given us warning to
expect some such, Mat. 24. and Acts. 2.19, 20. and every Age almost is Witness
of some Miracle or other of this Nature; tho not so many as many would believe.
Even Heathen and Mohammedan History, as well as Christian, give Suffrage to this.

From the whole, we have this Lesson intimated to us, viz. If the outward
insensate Heavens, that are neither endued with Sense nor Reason, but are of a
brutish Nature, declare to the World the Glory of God, what would be expected
from us Men, to whom all these Creatures are given but as Servants. If these
mute senseless Things preach so expressly the Glory of him that made them, what
should not Man do, who though he lives in place below them, yet is endowed with
an Excellency far above them! God himself sometimes appeals to them, for
Testimony against us, to upbraid our Disobedience: Hear, O Heavens, and give
Ear, etc. All the Host of the Inferior Heavens keep their place, and observe
the Laws of their Creation, the very Clouds and Winds obey him; only Man is an
unruly, undutiful, disingenuous, obstinate Thing, that will neither keep his
Orb, nor serve the Ends of his Creation, nor attend his Master's Will, nor
pursue diligently his own Happiness. Though our Feet are upon the Earth, our
Heads reach above the Clouds, and we are near akin to the other World, and
have very great Concernments beyond the Stars; and yet that we should let our
Affections sink into the Earth, and our Souls incline so strongly toward Hell!
For shame, Sirs, let us set forth the Glory of God a little better in our
Generations, than commonly we do: Let us vie here upon the Earth, by the
Excellency of our Conversations, with those twinkling Lamps that shine over our
Heads; let it never be said to our Disgrace, that these (senseless Creatures)
glorify God better in their place than we! Let our Faces, our Graces, outshine
the Sun! Let Men look on the Humility, Honesty, Sobriety, Charity, Piety, and
Patience of our Lives, and give Glory to Him, that has given such Graces unto
Men. And let these Graces never be darkened with any unworthy uncristian
Practices; let us appear glorious to the World, and no Hypocrisy or Apostasy
ever pull down our Professions, or lay our Glory in the Dust: It Is possible we
may meet with strong, with close Temptations: O let not our shining Stars fall
from Heaven -- (nor Let our Moon be turned into Blood) and then we shall be
shortly removed from Grace to Glory, and shortly shine like Stars in the
highest Heavens; yea, as the Sun in the Firmament for ever, 1 Cor. 15.41. As we
shine in Grace now, so in Glory hereafter.

6. Of the Continuation of the Heavenly Bodies.
DAY unto Day utters Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge, ( q. d.)
one Day informs another, and one Night gives in fresh evidence to another, to
prove the truth of it: Not a Day nor a Night passes over our Heads, but the
Heavens preach this Sermon to us: We have a continual Rehearsal of this
Doctrine from Age to Age, from One Year to another, from the beginning of the
World to this present time. This Preacher is never silent, this Exercise never
over.

All that I can think necessary to be said upon this particular, may be
referred to two Heads.

I. The Wonderfulness of this Continuation. II. The Practical Lessons we should
learn from it.
I. Wherein the Wonder of it lies.

1. In the multitude of the Bodies concerned. We observe of Mechanical
Instruments made by the Hands of Men, that an Engine consisting of very many
Wheels, or very many Motions, or other Parts, are the most difficult to be kept
in order. An Orchard with many Trees, or Gardens with may Herbs and Flowers,
require more Culture and Dressing, or some will decay. A Society of many
Members is apt to disorder: It Is a harder Task to manage a Nation than a
Family. The Hosts of Heaven are Thousands, and the Appurtenances relating to
them more; and yet all keep still their appointed Courses. We have lost none of
the Stars out of their Orbs, since their first coming there.

Some People tell us of some new ones; as that in Cassiopea, which was first
discovered in the Heavens, about the beginning of the Reformation; what Salvo
to give for that, I know not; it may be it was there before, but not
discovered: But however, 'twas a Case extraordinary, and no prejudice to the
Order of the rest; we have lost none of our Seasons, Day and Night, Summer and
Winter have kept their times; the Sun its Revolutions, the Moon its due
Changes; the Stars their proper Periods and exact Motions; the standing still
of the Sun in Joshua's time, and the going back of it on Ahaz Dial, are
miraculous Instances, and not to be paralleled other Ages.

2. The Greatness of them. Small Bodies are easily managed, and apt to motion;
but great ones move slowly, according to the course of sublunary Nature. But
they in the Aetherial Orbs are of so vast a bigness, that that Consideration
does mightily accumulate and greaten the Wonder. That the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
all of them so big, should move continually without disorder, or period, is an
Accent upon the Miracle.

3. The various Qualities they are of, and the different Motions they make, do
yet raise the Wonder to a higher strain, to keep all one Motion, especially if
all of one Nature were not so very much: But to move from East to West, from
West to East, from North to South, from south to North again, as some of them
do; and this continually, is an augmentation of the Wonder.

4. Without Period. Flowers wither, Trees rot, Stones decay, Man dies; the very
Face of Things below will shortly cease to be, and another succeed: The Day
dies, and so does the Year; and Stones and Castles here decay; every thing here
is weary of Motion. The Apostle tells us, The whole Creation groans: But here
is groans and dies; only what is akin more nearly to Heaven, and borders upon
that Court, is of a more lasting Constitution, or a more constant Motion, of a
more perpetual Duration. Since the Fathers fell asleep, all things (of that
kind, relating to the upper Regions) continue as they were from the beginning
of the Creation, 2 Pet. 3.4, 7. For the Heavens are by the same Word of God, by
which they were created, kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the Day of
Judgment.

5. Without Interruption. No faulter in their Courses, no breach of Continuity
in this long space of time: Nothing has been able to stop these great Bodies
in the progress of their Motion, or intermit the Exercise of their Virtues and
Operation.

6. Without Error, or Mistake, or Deviation. Though great and many, and various
in their Qualities, and incredibly swift in their Motions; yet have they
committed no remarkable Fault in all this Tract of Years, and Revolutions. They
have all kept close to the Path chalked out for them by their Creator, and have
never leapt out of their Orbs. Nothing has been able to tempt them from the
faithful Execution of their Offices and Employments: Who has ever beck^n'd the
Sun out of the Firmament, or pusht the Moon out of its place? Or made the Stars
wander into strange Courses? Or amidst all their diverse Motions mingled them
into Confusion or Disorder? When was ever Day and Night jumbled together; or
the Seasons of the Year reversed; or the Order of the Celestial Bodies turned
backward? Illic justo foedere rerum, verterem servant sidera pacem.

II. Practical Inferences, Learn we then --

1. To hold on from Day to Day, from Night to Night, in the excellent Offices
of a Christian Life; let Day to Day utter Speech, and Night to Night show
Knowledge, of our continual Goodness. Mankind is born with his Eyes higher set
than all the rest of the Creation besides, his Looks are by Nature more sublime
and lofty: Let us look up earnestly toward those lucid Spangles, those
sparkling Globes over our Heads, and use our Eyes to some good purpose: Let us
make thence some Practial Deductions for our Imitation, at least Emulation, and
scorn to Truant and Loiter here at that rare, as usually we do. Let no
Temptation soften our Spirits into an unnecessary Repose, nothing provoke us
unduly to depart our Orbs, to run back, or start aside. Let us never be weary
of well-doing. Particularly,

1. Let us never be weary of the Duty of Prayer. It Is an excellent Exercise,
and such as we ought continually to be intent upon. Our Savior spoke a Parable
(Luke 18.1, 2.) unto his Disciples, That Men ought always to pray, and not to
faint. And the Apostle, Col. 4.2. Continue in Prayer, and watch in the same
with Thanksgiving, etc. And 1 These. 5.17. Pray without ceasing. And let this,
amongst many others, be one Argument to persuade us to assiduity in this kind
of Devotion, viz. That God Almighty is continually from Day to Day, from Night
to Night, serving and supplying our Necessities, by the Ministry of the lower
Heavens, (all the Hosts of the Etherial Regions are in continual employment for
our Good) why then should we disdain to bestow some few Minutes, upon warm and
serious Addresses to the God of Heaven? Let neither the Day or Night go away
without a Testimony of or Devotion. Let not God hereafter ever cite the Sun,
Moon, or Stars, for to bear Witness to our Ingratitude. You know the Story of
Daniel, recorded to the Honor of his Memory, 'That three times every Day he
opened his Windows, and set his Face toward Jerusalem, and prayed to the God
of Heaven: Even then, when pinched with the close Temptations of the Court,
under a Heathen Emperor.

Let us (at least) twice a Day, do Obeisance to Heaven. -- Offer (as God
appointed to the Jews) a Morning and Evening Sacrifice continually: Let our
Altars burn with Incense, at least so often; and this shall not only perfume
our Days and Nights, and make our Conversations smell sweeter to our selves and
Neighbors, but a fragrant Odor in the Nostrils of the Almighty, And please
the Lord better than a Bullock, etc. Job. 1.5.

2. Let us praise God continually, as long as we live let us praise the Lord;
yea, let us sing praises to him, whilst we have any being, Psalm. 34.1. His
Praises continue in my Mouth, Psalm. 36.9.

3. Let us be continually employed in doing Good to others. And let us remember
this, that our God causes his Sun to shine, and Rain to descend on the just
and unjust. Let us try what we can to be like him; like our Heavenly Father,
diffusing our Rays to as wide a Circuit as possibly we can; not limiting our
Goodness to a few individual Persons, or a single Party, or a narrow Bound, but
(as our Faculties will extend) to the Church Catholic, and the wide World in
general. This is to be in truth, like the God of Heaven. And let our Charity
never be discouraged, never tired. To do good, and to distribute, forget not,
etc. To make it plainer yet; God has given us a Copy of his Infinite Goodness
in general, to the whole World, in the Face of the outward Heavens (as of his
special Goodness to the Church, in the Revelation of the Gospel.) If we
contemplate seriously the Structure and Properties, and several Virtues of the
Heavenly Bodies, we may read there in legible Characters, not only the Greatness
and Glory, but the infinite Goodness also of him that made them, and that to
the whole Race of Mankind; and that not for a Spurt, a short Fit of two or
three Ages, but of continual Duration; his Patience is indefatigable, and his
Beneficence reaches to the end of Time. Let us then, if we will aim at
Perfection, and try to tread in our Father's Steps, Do good unto all Men,
without weariness, and communicate the Light of our Graces to a whole Nation, a
whole World, if possible, and never grudge to lend our Candles to the
assistance of those that are about us. And as for those narrow Souls that
confine their Goodness to a Canton, or whose Light is like that of a flaming
Meteor, or an Ignis Fatu^s, or a falling Star, they deserve to lie down in
Darkness, and never more to rise up again to Light or Glory, Levit. 24.2. Cause
the Lamps to burn continually.

2. Let us consider a little the Employment of the Saints and Angels in Heaven.
It Is pretty hard to conceive with our present Apprehensions, the Business of
Eternity, and reconcile the Notion of a Complete Happiness, to the Exercise of
a continual Devotion; and yet this is handsomely represented to us, in the
Scheme of the heavenly Bodies; the Sun, Moon, and Stars are never weary, never
decay, never wander out of their place, but still are exercised in a continual
Motion, and keep still their Brightness and Glory; and yet they are inanimate,
senseless Creatures. Why should we think it strange or absurd, that the belssed
Spirits in the other World, should be still employed in the Offices of
Devotion, and yet still possessed of Ease and Bliss? And (which I drive at) why
should we not strike up, and mend our Pace at present? Why do we often mutter
and complain, as if it were a weariness to serve the Lord? And cry out, When
will the Sabbath be over, that may return to our worldly Cares and Pleasures
again? Is there so much Difference indeed, between Grace and Glory, between the
Apprentice-ship and the Profession, between the Church here and hereafter? Or
is it possible, think ye, to make so quick a return from one Extreme to
another? To be all Earth and Flesh, and Sin here, and Heaven and Spirit, and
Holiness there? Or must we not a little (at least) be Heaven'd in our Minds
now, and be in a continual Motion to the End of our Happiness? Having these
things always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.15. Or as Psalm. 119.112. Inclined to
perform the Statutes of the Lord always. Or Psalm. 1.2. Exercising our selves in
his Law Day and Night. And when we can do this, and do it with delight, we are
upon the Brink of a blessed Eternity, upon the Skirts of the Holy Land! Upon
the Borders of Heaven! When our Light shines without Darkness (tho it do
twinkle now and then!) and shines continually; when our Devotion does not die
with the Day, but glimmers through the darkest Night; then and not 'till then,
we are in a fair way to the Life of Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made
perfect.

3. Learn we hence to look for that which is lasting. In this World we have no
continuing City, nothing durable, no lasting Motion, unless it be that of
Changes and Vicissitudes, Summer and Winter, Day and Night, Peace and War,
Health and Sickness, Life and Death; even the Earth changes its Face according
to the Seasons; and the Seas, tho they flow continually, they are supplied from
the Clouds above, and both Earth and Sea, and every thing here, depend upon the
heavenly Bodies for that Motion and Continuance which they have. In Heaven only
is to be found the perpetual Motion, everlasting Life, an House eternal,
durable Riches and Righteousness, Rivers of Pleasure for evermore; there only
is a continual Day, a Light that suffers no Darkness, a Sun always shining, an
everlasting Summer, a long Eternity Bliss and Happiness. This is easily
demonstrable to any one that knows the present World, and can but see the
Skirts of the Holy Land, the very Borders of Heaven: Were it not Wisdom for us
them to leave off Building with so much Anxiety here, to take down our
Scaffolds, and get a Jacob's Ladder, and climb up to that place of Angels, to
send our Hearts before us, and cast our Anchor safe within the Veil, and choose
that other World for our Portion, and think and speak of it, and provide for
it, and account it as our own, and pack up all our last Cares and Passions for
it; that whilst we live upon Earth, we may have our Conversations above, and
then we shall be eternally safe from Hell beneath.

But especially at the approach of any unkindly stop, or period, in our worldly
Comforts, whether it be a black Night, or a cloudy stormy Day, or an ill
Winter, or Poverty, or Shame, or Sickness, or Death; let us then take the
advantage of the opportunity, and look up as high as the Firmament, and
further, even beyond the Starry Orbs, and say with our selves, In those
Countries, in that World is no Night, or Darkness, or Sickness, or Sea, or
Hell; let us scorn to grovel here as we have done. Let us pack hence our best
Goods and be gone; let that be our Home, and the Lord of that Country our
Father, and let us live heavenly, holily, humbly, as becomes Citizens of that
heavenly Jerusalem, the Metropolis of both Worlds.

4. Let us live by Rule, as those Celestial Bodies all do; even the Rule
prescribed us by our Maker, and fitted to our Natures, and conducive to the
Ends of our Being: And this without straggling aside, deviation, or error, on
the one hand or the other; without intermission, or passion, or weariness, or
any thing that may disturb our Motion. I know, as our Natures are more
excellent than the Stars, so we are upon greater Disadvantages, (upon the score
of Sin) that has so enfeebled our Spirits, and emasculated the Courage and
Vigor of our Piety, that as long as we live, we shall be apt to flag; but then
let it be considered, that our God has offered to accommodate us with all the
excellent Helps of the Gospel, and the Assistance of his Spirit; and therefore
in the strength of these let us go on from Day to Day in the exactest Course of
a Religious Piety, making no considerable Blot or Faulter (if possible) in the
whole Series of our Life; or if that, through the fraility of Human Nature, may
not be done, let the Blot be presently washed off by the Tears of a sound
Repentance; and then by that means, all the crookedness of our former ways
being made straight, let us take care for the time to come to move upright,
steady, and straight, according to the excellent Rules prescribed us in the
Laws of God, and Life of our Savior: Let us try not only to keep pace with the
Sun, but to outvie all the Stars of the Firmament; and let it be accounted no
Disgrace, to be thus watchful and curious about the keeping of our Orbs, and
observe our due Postures, and modelling our Actions, but rather our greatest
Excellency and Glory.

Slight those, who say, amidst their sickly Healths,
Thou liv'st by Rule: What does not so, but Man?
Houses are built by Rule, and Commonwealths:
Entice the trusty Sun, if that you can,
From his Ecliptic Line; becken the Sky.
Who lives by Rule then, keeps good Company.
7. Of the Extensiveness of the Heavens.
The Stars and Firmament, the expanded Sky, and all the Hosts of the Aetherial
Orbs, speak expressly unto all the Nations of the Earth, that there is a God to
be worshipped, and with such a Worship as becomes his Infinite Excellency:
Their words are so loud, they may be heard to all the Ends of the World. Then
let us consider,

1. WHether the most dark and distant Nations of the Earth have taken Notice of
this Rule; -- heard this Voice? 2. What they have understood by it? 3. What
they might understand? 4. What Inferences we may deduce from the whole, for our
own Use?

1. Whether the darkest Nations have heard this Voice?

Answ. Yes; Their Sound has gone out to all the Ends of the World. And it is
very easily made out For,

1. They had no other Bible to read in, than that of Nature; and this of the
Heavens was the most legible Page in the whole Book. They were without the
Written Law, but they were not without this Natural Light. They had neither
Moses nor the Prophets, nor Evangelists, nor Apostles, and therefore whither
else should they go, but to the Word writ upon the Book of the Creation, the
Divine Handyworks in the Make of the World, Romans 1.20.

2. We find them confessing it, making use of this Book, reading studiously
amongst the Stars, poring with an inquisitive Eye upon the Heavens and
Firmament, to gather some Scraps of a Religious Philosophy, and trace the
Principles of a Spiritual Divinity. Seneca when he has placed the Wise Man
walking to and fro, by the Contemplation of his Mind amongst the Stars -- Illic
demum descit -- (says he) quod diu quaesivit; illic incipit Deum nosse. And in
the beginning of his Book of Natural Questions, having undertaken some
Philosophical Account of the Heavenly Bodies, we find him no where in such a
Rapture of Divinity, as upon that Thesis, Nisi ad haec (the Study of Divine
Things, the Contemplations of the Heavenly Bodies, etc.) admitterer, non fuerat
operae -- pretium nasci: O quam contempta res est Homo, nisi supra humana se
erexerit!

Nay, more than this, they had generally the Original of all their Theology
from the Firmament: Their Gods were amongst the Stars; nay, the Stars were
their only Gods.

(...).

Homer. Even the Egyptians themselves are accounted to have lead the way to
this Superstition. And for this Reason it was chiefly, that their several
Priests, Prophets, and Magi, amongst the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Assyrians,
Persians, etc. were so well skilled commonly in the Curious Arts of Astrology
and Divination; which have been since derived and diffused from them to us, and
the rest of the World. Their Hermes Tresmegistus, Ptolomy, and Haly, being
Authors of great Request still, with our Astrologers and Prognosticators.

2. What did they learn from hence? Truly a great deal more than some
Christians learn from Nature and Revelation both. I speak not of all the poor
dark Heathen World; but of some who were more serious and contemplative amongst
them, who took more Pains than their Fellows. And I dare safely say, that though
their Eyes were dim, and the Light they saw by but like the obscure Twilight,
or the first Dawning of the Morning, that they might well School and Catechize
some of our old Professors, Grey-hair'd Christians, for Seven Years together.
It would be too large a Task now to tell you what Lessons they learned from the
Contemplation and Study of these Things. Their Books of Moral Philosophy, writ
by Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, Seneca, Isocrates, etc. where they preached in our
Pulpits, were enough to fill some Number of Years, with Sermons strong enough
for our Auditors of the Lower Form: And convictive enough to shame the Major
part of Christians among us into Blushing and Confusion. Read over but the
Roman Twelve Tables, Plato's Republic, the Laws of the several Heathen Nations
about Religion, Sobriety, Justice, etc. And you will find Reason to fear, lest
the Queen of the South, and the Inhabitants of Tire and Sidon, the Greek,
Scythian, and Barbarian, will escape better, some of them at the Day of
Judgment, than many of Christendom that have both the Books wide open before
them all the Days of their Life, Romans 2.14, 15.

3. What might they learn? Answ. All the Articles of our Christian Creed, and
all the Precepts of our Christian Religion, except those which refer to the
Cause and Cure of our Misery, viz. The Fall of Adam, and the Intercession of
the Second Adam: That there was a God, one only Supreme Maker of Heaven and
Earth, Infinite in the Attributes of Wisdom, Power, Truth, Justice, Mercy
worthy to be worshipped with a Holy Life, Prayer, Praise, Obedience, and a pure
Heart and Affection; one that had a Good Will to save us, one that would reward
us with excellent Rewards or Punishments, according to our Actions in the other
World: All this, and more than this, they might have discerned by their
Glimmering Light of Nature in only the Frontispiece of Heaven, if they had but
used their Eyes. And so much many of them did not only learn, but teach, and
make a public and stout Profession of it to the World. The Existence of One
Supreme God, the Divine Governance of the World, the Immortality of the Soul, a
Mediation between God and us, and almost all the Moral Duties of the Law in
Substance; the Distribution of Rewards and Punishments after this Life,
distinct Places and Times of Worship, Priests, and Priestly Maintenance, and
Attonements, and Purifications, and something like the Dedicating of their
Infants to God by Baptism, with secret Devotions, and Family Worship, as well
as that which was public in the Temples: All these, and much more, were
adopted into the Body of the Heathen Religion; and excepting only some few
Articles of our Creed, referring to the Trinity, and especially the Business of
our Redemption, and the true Notion of our Two Sacraments, and it may be the
Resurrection of our Bodies, it were not very hard to make out all the rest of
our Religion demonstrable by the mere Light of Reason. The invisible Things of
GOD from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the
Things that are made.

4. What Practical Deductions may be made from hence?

How great is God? A Contemplation of the Heavenly Fabric will directly lead
us to this Point, viz. an admiration of the Divine Eternal Power of the
Godhead. For Romans 1.19. That which may be known of God, is manifest to all the
World, for God has showed it to them. He has showed his Face in the Glass of
his Works, and his Features there appear so glorious, that it is a Wonder it
does not fill our Apprehensions with a pregnant and awful Conceit of his
Infinite Majesty and Power. The Splendor of the Divine Attributes gives Shine
to all the World: So that now all the Inhabitants of the round World have Scope
enough for Spiritual Contemplation, and the Exercise of their Rational
Faculties; and the Turk and Pagan, both have a Book large and voluminous
enough, being wide open before them, to employ all their Studies in, all the
Days of their Life. Who that considers a while the Nature of that God that made
the Heavens, how he must stretch his Compass over the whole Universe, how he
must mete out the Heavens with a Span, and comprehend the Dust of the Earth in
a Measure, and weigh the Mountains in Scales and the Hills in a Balance, and
take up the Isles as a very little thing, and measure the Waters in the Hollow
of his Hand, and make the Clouds his Chariot, and ride upon the Wings of the
Wind, and climb up to the highest Orbs, and extend every Globe with the present
Thought; and hang not only the Earth, but the Heavens upon nothing; and this in
the exactest Order and Perfection, that no remarkable Fault shall appear in
6000 Years, in any part of all this magnificent Building. -- Who that considers
a little the Nature of the Supreme Architect, shall not be ready to cry out
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 8.1, 9. O Lord our Lird, how excellent is thy Name in
all the Earth! who have set thy Glory above the Heavens. O Lord our Lord, how
excellent is thy Name in all the Earth!

2. What little low worthless Creatures are we? That God who is the Author of
such excellent Handywork, that dwells in that inaccessible Light, in such a
glorious Palace, who can make Heavens at his pleasure, and garnish them in a
moment, and fill the whole World with the Beams of his Glory, should yet place
his Affections so much on such little silly things as we are! Psalm. 8.3. When I
consider thy Heavens, the Work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which
thou have ordained; -- What is Man that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of
Man, that thou visitest him? Shall I speak my Opinion freely in this Matter? I
do conceive, that one great Reason why God has laid out so much of his
Excellency, and bestowed so much of his Infinite Wisdom and Power upon the
Creation of the Things that are above us, especially the Heavens over our
Heads, was on purpose to astonish proud Man into a Religious Admiration of his
God, and an humble Detestation of himself: For that is the very Frame and Temper
which disposes Man for the Impressions of Religion, and the Exercise of a
devout Affection, Isa. 66.1, 2. Thus says the Lord, The Heaven is my Throne.

3. A due Consideration of the Creation of the World, and especially of the
Heavens, belongs unto us all. Os homini sublime -- etc. If God does preach to
us by these Things that are seen, and thereby reveal to the World the invisible
Properties of the Divinity, then we ought to hearken to this Voice, and make
some good use of their Language. The Curious Spectator looks up to the Heavens,
and examines every particular there: Quidni quaerat? Scit illa ad se pertinere.
Tunc contemnit domicilii prioris angustias. Seneca. And (as he goes on) what is
all the distance from the utmost Coasts of Spain to the Indies? But a Voyage of
a very few Days, if thou sail with a good Wind: But that heavenly Country
above, for many Hundreds of Years, affords space for the swiftest Stars to
travel in, without let or molestation. In short, the very Natural Propensity of
Mankind to enquire into those upper Regions, and peer amongst the Stars, is
some Argument of our Concernment that way.

4. Let us beware of Idolatry; the fault of the old Pagan World: Who when they
saw those Lights hung out at the Windows of Heaven, which should have been but
ministerial to help them in the Search of him that made them, fell down and
worshipped the Servants instead of the Master, the Candles at the Door instead
of the Lord of the House, Deuteronomy. 4.19. Yet the Jews themselves were so forgetful
of this Precept, that we find them often taxed for burning Incense to the Queen
of Heaven: and worshipping the Star Rempham. And it is too well known, that the
Heathens generally worshipped the Sun, Moon, and Stars; becoming vain in their
Imaginations; and though they professed themselves Wise, they became Fools,
changing the Glory of the incorruptible God, into the Image of his corruptible
Creatures.

5. By this Law, they who want a Special Revelation, shall be judged, Romans
2.12, 13, 14, 15. Let no Man then (whether within, or without the Pale of the
Church) think to shroud his Guilt under the Cloak of Ignorance. There Is no
Corner of the World so remote, no People so dark, where this Voice has not
been heard; the Music of the Spheres is soft and still, but such as shortly
will make even both the Ears of the guilty Sinner tingle! The Language wherein
these Sermons are preached to the World, is temperate and equal, it makes no
great Noise at present to them, who are busy digging low in the Bowels of the
Earth, but it has a sharp and heavy Accent at the end. Let no Man then upbraid
the Almighty, as if he were a severe Judge for calling all Men to the same
Judgment; for damning Men that never had the knowledge of his Laws. Fear not,
God will be just; he will vindicate his Righteousness from the foul Aspersions
and Abuses of a scandalous World. Have thou sinned without Law? without Law
then thou shall be tried: And a Hundred to One, but condemned too; and yet God
clear from thy Blood, and just in all this! What a black List of Sins does the
Apostle present thee with ( Romans 1.29, etc.) all chargeable upon all Nations of
the World, Jew and Christian, and Turk and Heathen, and damnable by the very
Law of Nature; Unrighteousness, Fornication, etc. But that which affects us
most in all this, is, that not only the poor Infidel is guilty in this Case,
but a great part of Christendom also; not only they that have no other Law to
read in, no other Rule to go by, but the Book of the Creation; but they also
who have the Bibles in their Hands, and the Creed upon their Tongues-end, and
have all the Advantages of Nature and Revelation both. When these very Sins
(and as bad, or worse) walk barefaced within the Confines of the Church, and
Men of the best Creed and Profession in the World are not ashamed to commit the
foulest Sins, and sometimes accounteit their Glory to boast of such Vices,
which ought not so much as to be named amongst Christians.

There are several live amongst us, (it may be in this place now) whose
ordinary Conversations are stained with such Blots, as both the Lights (both
that of Positive Religion, and that of mere Natural Reason too) do abhor and
condemn. And yet, which is mighty strange, these very Men do please themselves
with the hopes of escaping safely the Sentence of the Judge at the Last Day!
And upon their Repentance they may; but else I cannot think of any plausible
Argument that will stand their Friend at the Day of Judgment. And to drive the
Nail farther yet: -- It will not be enough for Men to plead their Interest in a
Church, or Party, in such Cases; let the Church be never so pure, nor the
Profession never so good, nor the Advantages of Knowledge and Information never
so great; if under all these Pretensions thou should play the Hypocrite, and
live ill, thy own Mouth would condemn thee, and a whole Cloud of Witnesses
depose Evidence against thee: And yet notwithstanding all this, we may take up
the Complaint of the Prophet, Jer. 18.13. Ask now among the Heathen, who has
heard such Things? The Virgins of Israel have done very horrible Things. Thy
poor Men are tenacious of their superstitious Vanities; it is hard to make a
Proselyte to Christianity amongst them; they will dispute, fight, die for their
mere Shadow of Faith; but Christians will barter away their Conscience, their
Creed, their Heaven, their God, for mere Vanities! Ver. 14, 15. In short, if it
be true, what some of the poor ignorant Gentiles fancied, that the Sun, Moon,
and Stars do all look upon us, and are daily Spectators and Witnesses of all we
do, it were well for many, If the Sun were indeed turned into Darkness, and the
Moon into Blood, and the Stars would leave off their Shining, and the whole
Face of the Heavens were reversed, than thus to stand over our Heads, and
remark our Actions, in order to a Solemn Convictive Testimony against us, Jer.
2.9, 10, 11.

8. Of the Glorious Body of the Sun.
COnsider we next the Sun: 1. In its Motion. 1. Its Terms, a quo and ad quem.
2. Its Swiftness. 3. Continuance. 4. Its Light. 5. Its Heat.

1. Its Motion: Concerning which, and the rest of its Attributes, I shall have
the less to say now, because I have spoken so much of it in the General Notion
of the Heavenly Bodies. Yet for Order-sake, consider we,

1. Its Terms, -- or Bounds, -- from whence, and to which the Sun moves. From
the one end of the Heavens to the other, i. e. according to our Apprehension
and Common Sense of Things: For in truth, the Heavens have neither Beginning
nor End, but are of a perfect Round Figure. Indeed, this Notion was so long hid
from the World, that not many Hundred Years agone, a German Bishop was
Excommunicated for broaching this Doctrine, viz. That there were Antipodes, --
and that the Earth, in answer to the Heavens, was inhabited round; whereas,
now, it is generally agreed upon, with good Reason, by all the Learned of late
Ages.

2. Its Swiftness. I need say little more upon this Point, than what I said
before, viz. That the Sun according to the Judgment of some Astronomers, goes
in its Motion 1000000 German Miles, in the Judgment of others 261905 in one
Hour. Whether either of them are in the right or no, I am not much concerned to
determine. This is certain, it is of a vast Body, 166 times bigger than the
Earth, say Astronomers, who by the Eclipses say, they have found its Diameter,
and by its Diameter, its Compass (Periphery) and by that its Motion. Indeed its
Course is so swift, so incredibly quick, that our late Philosophers would fain
find a nearer way to solve the Wisdom of Nature, whose Principle it is to do
every thing the nearest way it can be done; and therefore have rackt their
Brains to discover, if possibly, a mistake in the case, and to prove that the
Earth (which is by many Degrees the less Body) does move round, and not the Sun
with so swift and daily a motion: But as yet the Evidence of that Opinion does
not appear; so that we may on this Point say, -- It rejoices as a strong Man
to run a Race.

3. It Is Continuance and Constancy. Intimated in these Words -- As a Giant --
running his Race, etc. Psalm. 19.5, 6. His Circuit, etc. nor need I say more
upon this particular. It Is demonstrable to every Eye, and agreed upon by all
the World, that the Sun has continued still in Motion, from the beginning of
the World to this present Age, and shall do to the end of time. Itself being
the Heavenly Clock, the Original Measure of all our Times.

2. Its Light. -- As a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, i. e. trimmed and
decked in splendid and glorious Apparel, making pleasant the Eyes of all
Beholders: So the Sun, who is Condus and Promut Lucis, the Spring of Light,
(...), a pure Flame (...), an always burning Torch, a Universal Candle, that
serves the whole World to work and walk by; that makes (with its approach)
smiles in the Face, and cheerfulness in the Heart of every Spectator, that has
Eyes to behold it. Even Infants themselves, incapable yet of making distinction
between other Objects, are pleased with this; and Beasts themselves can hardly
live without it. In a word, it is the Eye of Heaven, and the Pleasure of Earth;
and that we can as ill spare, as the Eyes out of our Head; for take away that,
and these are useless, or near upon it.

3. Heat. Nothing hid from the Heat thereof, Psalm. 19.6. Upon this Point
likewise I have spoken already, and left myself little more to say. It tempers
the Air, which we suck with our Nostrils, and produces the Aliments we take
with our Mouths, and cherishes our Bodies to help Concoction; and is the
Universal Cause (under God) of all Sublunary Beings. What shall I say -- it
broods the Earth, and moves upon the Waters, and helps to fecundate all Things
here below. There is nothing hid from the Heat thereof.

I have done with the Natural Consideration. -- ^t us now deduce something for
our Spiritual Meditation.

1. The Papists tell us, -- That Images and Pictures are the Laymens Books,
(wherein they may read) without ever a Letter) the Lives of the Saints. -- What
if I should say, the Sun is a fit Emblem of God, and a Pattern for our
Imitation, Imitation (I say, and Admiration) not Adoration.

1. A fit Emblem, or rather Adumbration of God; but with an infinite
Disproportion. For, Inter finitum and infinitum -- no proper Comparison. Yet
this, I say, is peradventure, as fit an Emblem of the Divinity, as any we can
find within the Ken of our Senses, and under the Cope of Heaven. And, methinks,
God himself does not disdain the Resemblance; the Holy Ghost himself fetches
Metaphors thence to attribute unto God. Psalm. 84.11. The Lord is a Sun -- And
Psalm. 4. Cause the Light of thy Countenance to shine -- etc. And Jam 1.17. The
Father of Lights. And the Fathers generally make use of this Similitude to
pourtray a little, in faint Resemblance, the Majesty of God by. -- So
Chrysostom, Gregory, Bernard, Tertullian, Hillary, etc. Having therefore so
good footing for my Inference, I shall pursue it more clearly. The Sun is an
Emblem of the Godhead in these respects.

1. Of his Unity. There is one Sun in the Firmament, and one God in Heaven.
Deuteronomy. 4.35. Unto thee it was showed, that thou might know that the Lord he
is God, there is none else besides him. Deuteronomy. 6.4. The Lord our God is one
Lord. Are there any more Suns in the World than one? It Is true, there are
sometimes Parelii, or Mock-Suns, two or three or more, which are no other than
some Images, or faint Resemblances of the Sun, caused by the Refraction of its
Beams in some plain, thick watery, adjacent Cloud; and so there may be some
faint Shadow, or Adumbrations of the Deity, in some brave Vertuoso's, some
Heroic Saints in the World; but yet he that shall worship these for Gods, and
pray to them as if they were his Mediators, or Saviors, commits Idolatry, and
offers Sacrilege to the God of Heaven, who calls to the Grandees of he World
for an entire Service, -- Worship him all ye Gods. The Gods of the Heathens are
but mere Parelii, silly Adumbrations, Ciphers compared to this One Jehova. An
Idol is nothing; so says the Apostle, i. e. of that which it pretends to
represent. And it is a bold piece of Presumption, and sacrilegious Impudence, to
set up Rush-Candles, or Wax-Tapers, to vie with the Savior, to put mere
Creatures in Competition with the God of Heaven. Nay, the Moon herself is not
fit to enter any Comparison (in right Judgment) with the Fountain of Lights,
the Sun; for what Light she has, it is dim and uncertain, and all borrowed; she
has none of her own: So nor all the Church Catholic put together, that in
Heaven, and this on Earth, are worthy of the Tenth part of that Adoration and
Honor we owe to the God of all the World. And yet there have been some so
absurd in their Practice, that they have burnt Incense to the Queen to Heaven,
(the Moon) when the Sun must be put off with a bare Sacrifice: And some that
say Ten Ave Mary's to One Pater Noster; saying with that superstitious Monk --
Tu spes mea -- Thou my Hope, my Tower, in whom I have placed the very End of my
Salvation. -- If (which God forbid) I should like a Man mad and reprobate,
forget my God, Vere tui nunquam obliviscar. -- Thy Memory is sweeter than Honey
and the Honeycomb, in my Mouth, etc. Methinks the Apostle seems, 1 Timothy 6.16.
to allude to this Similitude of the Unity of the Sun.

2. Of the Trinity. There are Three considerable distinct Affections belonging
to the Sun; all which I mentioned but now, -- Motion, Heat, and Light: They are
all of a several different Property, and yet inseparable one from the other;
and yet these Three all concenter in one Sun. Why may not this be a pretty
tolerable Representation of the Trinity of Persons, the Father, son, and Holy
Ghost? It Is a hard mysterious Article to Human Reason: Mankind has long
complained of the Depth and Difficulty of this Mystery. I will not say, -- That
God meant this Consideration of the Sun, for a Natural Advantage to our Faith
in the Case: But I dare say, -- We are allowed to help our Unbelief with all
the Assistances of Nature (as well as Grace) that we can get. And this, if we
please, may be one. Nor am I singular here neither; the Ancient Fathers of the
Church have started the Notion before me: Dr. Day, in his Lectures, cites
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Lactantius, making use of this
Comparison. I humbly acknowledge, this Article of our faith is without a bottom
past Human Fathom. It Is storied of St. Augustine, that he endeavored to sound
it: He walked abroad to that purpose, at last came to a Riverside; musign with
himself, and laboring to conceive it. At length not far off, a little Child
appeared unto him very busy on the Bank. He had made, forsooth, a little Hole,
and with a Spoon which he had in his Hand, was lading of the Water into the
aforesaid little Hole. St. Augustine draws nearer to him, demands of the Child,
what he was a doing? Father (quoth he) my purpose is to unlade this whole
River, into this little hole you here see.

Augustine. That Is impossible, etc.

Child. No more will you be ever able to bring to pass that which you are
about. And with that the Child vanished.

I relate not the Story for a certain Truth. The Thing itself in absolute
Consideration is true, viz. That it is as impossible for us to conceive the
Blessed Trinity, as with a little Spoon to unlade a great River into a little
Hole. The present Emblem may serve a little to take off our Suspicions of the
Impossibility and Absurdity of the Trinity of Persons in One God: It is not
sufficient to Expound the Thing itelf, all the Three Persons are represented
under this Notion.

FATHER -- The Lord is a Sun. -- Isa. 60.19.

SON. -- Mal. 4 2. And Vide Margent, Luke 1.78. And Mat. 17.2. Rev. 1.16.

HOLY GHOST. -- He shall baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. -- Lead
you into the Way of all Truth.

Multa sunt quae dici possunt, sed sufficiat fidelibus pauca de Mysterio
Trinitatis audivisse. Aug. -- In die judicii non damnor, quia dicam nescivi
Naturam Creatoris mei, si autem aliquid temere dixero, temeritas poenas luit,
ignorantia veniam promeretur. Id.

3. Of the Divine Glory and Vnsearchableness. He that goes about to stare long
upon the Sun, or approach its Light, and dive deep into the Nature of it, may,
as Democritus, stare himself blind, before he can make any near approaches to
it. It Is not easy to bear the Influence of the Sun for one whole Day, suppose
we could possibly be so long under the immediate and direct Emission of its
glorious Beams, though upon the Earth. It will burn combustible Stuff at the
distance of 1000000 Miles, should it stand still, and neither remove away, nor
be tempered with other cooling Elements. Consider this a little seriously, and
apply it.

The Glory of God is such an amazing Wonder, that as the Father says, In hac
mortali vita quicquid ad nos usque pertingit, aliud nihil est quam exiguus
quidam rivulus, ac velut parvus magnae Lucis Rivulus. Naz. vide Act. 26.13. 1 Timothy 6.16. So that when we go about to search into the Divine Nature, we must
stand off, and know our distance, and assume modestly to our Thoughts, and
acknowledge the Depth of the Mystery, and cry out with the Apostle, Romans 11.33.
etc. O the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! -- For who has
known the ind of the Lord? Or who has be his Counselor? -- Or who has
first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? -- For of him,
and through him, and to him are all Things: To whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

Sure I am, tho we ought as much as any thing in the World, to study the Nature
and Properties of that God we are concerned with, and account it one of the
first Points of True Wisdom, to acquaint our selves with that Almighty Being we
have to do with, and to pray for more Light and Grace, that we may be able in
due time to comprehend, with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and
height and depth; and to know the Love of God which passes knowledge. Yet in
our highest Seize on this side the Veil, we shall know but in part, and
prophecy in part; our utmost Skill will not be sufficient to comprehend the
Infinite God in the Embraces of our Finite Conceptions: And we shall as soon be
able to climb the Sun, and stare with open Eyes upon that great Luminary, and
comprize all is excellent Rays and Influences, within the Limits of our narrow
Bosom, as -- by searching to find out, and trace out the Almighty to Perfection.

Est in Deo, quod percepi potest; est plane si modo, quod potest, velis: Sicut
videre est in Sole quod videas, si hoc velis videre, quod possis; amittas autem
quod potes videre, dum quod non poes niteris; ita ut in rebus Dei habes quod
inelligas, si intelligere quod potes, velis: Caelum si ultra quam potes,
speres, id quod potuisti non poteris. Hilar. Psalm. 145.3. Great is the Lord,
and greatly to be praised, and his Greatness is unsearchable.

I am loath to leave this Abyss of Meditation: Pardon me, Reader, if I strain
Courtesy a little in the Case: This Infinite Being is the Fountain of our
Blessedness, and therefore, notwithstanding his excellent Majesty can be cooped
within no Bounds, nor scaled by any Human Apprehensions, to the Height, nor
fathomed to the utmost Depth by any Line of Human Reason; yer it is pleasant to
behold him through the Lattices, and spend our deepest Thoughts and Admirations
upon his Glory; and if we cannot comprehend him, let us stand and wonder! And
cry out with longing and importunate Desire -- Oh! when shall the Veil be taken
off our Eyes? When shall the Apartment that separates us, be taken away? When
shall we come to know as we are known? But Oh! when shall our finite Natures be
exhaled and drawn up with this Sun? and our Souls drawn up into his boundless
Glory? and we eternally blessed in the warm Embraces of his Divine Love? In
those Flames of pure Affection for ever and ever! To think now of this
unsearchable God, the most infinitely good and glorious Being in the whole
World, whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain; whom Angels all admire and
adore; the Nature of whose Glory we cannot now grasp with our most expanded
Thoughts: That this God shall first pardon our Sins. and then sanctify our
Natures, and shortly send his Angels of fetch our Souls up to that Heavenly
Choire where we shall be clothed indeed with the Sun, and tread the Moon under
our Feet, and look with a holy scorn upon the little silly trifling Comforts of
the sublunary World! This is enough to make our Faces smile now at every Beam
of Light and Mercy, darted upon our Souls from that Divine Countenance, to make
our Hearts dance within us! To fill us with an unspeakable Joy, upon the hopes
of that Intuitive Fruition in the other World! Then, and not till then, we
shall see the Maker of the Worlds, and come to see and understand the deep and
pleasant Mysteries of his wondrous Works!

4. Of the Divine Omnipresence. That God should be everywhere preent, as our
Religion obliges us to believe that he is, is a pretty hard Article; in
Heaven, on Earth, in Hell: In the one, by the especial Manifestation of his
Glory; in the other, by the continual Exercise of his Providence; in the last,
by the Execution of his Justice; and yet thus he is, as both Scripture and
Reason oblige us to believe: The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, nor the
Earth, nor Hell: He transcends all the Limits of Nature, and surpasses all
those finite little Bounds of Man's Conception, Psalm. 139.3.4, 5. etc. yet even
the difficulty of this Attribute, as insuperable as it seems to be, is plainly
illustrated by this Simile, The Sun is placed in the heavenly Orbs, there it
resides continually; yet disperseth its shining Rays to the Firmament above, to
the Air, to the Earth below; yea, it traverseth round the World, and visits the
Antipodes under our Feet; it passes through our Windows, through the Crevises
of our Walls, the Light breaks in through the Pores of our Curtains, and its
Heat through Stone-walls; it shines upon the nasty Dunghils, and yet receives
no Infection or Impurity thence. Why should it seem then a thing impossible,
that the God that made it, should fill the World with his Presence! and be
confined to no Bounds!

5. Of the Divine Omniscience. (This borders upon the former Head.) The
Heathens supposed the Sun could see and hear: (...). Even the Scripture itself
sometimes makes use of this Allusion and Metaphor: The Sun has looked upon me,
Cant. 1.6. 2 Samuel 12.11. In the sight of this Sun. And there is so much Ground
for this Fancy, that take away the Sun, and our Eyes would serve to very little
purpose; it is that dispels the Darkness, and discovers the Truth in all places
of the World, (where it is discovered) and it brings to light the hidden things
of darkness: As I said but now, it visits all parts of the World, Air, Earth,
Sea, all the Corners of the Earth, all the Rooms of our Houses; nay, our very
Reins and Heart, the most retired parts of our bodies are not hid from the Heat
of it: Were it possible to bar the Pores of our Skin, and shut the Door of our
Breasts fast, against the Beams and warm Influence of it, our very Heart-blood
would soon congeal into a dead and putrid Humor! What is this but a fair Copy
of the Divine Omniscience, so far as an insensate Creature can possibly vie
with an intelligent and infinite Creator? Tell me, you now that are ready to
object Blindness to the God of Heaven, and say, Tush, the Lord does not see,
nor the God of Jacob regard: Can you hide your selves from the Sun of the
Firmament, and live? If not, shall not he that made the Sun, search further
than an insensate finite Creature of his own making? shall not he that made the
Eye, see? etc. But shall not he that made (...), the Eye of the World, see more
than the Eye itself? Go now, ye Hypocrites, and shut the Door, and draw the
Curtain over your secret Debaucheries, and dare to perpetrate the boldest Sins
under a Veil; -- but remember, that the Light will break in through the
narrowest Chink, and nothing can hide you from the Omniscient Eye, before whom
Hell is naked, and Destruction has no covering, Job 26.6. vid. Heb. 12.13.

6. Of the Divine Providence. That God should be still in Heaven, and there
safe in the Enjoyment of a complete Happiness, and yet interpose his Power and
Government in the Transactions of this lower World, withut any Disturbance to
his Rest and Quietness, is a Wonder which some People in the World have not
been able to digest: I desire these People but to give themselves leisure to
meditate a little upon the present Subject of our Discourse, and take Notice
how the Sun is as quiet in his Orb, and excellently glorious from Age to Age,
without any change or diminution, or disturbance from any thing, either in the
Spheres above, or the Orbs below, and yet has still a mighty Influence upon
all Things here beneath; tempering the Air, fanning the Clouds, dissolving the
Snow, and Hail, and Frost, and Dew, giving Light to the Moon, shining round the
Earth; fecundating the very Mines, Trees, Herbs, Grass, Fruits, Flowers;
influencing upon the Constitutions of us Men, our Bodies first, and then our
Minds; giving Light, Heat, Motion, Action, Generation, Sense, and Life, to all
sublunary living Bodies; and then say -- Whether it be not very feasible to
believe, that God Almighty may govern this lower World, and interpose his Hand
in the Concernments of us Men, without any prejudice to the rest of his blessed
Attributes.

I am very sorry that Men are so apt to suspect the weakness of the Almighty
Power, as if he were a mere Cipher to the Governance of all Human Affairs: But
when they are so insensible of the secret, and yet notorious Concurrence of
this eminent Planet, with the Concerns of Nature, the Wonder is at a stop: And
we must say at best, that Men are Fools for want of Thinking, and using their
Faculties: Men have got a Trick, ever since Sin debauched their Natures, of
looking low, and creeping upon the Earth, and taking Notice only of things that
run directly into their Eyes, fixing upon Secondary Causes; and the immediate
Effects and Consequences, (like the Dog that quarrels with the Staff, but
regards not the Hand that holds it; or the Hog that gathers the Acorns and
Mast, but looks not up to the Tree from whence they fall) forgetting that the
God of Heaven has an effectual Influence upon the Works of his own Hands. Is
there Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it! And is there any Godo
amongst us, which comes not from the Fountain of Blessedness, the Author of
every good and perfect Gift! Let Men learn a little from this Topic, to raise
their Aspect, and climb the Ladder from Orb to Orb, in the tracing of Causes,
'till they come to the Primum Mobile, the Oriignal Principle of all Motions;
and by accustoming themselves to this Method of Consideration, peradventure
they will find Reason to run every remarkable Contingent of their Life to the
Head, and at last terminate in the Son of Righteousness.

7. Of the Divine Invisibility. It Is true, we may see something of the Sun, but
there is something likewise in it, which we cannot see; who can see its Beams,
or glaring Light, or Heat, or Motion, so as to be able to give any competent
Account of the Nature, Substance, Color, and Properties of them? You may see
the Back-parts, the Operations, the glimmering and faint Representations of the
Almighty -- But there shall no Man see his Face and live, Exodus 33.20. Can the
Owl see the Sun, or Batts endure the Daylight? No more can we abide the Luster
of the Divine Presence, or see the Essentials of his Being, 1 Timothy 6.16.

8. Incorruptibility, and Immortality. The Sun is the same now, as he was last
Year, last Age, Thousands of Years ago; he suffers no Decay, Infirmity, Old
Age, or Declension; but is as fresh and vigorous now, as in the first Morning
of its Creation. Does not this somewhat resemble the Glory of the incorruptible
God? the King, Immortal, Eternal, Invisible, Jam. 1.17. Who is the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever: All things here wax old as does a Garment, etc.

9. Of his Omnipotence. (For all these Attributes are reckoned to the Almighty,
as in a manner peculiar to him, and therefore I hope you will not quarrel with
the Number of my Particulars.) What cannot (in Reason) the Sun do? I have
instanced in many things under the Point of Providence; I will add a few more.

The Waters can parch our Grounds, exhale our Waters, make the Earth barren,
destroy our Harvests and bring a Dearth upon the Land. The Sun can invenom the
Air, and shed a Poison into our Constitutions, and destroy us with Plagues and
Mortal Distempers; the Sun can burn our Houses, Towers, Steeples, and make a
Desolation in the Earth; the Sun can make our Heads ache, our Hearts burn, our
Choler domineer, and so dispose to Wars and Bloodshed. Again, the Sun can melt
the Clouds, and send Rain upon the Earth to make it fruitful, and turn our dry
Grounds into Springs of Water; can heal the Air, and warm our Constitutions,
and preserve our Health, and Wealth, and Peace, and Plenty; but all this under
the Permission of God Almighty: He only is the Supreme Power, whom no Creature
can resist: He only is Omnipotent -- Our God is a consuming Fire, Heb. 12.29.
What a mighty Foundation is this Attribute of the Divine Omnipotence, to build
our Faith and Affiance upon! And what strong Reasons we have to believe it! And
yet we shake like a Bulrush, when we lean upon that strong Arm; the Strength of
Israel, who will not lie nor deceive; that Mighty God, who is able to do
exceedingly abundantly above all that we (weak Mortals) can wish or think of.
What Conceptions we are able to frame to our selves now of this Attribute, I
know not; this I believe, when once the Leaf of this sublunary World is turned
over, and the Gates of Heaven are opened, and that Scene of Infinite Glory,
which lies yet before us out of sight, is presented to our Eyes, when the
WONDERS of the other World come in view, we shall then cry out, Rev. 19.6. The
Lord God Omnipotent Reigns.

10. Purity and Holiness. The Fire is a clean Element, and one of those that we
are wont to purify Metals and Vessels made of them with: It was enjoined under
the Law. The Sun is pure from any Spot, or Blemish, or Wrinkle, or Cloud, or
Earth, or Pollution: Yea, tho it visits our Dunghils, it is not defiled with
them; no Uncleanness can stick to the Sunbeams: Yea, it discovers the Spots
upon our Garments, the Freckles upon our Faces, and puts a Shame upon our
Deformities, Eccles. 16.10. What is this but a lively Emblem of the Infinite
Purity of that God, with whom we have to do? That Refiner's Fire, and Fuller's
Soap, whose Words are all of them purer than Gold tried in the Fire; and
requires us to be pure, as he is pure. And really, when we consider this
Visinity of the Divine Holiness, we may be justly abashed into Shame and
Confusion, to think what Deformities our Souls are disfigured with, and what
Insolences we have committed in the sight of this Sun; and withal, we have
Reason to cry out, as 1 Samuel 6.20. Who is able to stand before this holy Lord
God? If the Righteous scarcely be saved. etc. We are apt to please our selves
with the Memoirs of the Divine Goodness and Clemency, the shining Light and
Warmth of the Sunbeams, but seldom remember, that the same Sun, when it looks
through a Burning-glass, is apt to set fire upon combustible Stuff; I mean,
that whosoever builds any such Light, Tinder, Hay, Straw, Stubble, Wood, False
Doctrines, and Errors of Judgment, or Ungodly Practices, runs the Risk of an
extraordinary Hazard, and that these Works must be tried by a Jealous God; and
whatever is combustible must be burned up; and if the Sinner after that loss,
have any Substance of Purity and Holiness left, he shall be saved, but so as by
Fire; as a piece of impure Gold or Sslver thrown into the Furnace, to prove the
Metal, and waste the Dross. Our God is a consuming Fire.

11. Bounty. How beneficial the Sun is to the Earth, I need not stay now to
tell you; it is sufficient to say, the Benignity and Beneficence of it is so
great, and its good Offices so many, that we can as ill spare the Sun out of
the Firmament, as the Breath almost out of our Nostrils; nor can we live, or
move, as Men, as Christians, without the Mercies of God. His Mercies are over
all his Works! And should I go about to expatiate upon this Theme, I might as
well go wa^e in the deep and wide Ocean. His Mercy is over all his Works! He is
a gracious God, merciful, slow o anger, of great kindness, pitiful, and
compassionate, of tender bowels, and of long patience, and plen^^ous in
goodness; keeping mercy for thousands of them. In short, the Prophet seems to
make out my Analogy in this Point more exactly, when he else us, Mal. 4.2. The
Son of Righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings.

12. Unchangeableness and Everlastingness. We see nothing visible in the Nature
of Things, to prognosticate the Ruin of the Sun, at least 'till the expiration
of the whole Elementary World: It neither changes, nor decays, nor dies, it
falters not in its Motions or Influences; it is still one, continues the same,
and will do so 'till the End of Time -- So long as the Sun endures, Psalm. 72.5,
17. And in this respect likewise, it is an Adumbration of the Divine Truth, and
Faithfulness, and Unchangeableness, and Eternity. I am the Lord, I change not,
therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed, Mal. 3.6. The Lord shall endure
for ever, Psalm. 9.7.

13. I have one thing more, and I have done: The Sun and Moon repesent a
Husband and Wife: So the Heathen Poets fancied, and accordingly gave the Names
of Phoebus to one, and Phoebe to the other, Psalm. 19.5. And it is very certain,
the Moon depends entirely upon the Sun for all its Light, and attends it in its
Motion as becomes an obsequious Bride: Nor am I singular in this Conceit; Holy
Scripture gives sufficient Countenance to it. The Church is fitly compared to
the Moon, upon the Account of its Changes, Eclipses, borrowed Light, and wanish
Complexion. I think, by the Seed of David, Psalm. 89.37. compared there to the
Moon, is meant the Church, and as for the Sun, ye have heard already, that God
himself stoops to the Metaphor; the other part is easily made out, viz. That
this Sun, and this Moon are related one to the other, as the Bridegroom and the
Bride, Isa. 62.1, 5. You are this Moon, God has set his Love upon the Children
of Men, with design to marry them to himself; Christ the Son of Righteousness,
has died to purchase their Affections, and present them to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, etc. As a Man loves his Wife, so does
Christ the Church: Only this, Are you willing to accept the Proposal, or will
you disdain the Motion? Shall this Moon scorn to be married to this glorious
Sun? Or are you willing to take Christ for your wedded Husband, to live
together after God's Ordinance, in the sacred Tie of a Matrimonial Relation?
God himself courts you, Christ has died for you, the Spirit and the Bridegroom
say, Come; and we his Ambassadors and Ministers say, Come, we beseech you, in
Christ's stead: The Commission to us is much the same with Abraham's to his
Servant, Genesis 24.38. And our Answer may be much the same with Abraham's Servant
to his Master, ver. 39. However, our Address to you is the same with his to
Rebecca, v. 49. If you are willing, God is willing, and all things are ready,
and the Match is excellent, and no Dowry on your part is required, only as the
Psalmist, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken, O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine
Ear. And if you are thus far willing, heartily willing, the Espousals may be
celebrated now, we will very quickly, God willing, solemnize the Contract, ( in
the Sacrament) and shortly the Marriage shall be consummate, and the Feast
prepared, (when the Scaffold of this World is taken down) and the Compeer of
our Bridegroom, the Man of Sin is destroyed, and the Number of the Guests are
completed, and Room is made for that Great Solemnity; then, I say, the
Marriage-Day will come, and the Feast celebrated, and the Nuptials consummate;
and then, Rev. 19.7. Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give Honor to him; for
the Marriage of the Lamb i^ come, and his Wife has made herself ready.

III. Of the Existence of a Separate Soul, and Ministry of Angels.
-- And was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom,

Luke 16.22.
THE Context is a Parable, which I need not make a Rehearsal of: The Subject of
my Discourse is somewhat abstruse from Common Sense: My Text lies all out of
sight. The Soul of Lazarus lately departed out of the Body; the Angels carrying
it perceptible to no Mortal Eye; the Place whither, Abraham's Bosom, in the
other World. From whence we have a fair occasion to Discourse of, I. The
Existence of a Separate Soul. II. The Ministration of Angels to it in that
State. III. The Conveyance of it to the common Receptacle of Departed Souls.


I shall propound the Doctrine thus:

Doct. Upon the supposition of a Sound Faith in Christ, our Souls are well
provided for at the Dissolution of our Bodies. The Soul of a good Christian is
better accommodated after its departure out of the Body, than it could be in
the Body. Tho the outward Tabernacle be taken down, and returns to the Dust,
the Soul is in a safe and comfortable Condition; and that in respect of its
Immortality and Existence in a Separate State.

The Foundation I have for this Argument in my Text, is this, viz. That tho our
supposed Friend Lazarus was dead, yet he was carried away by Angels: His Body
cannot be meant in this Case; that was to return to its Dust, and at the
disposal of Mankind, it must therefore be his Soul, which remained alive after
Death. Shall I give you some Arguments to prove, that the Soul lives when the
Man dies?

1. The Scripture tells us so. The Righteous has hope in his Death, Prove.
14.32. Stephen prayed, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, Acts 7.59. To Day shall
thou be with me in Paradise, etc.

2. Take away this Doctrine, and the Force of all Religion falls to the Ground:
Then that of the Epicurean takes place, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
die. Then who would renounce his Lusts, to serve a God? And quit the present
Pleasures of Sin, in hopes of a future Reward? Were it not that Mankind has
naturally, and generally, ( all the World over) a sollicitous Care for the
other World, Religion would be soon banished out of this.

3. If the Soul live not after the Body, it is more unhappy in the Body than the
Souls of Bruits; and Man is a more ignoble inferior Creature, than those
Creatures which serve him. We enjoy less of the Pleasures of this World, than
many Bruits: We are distracted with more Cares, Fears, and Anxieties about
Death and Hell, about Duty and Conscience, about Body and Soul, about Children
and Friends, about the Concerns of the present Time, and Time to come; than the
innocent, pleasant Birds of the Air, Beasts of the Forest, and Fishes of the
Sea. So that we must conclude, if the Creator that made us, made us with any
Wisdom, and did not put an absolute Cheat upon us, he made us for a longer
Life, than that of this World: And the Soul must live longer, or the
Workmanship of God's Hands is clouded with a grievous Solecism. There are many
more Arguments by which this Doctrine is wont to be proved, which I shall now
pass over; supposing my Readers are all willing enough, that their souls should
survive their Bodies, and endure to Eternity.

[2.] When the Soul goes out of the Body, it is conveyed away by Angels into the
other World. Once out of Prison, and it comes into the Society of Spirits;
whilst it is here in the Body, it is pent up, and cloistered within such thick
Mud-walls, that it hardly enjoys a free and unconfined Breathing, can scarce
peep out at the Windows, or take Acquaintance with those Spiritual Creatures of
its own Kind; it is mancipated for the time to a heavy lumpish Body, shackled
and chained up in a narrow Tabernacle of Flesh and Blood. But when Death unties
the Knot, and open's the Prison-doors, then, like a Bird broke newly out of the
Cage, it is presently saluted with Ghosts, its Fellows, a sort of Spiritual
Intelligent Abstracted Forms, naked Spirits, which come to congratulate and
conduct it to its place of Rest. This will appear more probable, if you
consider,

1. That God employs the Angels about the common Providential Government of the
World. Those Ministering Spirits are ready at hand to do his pleasure; and
nimble, and active; if he bids them go, they go: if come, they come, etc. And
this all without Murmur, Dispute, or Displeasure, in a ready, pleasant,
cheerful manner. Thus we find an Angel attending Hagar by the Fountain of
Water, Genesis 16.7. And again, Genesis 21.17. we read of Angels appearing to
Abraham, about the Judgment of Sodom; to Jacob, to Moses, to Balaam, to Joshua,
Gideon, Manaoh, Elijah, to our Savior often, and to his Disciples, to Philip,
to Cornelius, to St. Peter: So that we may upon the whole conclude safely, that
Angels are Ministers ordinarily employed about the Concernments of us Men,
especially for our Salvation.

2. That they have a Love for us, upon the account of the similitude and
resemblance of Nature. The great Difference is, our Souls are younger Brothers,
born last, and put in Prison for the time: Both Spirits, both immortal, both
intelligent, both able to exist, and live, and act without the help of a dull
Organical Body; both active busy Creatures, and both accomplished in the
Fruition of the same God, the Father of Spirits; and therefore no wonder, if
these Angels, tho of a different Species from the Separate Souls of us Men,
have a dear Affection for us. The truth is, our Souls are here upon their
Probation for Eternity; and so long as they have any Time to spend, and the
Sentence is not passed upon them, the Angels of both Worlds are Competitors for
them; and the Rivalry is importunate, and the Soul is courted with much
eagerness and contention on both hands: The Angels of the bottomless Pit, tug
hard, and bid fair for the greatest part of Souls; and no doubt, but all those
who are immersed deep in Flesh, and prefer the ditty Pleasures of Sin, to the
Light and Purity of the blessed Spirits, will all fall to the share of those
impure fiends. A Man cannot be at his Duty, but a Devil is at his Elbow: If he
goes to Church, Satan will meet him there too, Job 1. Jesus himself shall not
escape without an Assault, and after extraordinary Devotion also.

And as they that are against us are many, so they that stand our Friends are
many too, Psalm. 68.17. The Chariots of God are Twenty thousand, even Thousands
of Angels. In short, the Soul of Man is a Wager staked down between these two
divided opposite Armies, and the Battle is strong, and the Victory doubtful.

III. The Angels assist in our Second Birth; and therefore we may reasonably
expect, that they will not be wanting in our Third likewise. They help on our
Conversion, and they rejoice at it, Luke 15.10. There is Joy in the Presence of
the Angels of God, over one Sinner that repents. The Angel of the Lord
appeared to Cornelius, Acts 10.3, 7. In a word, -- Heb. 1.14. Are they not all
Ministering Spirits (...), Sent forth to Minister for them, who shall be Heirs
of Salvation. It is generally agreed upon by all Religions in the World, that
every Man has a Guard appointed him, of the Angelical Host, to be the Guide of
his Actions, and the Preserver of his Life. Menander, the Heathen Poet, says,
That every Man, from his Nativity, has his peculiar Demon assigned him for
his Conduct. The Egyptians, and some of the Platonics, assigned Three. Many
Christians, as well Jews, as Mahometans, are of Opinion, That every Man has
some, One, or more, for that purpose. However it is, we have great Reason to
believe, that our God and Savior has provided better for the Concerns of our
Salvation, and allows us a stronger Guard for our safe Convoy through the
Temptations and Dangers of this World, than the Devil has to seduce and ruin
us: And if the Angels, as some believe, take us at the First Gate of our
Nativity; but especially at the Second, of our Regeneration the Birth of Grace,
is it probable that they will be wanting to us at the last, our Birth of Glory?

4. It is but very meet, that the Man should have some such Assistants ready at
hand, to receive the Soul, upon its going out of the Body, and carry it to its
place of Eternal Abode, tot he Mansion and Company it is appointed for. And
that, because it is so in all other the like Cases: When the Man is born out of
the Womb into the World, there must be some of those People present, that are
already Inhabitants of that World. When the Man is Regenerate, and Born anew,
there must be some Members of the Church, acquainted with Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Matters, to receive it out of the World of Nature into the
Assembly of the Church; and at the Birth of Glory, it is very requisite also,
that there be some of those Spiritual People, which belong to that place, ready
to embrace and introduce it to the whole Society of departed Spirits. We may
not be incorporated into any Society, or admitted to any Court, without some
such Friends related to that Society, or that Court, to introduce and bring us
thither: And we may assure our selves, that when once these souls of ours are
dismissed out of these Earthly Mansions, emancipated from the Body, and
dispeopled out of this World, and have left off to converse with Corporeal
Beings, the Change will look mighty strange and amazing, and the naked Spirit
will be at first very modest, and unskilful, to appear immediately, and intrude
hastily, and without Company, into that Spiritual Corporation. Why, tho we
grant, that the Soul, upon the pulling down of the Corpreal Prison, is clothed
with a much greater Light and Intelligence, and knows more, and sees more
clearly into the Affairs of the Spiritual World, than ever it did, when it only
peeped through the Keyhole of the Prison-door; yet still it is the first time it
ever appeared upon that Ground, or ever saw such People, and its Acquaintance
being so new, its Introduction is more necessary. And besides, I doubt not, but
as long as the Soul is on this side Canaan, the Enemy is at his Heels; whilst
not possessed actually of the State of Bliss, the Evil Spirits challenge him
for their own, and threaten to Arrest him, and carry him to their own Home. --
And again, we find,

5. The Proposition true in Fact, the Angels attend Lazarus, and carry him to
the Bosom of Abraham. We find the Angels attend at the Ascension of our Savior
into Heaven. We find abundance of Stories of this Nature, in Modern Ages, of
Dying People sublimated to that pitch, and their Souls so elevated and refined,
that they have seen the Spiritual Harbingers, and Guard, prepared for them,
before the House of Clay was pulled down, or themselves turned out. God does
sometimes, -- whether for the sake of the Soul itself, to cheer it with a
Cordial, or for the sake of us that remain alive, -- put Dying Men sometimes in
a Rapture, and present them with a Scene of Spirits arrayed in Light and Glory:
For this Cause Tertullian calls the Angels, Evocatores Animarum, the Callers
forth of Souls, and such as show to them Paraturam Diversorii, the Lodging and
Entertainment provided for them. And thus the Souls of wicked and good Men, are
both called out and conveyed away. I Will give you one Instance or two.

Gregory the Great tells of a Boy, ill Educated by an ill Father, of a vicious
Life, being taken ill upon his Deathbed, cried out, Father, Father, the Blacks
are come to carry me away.

The other of an English Martyr, comforted in the Prison, with the glorious
Appearance of a Spiritual Messenger.

I could enlarge much upon this Subject, but list not to do it now, having
given many Instances of this Nature in the following Work.

[3.] The Society the departed Soul is carried too, is Spiritual likewise: A
Spirit carried by Spirits, to a World of Spirits, to the Bosom of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, Heb. 12.22.

Application.] 1. Let us endeavor what we can to refine and screw up our Souls
to a Spiritual Temper; let it not sink so deep, as commonly it does into an
Oblivion of its own Country. Remember, that this Body is but the Mansion House
for the time of its Apprentice-ship, and Nonage; when it is grown up, and fit
for a change, the Tabernacle must be taken down, and laid in the Grave to
moulder, in order to a more glorious Resurrection: In the mean while, the Soul
is a Spiritual Substance, near akin to the Angels of Heaven, attended and
waited on by those Ministering Spirits; and by them guarded and conducted to the
General Assembly of those Beatified, Glorious, Spiritual People in the other
World. Why then do we go about to stisle and suffocate these Spirits of ours,
with the thick noisome Vapors of worldly Cares and Pleasures? Why do we go
about to emasculate and evigorate our excellent Souls, with putting them to the
Drudgery of the Flesh? Why do we let the Body, the Lusts, and inordinate
Passions of it, domineer over, and Pinion down the Wings of the Soul? Why do we
forget our selves, that we have the best part of an Angel in our Breasts? A
Piece of Noble Substance, prized by Angels, designed for the Fellowship of
Angels for ever, etc. Spend not your Time, Strength, Substance, and Passion, in
providing for the Body; but think of the poor Soul that is imprisoned in it,
and labor as much as you can to enlarge its Condition, to spiritualize its
Nature, to separate it as much from the Body, to advance it as far above the
Body, as your present State is capable of.

2. Be thankful to God, who has ennobled your Souls so far, and dignified them
with the Guardianship and Protection of Angels. How much, methinks, do we owe
to the God of our Beings, for raising the Spirit of Man to such a high Degree,
that he is in a fair way to be an Angel's Fellow! That has not only provided
them for Guards here, but Companions for us hereafter! Surely God loves us,
honors us, and puts some great value upon us, when he sends such Noble,
Honorable Messengers to us! Why, then, we ought to love, to honor, to serve
him, to live up to the Credit of our Religion, the Honor of our Lord and
Master: Lord, what is Man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of Man that
thou thus vifitest him? Psalm. 8.4, 5.

3. Let us not lightly esteem the Dignity of our Fellow Christians, be they
otherwise what they will, poor in Estate, Lazarus with Sores, weak in parts, of
low Degree in the Honors of the World, under Reproach, Temptation, or
Afflictions whatever. Their Souls also as well as ours, are precious in the
sight of God; Angels are their guardians; Glorious Spirits minister to them for
their Good; let us beware of doing any thing to their hurt, Mat. 18.10.

4. Let us also hence take Example of Ministration to our Fellow Creatures. Let
it be accounted no Disparagement to our Honor, to do Attendance to our weaker
Brethren; Creatures made in the same Mold with us, born to the same Dignities,
the like Privileges. If Angels stoop from Heaven to Earth, from a Seat of
Bliss and Glory, to do the Offices of Love, Tuition, and Convoy to our Souls,
let not us disdain to wait upon our Fellows, Mat. 20.26.

5. Let us Reverence the Angels, and do what we can to secure their Ministry
to, and Care for us, and Protection of us. Praying unto God, their, and our
common Lord, the Author of every good and perfect Gift, to him who can
presently give (if there be a necessity of it) more than Twelve Legions of
Angels, to deliver thee out of Danger, Psalm. 91.11, 12.

Keep within the Pale of the Church, upon Sacred Ground; I mean, in the Bounds
circumscribed by the Gospel of our Savior, the Territory and Confines of the
right Faith. Nor is that enough, we must keep within the Limits of our lawful
Vocations too, be found doing nothing but what we need not be ashamed for
Angels to look upon; resisting Satan, and banishing him far out of our
Correspondence and Community, putting out of sight every thing that is
offensive to those pure Angelical Spirits, those Flames of Fire that are
fervent hot with Zeal for their Maker; conforming our selves, as near as will
consist with the State of our present Corporeal Condition, to a hearty, ready,
and cheerful, and constant Obedience, in imitation of the Angels; shaking off
what we can the Impediments of the Body, the Shackles and Chains of our corrupt
Nature, aspiring to a Noble Freedom, Easiness and Alarity in all the Parts of a
Christian Devotion, stooping with the most profound Humility and Condescension
to our Fellow-sinners, maintaining as far as it is possible for us, an unspotted
Purity in Heart and Life, shining to the World, bright as Mortal Angels,
incarnated in Flesh and Blood; but above all, burning with a Seraphic Love and
Charity to God, to Man, to all proportionably; and then will he give his Angels
charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways, Psalm. 91.11.

IV. The Future State, etc. being Meditations on the Glory of the Invisible
World.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of
Man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him,

1 Cor. 2.9.
I Have formerly attempted this Subject; but yet am not satisfied to say so
little upon it. The Reward at the End of the Work, is an excellent Motive to
the Courage of the Workman: I have considered, that our Wages is proportioned
to our Work, and more; and we may think of it before hand for our
Encouragement; As we have not to do with a Tyrant, that requires our Slavery,
and propounds no Rewards, so we are not bound to a continual Service, without
looking at the End of our Labors: Nay, I believe, that on purpose to encourage
us, the Almighty has been pleased to make some Revelation of his kind
intentions toward us; we may, as well as our Savior, the Son of God, look a
little upon the Joy that is set before us.

I am not able to say much upon the Point, it is high and future, and
intercepted at present from our Apprehension, with Clouds and a thick Darkness;
and when I have said all that I can say, I must leave off before I come to the
middle of the Story. When all is said that I can say, the one half will not be
told you: But this I will be bold to promise, if I do not make it out by sober
Reason, to any Man of a sober Mind, and reasonable Spirit, a Man that is humble
enough, and impartially willing to believe Truth to be Truth, that the Rewards
are, 1. Great. 2. Certain.

I say, Reader, if I make not this out by sober Reason to be very credible,
then say, either first, that the whole Business of Religion is backed with but
a cold Encouragement; or, (which would be more favorable) that I am very
unskilful in the Managery: But I do hope, so to explain the Matter, as to
convince you, That the Joy beyond is worth our seeking, tho it cost us much
more than is required from us. And if it prove upon our serious enquiry, to be
both Great and Certain, exceeding great and very certain; then I hope, it will
add Courage to our Religion, and Strength to our Devotion, and we shall be
willing to work harder, in Consideration of our Wages.

I remember St. Augustine tells of himself, That going about to write to St.
Hierom, that very Day on which Hierom died, (as it proved) on a sudden, he saw
a Light breaking into his Study, and perceived the Room perfumed with a
fragrant Smell, and heard a Voice, (as he thought) -- O Austin, what art thou
going to do? to put the Sea into a little Vessel? when the Heavens shall cease
from their perpetual Motion, then, and not till then, shall thou be able to
understand the Glory of Heaven, unless thou come to feel it, as now I do.

We are, Reader, upon a great Disadvantage in this Case; we cannot conceive the
Glories of another World, which we never saw; especially of such a World as
that is, whilst we dwell in such a place as this is: But more especially yet,
if we live in Sin, and belong to the Kingdom of Darkness; then 'twill be hard
indeed: If we not only walk with our bodies on this Earth, but stoop low with
our Souls toward Hell, then the great Gulf between, will make the Prospect
darker to Heaven; and we shall find it difficult, and even impossible, to see
so far with such weak Faculties. The natural Man understands not the Things of
God, For in order to the Discovery, there is requisite the Grace of Faith, as
well as Natural Knowledge; and if Men's Hearts are not disposed to believe it,
all the Wonders of the Future Glory, told with the greatest Demonstration of
Natural Reason, will signify no more, than the fine Description of a Utopia,
or the World in the Moon; and Men will be as far from seeking after it, as if
they looked upon all as a Romantic Fiction. Well, Reader, think of it how you
please, I shall begin,

I. To tell you, That God does mean great Rewards for them that love him. And
this I shall show from several Topics.
1. The Preparation that has been making. 2. The Place. 3. The Riches of the
Place. 4. The Company. 5. The Sufferings of good Men for it. 6. The Author and
Design.

1. The Preparation for it. We are wont to guess the Greatness of a Solemnity,
Feast, Triumph, Building, any extraordinary Work, by the Preparations that are
made aforehand, in order thereunto; whereas little Works require little
Preparation. If this Rule be worth any thing, we have this Argument here: The
first Stone of this Building was set from Eternity; the Counsel was taken up
before the Foundation of this World was laid. Our Savior was intentionally
provided, before we had actually sinned; nay, before Adam was actually created,
1 Pet. 1.20. Thus the chief Cornerstone was provided from Etenrity: God, who
saw beforehand, that Man after his Creation would not stand, before he put him
into the World, provides a Remedy for his Fall; and this Remedy not provided
without the concurrent Assent of all his Attributes, Wisdom, Power, Truth,
Justice, and Mercy. And as he selected Christ so early for our Messiah, so he
chose us to Salvation, in and through him, Ephesians. 1.4.

Besides, consider what a brave World he made for Man, before he created him;
what Powers and Faculties he created him with; what a Paradise he put him in,
and there set him down vested with Righteousness and Holiness, in order to his
Happiness: All the Creatures besides, were but Attendants to wait upon Man,
Man, for God. Observe here a Messiah provided from Eternity, for Man, in case
he should fall; the Mercy of Election contrived beforehand, for such as would
accept it; a whole World provided filled with variety of Creatures, all
excellently and wonderfully made, and put in admirable Order, and at last Man,
a little Being, ushered upon the Stage with the Songs of Angels; for Job 38.7.
Those Morning-Stars sung together at this Solemnity. All this lower World was
but a Theater for Man to act in, a Preface to Eternity, and Eden's a Type of
Heaven, and Man designed thither in the Sequel of his Journey, for as yet he
was but upon his Journey, just entering his Sojourning State. No sooner scarce
was Man come hither, but he fell soully, and exposed himself and Posterity to
the Danger of Hell for ever: From that time to this, has God been laying out
himself for us, by Providence, Promises, Threatenings, Judgments, Mercies,
variety of Dispensations, diversity of Administrations, by Law, by Gospel, by
Angels, by Men, by Prophets, by Apostles, by his own Son, by his Holy Spirit,
by Circumcision and Passover, by Baptism and Eucharist, by ordinary Means, by
extraordinary Miracles, by such manifold Methods, all tending to our Salvation,
and conducive to our future Glory, that it would fill a Volume enough to cloy
you, to enumerate the Particulars of them. The whole Frame and Furniture of
this wide, vast Universe, all the Luster and Transactions of Divine Providence,
for these many Thousands of Years, ahve been but so many several preparations,
subservient to the State of Happiness and Glory hereafter; nay, Hell itself,
the Infernal Tophet, (ordained of old) was made for this v^^y purpose, for a
Prison or Dungeon, to remove those wicked Men and Devils into, which are unfit
for this State of Glory, and would be offensive and troublesome to the Good, if
God should do violence to his Justice to admit them there. All things work
together for good --

But neither is this all, we ourselves are prepared for this very thing, 2 Cor.
5.5. He who has wrought us for the self-same thing is God. He has not only
made the Elect, but predestined, redeemed, called, justified, and sanctified
them for this purpose; and so has created some Vessels of Silver, and some
Vessels of Gold, of Honor, and Glory, in order to it. Our Sins after
Repentance and Pardon are but like the cold, stormy, and cloudy Days of Winter,
which will make the Summer more welcome and pleasant; and he that knows how to
bring Good out of Evil, has fetched Honey out of this Lion; to whom much is
forgiven, the same loves much: The Forgiveness of our Sins, will be an
Endearment of our Affections, and provoke us to love God better, and delight
more in our blessed Sight and Enjoyment of him. It Is true, our Natures by our
Apostasy are soyl'd and deformed, it is the Work of Grace to smooth and
imbellish them. This is the World, the School, the Stage, where we are dressing
our selves, and putting on the Wedding Garment of Holiness, that at the
Marriage of the Lamb, and his Bride (the Church) we may be qualified for
Happiness. Christ is now washing our Souls clean, by the Waters of Repentance,
the Graces of his Spirit, and the Blood of his Cross, that when we come into
that heavenly Jerusalem, that pure City, we may be found clean all over: If I
wash thee not, thou have no part in me, John 13.8. And Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself, that he might sanctify and cleanse
it. And believe it, that is no light matter, but it puts the God of Heaven upon
infinite Charges, and costs him not only many a Mercy, many a Check, Rod, and
Judgment upon us, but the Graces of his Spirit, the Blood of his Son, the Calls
of his Ministry, and a continual Providence and Care for us!

Look over all this, and say, when there is such Hacking and Hewing, so much
Care and Concernment, with Compass and Chizzel, to carve the Stones of the
Building, what a mighty Glory is the Structure designed for!

The Walls of Babylon, they say, were a Work of many Years; I need not tell
you, how great or stately they were, you may guess the Greatness of the Work,
by the Labor about it; they say, Three hundred thousand Men were continually
employed in it for many Years. From the Preparation made for Solomon's Temple,
the Stock left in Banco, by David, to that end, the Gold from Ophir, the Cedars
from Lebanon, the Thousands of Workmen about it, you may guess the Glory of the
Building. These are but Shadows, but poor Emblems to the New Jerusalem.

2. The Place. The very Name of it is sweet and glorious: Where it lies, I take
not upon me to tell you, it is enough to me, it is somewhere; not in Hell, not on
Earth; but above them both; therefore above the Evils of them both. The
Scripture gives us a large Account of the Excellency of that place above this
World, by excluding all the Evils, Inconveniences, and Disadvantages we are
subject to here out of it. Wherever it is, it is in no part of the Elementary
World; no, not in any of the visible Orbs of the Heavens over our Heads: The
whole Universe is but a Scaffold to the Building, to be taken down at the Last
Day, in order to the Commencement of that glory. The Heavens themselves shall
submit to the common Fate of the Universal Conflagration; the Sun and Moon, and
all the apparent material Host of Heaven shall be dissolved, and burned up like
a Scroll, into Ashes, Vanity, and Nothing. The Elements themselves shall all
melt with fervent Heat, whole Nature shall stoop, and a final Period be put to
the Transactions of Things here; and then a vast Space will be made void and
empty, to erect the Eternal Kingdom in. What some Men guess of a Local Heaven,
above the Firmament, I presume, they have it all without Book: For of the
Place, (as well as Day) knows no Man on Earth. Behold, the Heaven of Heavens is
not able to contain the Majesty of the Great God, and the Glory of his court;
and therefore, I humbly conceive, (with deference to wiser Heads) that one
reason of taking down the Fabric of this World then, is to let the Glory of
the Infinite God, have free Scope, and full Liberty (not for his sake, for
nothing can obstruct his Power; especially, no Bars, Bolts, or Paper-walls, and
thin Enclosures of his own making) but for our sakes, whose Sense is finite and
Faculties limited, Psalm. 148.13. His Name is exalted, his Glory is above the
Earth and Heaven. It Is true, we are told, Psalm. 115.16. The Heaven, even the
Heavens are the Lords, but the Earth he has given to the Children of Men. But
I suppose, that means no more, than that the Spheres above the Clouds,
especially the Firmament, where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are, do in especial
manner, show forth the Power, Goodness, and Wisdom of God; whereas the Earth is
more immediately and directly made subservient to our use. When the Scripture
speaks of the last Glory, it expresses it by the Name of New Heavens and a New
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, i. e. ( If I mistake not, a new World
instead of both). And tho we find still in Holy Writ, the Throne of God, and
the Seat of the Blessed placed in Heaven; that is, but a lisping Phrase, a
condescending Figure that God uses to express himself to Man, by such means as
he is aptest to understand; because we look upon those higher Parts the most
Noble and Glorious of the World; and withal, to take off our Eyes, Thoughts,
and Affections from the drossy Sediment of this Earth that lies below, to teach
us, that our Happiness lies not here, but we must look for it out of this World.

3. The Riches of the Place: Which are very great. And if you ask how we may
know that, I answer, by observing what comes thence. How know we the Riches of
the East and West Indies, but by taking Notice of the Wealth and Commodities
that are carried out of those Countries; and the Reports of them that have been
there.

1. The Riches that come thence. What is there here, that has the Name of
Goodness writ upon it, which came not first from that Fountain? The Earth is
the Lords, and the fullness thereof: Every Beast of the Forest is his, and the
Cattle upon a Thousand Hills. It Is his Sun that shines upon our Heads, and his
Earth that is under our Feet, and his Air that we draw with our Health, and his
Rain that makes our Fields fruitful; the very Essence, Existence, and
Excellence of this World, and all Things in it, are derived from that Original:
Whatever Things are beautiful, strong, wise, good, pleasant, desirable, these
all are but Drops from that Ocean: Every good Gift comes from above; our
Health, Wealth, Life, and Learning, are but lesser Tokens sent us out of that
Country. What have we here that is delightful, or of any Account with us, which
is not there in a much more eminent manner?

In short, here is a Dungeon, there is a Paradise; here we live, we sin, we die
like Children of Men; there we shall be as the Children of God, like Angels,
glorified Creatures. Here Is a World of Confusion, Disorder, and Discomfort;
there is a Kingdom and Crowns for every Head, Crowns incorruptible and full of
Glory. You may guess the Fruits of Canaan by the Eshcol (the Cluster of Grapes)
that comes thence; the Glory of Heaven by the little Beams that are darted
hither; the bravery of the Temple by the Excellency of the outward Court. If
the Walls of Babylon are so great, what is the City? But if the very Suburbs of
the New Jerusalem (yea, the Neighbor-villages, and Country round about, at so
vast a distance) be so rich, so plentiful, what shall we think of the place
itself! If the Sun shines to us so glorious so far off, what is it if you were
near to it! I desire not, Readers, to impose upon your Faith, tell me, you that
admire this World for so delicate an Eden, do not you think, the God that made
it, and gave it to the Children of Men, (most of which care but little for him)
has he not a far better for himself, and his own Children! Psalm. 8.1, 3 -- etc.

2. The Reports of them that have been there, or had some sight of the place. I
shall name St. Paul for one, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. Will ye believe such a Man? See
what he says, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18, 2 Timothy 4.8. and in several other places. I
mention St. John the Apostle for another, entertained with extraordinary
Visions in the Isle of Patmos, Rev. 21.2. -- etc. Will ye believe the Son of
God, that came down from Heaven to visit the Children of Men? And came on
purpose to court us, and prepare our way thither, he has told you of those
Rewards in several places, Mat. 8.11. Mat. 13.43. Mat. 22.30. Luke 12.32. Luke
20.36. John 10.28. Neither have they only told us these Stories, but sealed
their Reports with Miracles and Sufferings: And others have believed them, as
wise as we; and we believe others in Things as strange and incredible, that are
not so worthy of Credit as this: And why do we stumble here? But verily Canaan
was a Type of Heaven, and the Reports of that a Figure of these, and the
Unbelief of the Israelites in that Case, a Shadow of ours in this. They would
not believe then, nor we now; but the Aggravation is on our part, Caleb only of
them that were sent to search the Land, encouraged them. We have a Cloud of
Witnesses to encourage us, and yet we will not believe. Well, many of them fell
short, God not being pleased with them; let us take care lest we fall also the
same Example of Unbelief.

4. The Inhabitants that dwell there, and are like to be our Companions for
ever. Here we sojourn in Meshech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar; we cohabit
with a People of unclean Lips, and an uncircumcised Heart. In Hell the Company
is worse, nothing there but damned, cursed, blaspheming Spirits. In Heaven is
pure Society, without any mixture of Evil or Unkindness. The Apostle tells you
who they are, and I suppose you know -- Heb. 12.22, 23, -- etc.

1. God himself, Blessed for Evermore. The Lord is in his holy Temple, the
Lord's Throne is in Heaven, Psalm. 11.4. The Lord of Hosts, wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in Working. A King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, who
dwells in the Light, which no mere Mortal Man can approach unto. The Strength
of Israel, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, gracious and merciful,
slow to anger, of great kindness, abundant in Goodness and Truth. The Father of
Lights, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. The Lord God
Almighty, who was, and is, and is to come, the same God for ever and ever.

The humble, holy, and compassionate Jesus who died for us, who trod the
Wine Press of his Father's Wrath alone for us, and came from Heaven to Earth,
from Earth to Hell, from Earth, to Heaven again, to prepare the Way, and
provide Mansions of Bliss, and Crowns of Glory for us.

The Blessed Spirit the Second Advocate, our tender Guide, Solliciter, and
Comforter, the Three-One God, blessed for evermore.

2. The holy Angels, glorious Creatures, as far superior to the Excellency of
Man, as Man is to the Beasts that perish: We may guess their Excellency,

1. From their Priority of Creation. Indeed, Moses, or whoever was the Author
of Genesis, gives us no Historical Account of their Creation, because it
concerned not us. But we may probably conjecture, that they were made before us
not only because of their Excellency, but because likewise they are said to be
present Witnesses of the Creation of Man, and sung together (Job 38.7.) When
the Foundations of the World were fastened, and the Cornerstone laid. And
besides, no sooner scarce was Man in Paradise, but Satan was there ready (one
of the fallen Angels) to lay a Temptation for him.

2. Their Nature, having neither the Clogs of Flesh, Bones, or Blood, as we
have, but free, nimble, intellectual Spirits, (...) Principalities and Powers,
endowed with an extraordinary Measure of Knowledge. (...), Eyes before and
behind, of a quick Sight and Conception, and a quicker Expedition in the
Dispatch of Sacred Duty. Love has given Wings; of an ardent Zeal, and a
flaming Affection, thence called Seraphim: in a word, immaterial, and immortal.

3. Their Number. You will not expect that we should count the Stars of Heaven,
Rev. 12.4. Some of the Heathens thought them innumerable; so Max. Tyr. and
Pythagoras thought all the Air was full of them. Thales omnia Deorum sunt
plena. Orpheus counted 365, Hesiod Three Myriads; the Holy Scripture Thousands
and Ten thousand times Ten thousand, etc. Dan. 7.10.

Whatever they are, they are many and glorious Creatures; insomuch, that the
very appearance of them in this lower World, would dazzle and affright us. We
have frequent mention made in the Old Testament, of their appearing to some
Persons of greater Favor and Eminency in the Church; and yet even then, it was
an astonishing Wonder, and even good Men looked upon it as a Presage of Death,
Judge. 13.6, 19, 22. and it would be so now. We are dashed in the Presence of a
Man that is extraordinarily famous and eminent for Wisdom, Goodness, or
Greatness: How many have we read or heard of, Men of a competent Spirit,
Presence, and Courage, have been struck mute in the Company of some Great Sir!
How should we veil our Faces now to Angels, as they to God in Heaven! The Rags
of our Mortality, Sin and Baseness, is enough to make us blush in such pure,
glorious, heavenly Company!

That which I drive at in all this, is to show, That if the Inhabitants be so
rich, so brave, the Country is a Paradise. If the Courtiers are so gorgeously
apparelled, and arrayed with so high a Glory, the Court is more glorious!

These are the Natives of the place; And do not you think the place where they
live is mighty pleasant? They must needs fare well that go to such good Company.

4. But besides all this, we shall have the Society of the Spirits of Just Men
made perfect. Fan the World, and sift it so clean, that all the Chaff may be
driven away, and nothing left but pure Grain: Good Men, Men that love God and
work Righteousness, and cleave to that which is good. Run over all the
Countries, all the several Ages and Generations of the World, and set the
scabbed, lame, blind, and blemished out of the Flock, and keep none there but
the Male Firstling, Fat, and such as are pure, and without spot, blemish,
wrinkle, and every such thing, washed clean in the Blood of the immaculate
Lamb, and put these in Heaven with the blessed God, the holy Angels, and none
but these, -- and think what a lovely, loving, pleasant Society this will make!
An excellent Abraham, a holy Isaac, a plain Jacob, a chaste Joseph, a meek
Moses, a devout David, a patient Job, a righteous Lot, -- the holy Prophets,
the blessed Evangelists, the humble Apostles, the heavenly Martyrs and
Confessors, the learned and pious Fathers of the Church in all Ages. Ignatius
and Polycarp, Cyprian and Nazianzen, Augustine and Chrysostom. -- all the good
Men, and good Women of all Countries, of all Ages, from Adam till the End of
the World, met together in a sacred, sweet, and indissolvable Knot of
Communion! All the best of the World, picked out of the common Lump of Mankind,
and taken off the common Stage, and set fast in Heaven, there to enjoy an
Eternal Paradise together, under the immediate Influence of the Great Jehova!
To put on their White Robes of Glory, and enter upon their everlasting
Inheritance, and Reign all of them as Kings and Princes for ever and ever! This
must needs suppose an excellent State. To have God, Angels, and good Men, and
those good Men washed from all their Enormities and Imperfections too; none
there, but those that are perfectly good; this must needs make an accession to
the Happiness of the place, Heb. 12. And to the Spirits of Just Men made
perfect.

5. The Sufferings of good Men for it. There is nothing in the World, within
the reach and knowledge of Man, that all Men so universally, (especially the
wise and good) have consented in a zealous Prosecution of, as in the Joys of
the other World. Were it a particular Sect, or one single Nation, one Age only,
or the worst, the wildest, and most imprudent and vicious of Men only, that
agreed in this Article of Religion; or did they believe it doubtfully, and
prosecute it coldly and indifferently, there were some room for doubt: But all
Sects of Religion generally, Pagans and Mahometans, Jews and Christians, of all
Parts, of all Ages, especially the more solid, wise, and virtuous, Men
defecated from the Mud, Debauchery, and Vanity of Earth, have still believed,
that there was something extraordinary of Happiness in the other World, which
was worth a warm and eager Contention; and they have been willing to take their
Hand pretty well off the present Pleasures of Sin, and make Lust and Nature
stoop low in Self-denial to the Dictates of Religion, and do and suffer many
Things hard to Flesh and Blood, that they might at last be though worthy (at
least fit) to be made Partakers with the Saints in that Glory. I need not rip
up the Bowels of History, or the Martyrologies of the Church, to tell you what
Hardships Men have endured upon this Score, Heb. 11. gives you a good Taste of
that Notion, v. 34. etc. And of late Ages, and in our own, and
Neighbour-Countries, what Alms, Prayers, Fastings, Mortifications, Labors, and
Sufferings, have Men undergone, in prospect of the Reward before them. Hear St.
Paul give an Account of his own Travels in this kind, 2 Cor. 11.23, with the
Reasons for it chapter 12.2.

To read the extraordinary Patience of a Job, the Travels of a Paul, the
indefatigable Pains of an Origin, of an Austin; St. James praying 'till his
Knees were as hard as Camels; Luther spending Three Hours every Day in his
Devotions; some giving almost all they had to the Uses of Piety and Charity;
others sacrificing their Lives for the sake of their Religion: And to find,
that in Cases of Competition, the best of Men are generally willing to throw
all overboard, for the Purchase of the heavenly Inheritance: This must of
necessity argue, that they take Heaven to be a good Bargain at any rate. It Is
the Saying of one, That if there were no other way of coming to the Possession
of that Blessedness, he would be content, not only to swim through a Sea of
outward Troubles, but he would wade through the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, to
be possessed of God himself. Rutherf.

Certain Men, here (and they wise too) have lived, and suffered at such a Rate
upon the Score of Religion, that we cannot in Reason but imagine, they had
somewhat extraordinary in their Eye: And I am of Opinion, that there is
something of Truth in that Saying of Luther, Homo perfecta credens. si esse
haeredes, and filium Dei, omnium diu superstes manner sed statim immodico
gaudio absorberetur. Set but Canaan in the Eye, and give the Man the
Perspective of Faith in his Hand, and let him see clearly the Landscape of that
New Jerusalem, and neither the Red Sea, nor the Wilderness of Zin, nor the
Waters of Marah, or Meribah, nor the River Jordan, nor the Moabites, nor the
Amorites, shall fright him thence.

6. The Author and Design of this State of Glory.

1. The Great God, who made the World, who spoke the Word and it was done; who
weighs the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance; who governs all
Things, and has all the Hosts of Heaven and Earth at his Command, and can do
his Pleasure, and says to one Angel, Go; and he goes; and to another, Come,
etc. who makes Angels of Spirits, and Ministers of Flames of Fire: Whose Power
and Will nothing can resist; but the very Pillars of the World stoop under him.
A God infinite in all Perfections, of Wisdom as well as Power, of Goodness as
well as Wisdom, and wants neither Skill, nor Will, nor Materials for the Work:
The Builder and Maker is God; and therefore the Work like him.

2. The Design of it; to show the Riches of his Glory, Ephesians. 1.3, 4-10, 14, 18.
and ver. 19. (That ye may know) what is the exceeding Greatness, [(...)] etc.
God has showed all Men universally somewhat of what he can do: He has made a
World, and made them, and an infinite Number of Creatures besides, has, and
daily does such Wonders in the World, that he must be blind and stupid, that
does not admire them, The Heavens declare the Glory of God, etc. Job 36.24. But
all this is but ordinary Work, his Masterpiece is yet behind, and he intends
in the other World to unlook the Treasury of his Attributes, and show the
Riches of his House; and to his Elect Children, his chosen Friends, communicate
his Glory in a more full, free, and immediate manner than ever he did to the
Sons of Men in this World.

You shall see then (as many of you as shall be found worthy) the exceeding
Riches of his Wisdom, Truth, Justice, Power, Goodness, Greatness, Blessedness,
and all his excellent Perfections: You shall see then the Bravery of the
Universe, in one entire Eternal Scene: Infinite Glory displayed in Paraphrase!
You shall see then what a God is! and what he can do! And when ye have seen the
Beauty, Order, and Excellence of it, you shall believe and wonder, and say as
the Queen of Sheba, of Solomon's House, the Reports you heard of Heaven in the
lower World, were far short of the Truth!

Chrysostom says, It were worth the while, ('twould quit Costs) to suffer daily
Torments; yea, to endure Hell itself for some time, to see Christ come in his
Glory, and join himself to the Number of his Saints. For my part, I am very
sensible, that the outward Court of this World is strewn with variety of
Comforts very pleasant to Flesh and Blood, to the Sensitive part of Man; but I
do firmly believe, that if we had but a sight of the inner part of Heaven; were
the Curtains drawn, and could we look within the Veil, 'twould be a Sight worth
all this World, and more: The Cherubims over the Mercy-Seat were enough to put
a Sinner into Rapture and Ecstasy: Glorious Things are spoken of thee, thou
City of GOD.

Thus having told you the Joys of Heaven are great, now I am to tell you they
are certain. And all the Arguments I have used already to prove the Joys great,
are of some validity, and tendency to prove them certain. If the Preparation
for it has been so long a making, from Eternity to the present Time, by
Decree, Creation, Providence, Redemption, Sanctification, variety of
Dispensations, etc. If the wisest and best of Men have taken such Pains for it,
if it be the Purpose of Almighty God, whose Power nothing is able to resist,
then to show forth the Greatness and Excellency of his Glory; we may safely
conclude, that God will certainly accomplish his whole Will, and will not be
frustrate in any of his Decrees; and that the wisest and best of Men in the
World cannot be all mistaken in a Point of so great moment; and if they should
be so, yet it were the safest way to err in such Company.

But be it how it will with some, I am very confident, some will be as willing
to have it certain, as I to prove it so; and for the sake of those I go on.

1. God has promised it, Dan. 12.2, 3. Mat. 5.8. Luke 12.32. Fear not little
Flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, etc. 1
Cor. 15.19. If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all Men most
miserable.

2. But if ye dare not take his Word, he has sworn by his Life and Being, that
if the Future Glory be not ours, it shall not be by his default; he will not be
wanting to do his part, As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, Ezekiel. 33.11.

3. He has entered into a very solemn Covenant with us by Baptism, and has
confirmed it too in the Lord's Supper, and therein has avowed to us before
Witness, that he will be our God, and do what is fit for a God to do, in order
to the saving of us.

Thus have I briefly proved, that the Joys of Heaven are very great, and very
certain; with such Arguments as I cannot answer myself; and, I suppose, nor you
neither; such as are enough to make a lame Man run, a Coward fight, a Sinner
repent, and the heaviest Sluggard rouse up, shake himself, and be Religious in
earnest. Enough to make the Sinner leave his wicked Courses, the Miser his
Bags, and the Martyr his Body. -- Oh, that Joy, O my God, when shall I be with
thee? The Saying of the young Lord Harrington. To sit on Thrones, with Robes of
White, and Crowns of Glory! To live like Angels, to see God Face to Face! To
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven! To shine as
the Sun in the Firmament! To feel no Hunger, Thirst, Pain, Sickness, Death,
more! To have our Bodies glorified, and our Natures refined, and all our
Faculties perfected, and we safe in the full Enjoyment of God to all Eternity!
To be made free to Rivers of Pleasure, and Joys unspeakable for evermore! What
Soul not clogged with Flesh and Blood, and bewitched with Sin, would not leap
at these Tidings, and scorn to truckle any longer to the Moon and Clouds, and
little Vanities of this World.

Those soft, effeminate Souls, that sleep out their Life in a Golden Dream of
Happiness, and awake anon in Everlasting Burnings, shall sadly find (too late)
that Heaven was worth more than a cold Wish. I would fain, Reader, (Is it not
possible?) to awaken myself, and you, into a posture of Work and Resolution.
When you find yourself declining into a Slumber, look up, and remember what
lies beyond the Stars, and then gird your Loins, put on Courage, and scorn to
keep pace with an ill-natured, sluggish, drowsy World; put on with Courage,
and fear no Colors; -- Heaven is before you, i. e. Joy so great as you cannot
conceive, enough to make amends for all the Travel, foul Way, and Charges of
your Journey.

A Complete HISTORY Of the Most Remarkable Providence, Both of Judgment and
Mercy which have happened in this Present Age.
Extracted from the best Writers, the Author's own Observations, and the
Numerous Relations sent him from diverse Parts of the Three Kingdoms. To which
is added, Whatever is Curious in the Works of Nature and Art. The Whole
digested into one Volume under proper Heads; being a Work set on Foot Thirty
Years ago, by the Reverend Mr. Pool, Author of the Synopsis Criticorum; and
since Undertaken and Finished by William Turner, M. A. Vicar of Walberton in
Sussex. Recommended as useful to Ministers, in Furnishing Topics of Reproof
and Exhortation, and to Private Christians for their Closets and Families.

Together with the Names of those Modern Authors, and persons of Note, from
whose Printed Works, or Manuscripts, the aforesaid Author has received great
Assistance in the Compiling of this Book.

The CONTENTS.
PART I. COntaining The History of Divine Providence, to which is Prefixed, A
Practical Introduction to this Work, being the Author's Meditations On The
Being of a God, On The Works of Creation and Providence On The Existence of a
separate Soul, On The Ministry of Angels, and On The Future State, etc.

Chap. 1. Of the Appearance and Manifestation of God Himself in the World, p. 5
Chap. 2. Of the Appearance of good Angels, p. 7 Chap. 3. Of the Appearance of
bad Angels, or Demons, p. 16 Chap. 4. Of the Appearance of separate Souls,
with several late Instances of that nature, p. 34 Chap. 5. Revelation of secret
or future Things by express Voice, p. 40 Chap. 6. The discovery of things
secret or future, by signs, common sounds, and voices, p. 43. Chap. 7.
Discovery of things secret, or future, by Prodigies, Comets, Lights, etc. p.
44. Chap. 8. Discovery of things secret or future by Dreams and Visions, p 47
Chap. 9. Of Prediction by Impulses, etc. p. 54 Chap. 10. Of Divination,
Southsaying, Witchcraft, p. 56 Chap. 11. Of Astrology, p. 60 Chap. 12. Of
Oracles, p. 62 Chap. 13. Of Prophets, p. 64 Chap. 14. Of Urim and Thummim,
Teraphim, etc. p. 67 Chap. 15. Premonitions of general Changes or Revolutions,
p. 69 Chap. 16. Premonitions of particular Changes or Accidents of Life,
containing great variety of late Instances, p. 71. Chap. 17. Promises
fulfilled, p. 81 Chap. 18. Strange Convictions or Conversions, with many late
Instances of that nature, p. 83 Chap. 19. Strange ways of Restraining Persons
from Sin, in several remarkable Instances of it, p. 94 Chap. 20. Strange ways
of promoting Salvation, p. 95 Chap. 21. Wants strangely supplied, p. 97. Chap.
22. Strange Instances of Consolation and Protection in dangers, containing, 1.
Personal deliverances and comforts. 2. Sea-dangers and deliverances. 3. Princes
and Magistrates delivered from Plots, p. 99, to 120 Cha. 23. The Innocent
strangely cleared, p. 120 Chap. 24. Doubts strangely resolved, and the weak
confirmed, p. 123. Chap. 25. The Modest and Humble strangely advanced, p. 125
Chap. 26. Persons strangely admonished of sins or dangers, p. 126. Chap. 27.
Remarkable instances of Faith, p. 128. Chap. 28. Remarkable courage and
boldness, p. 129. Chap. 29. Remarkable Patience, p. 130. Chap. 30. Remarkable
Prudence, p. 132. Chap. 31. Remarkable Justice, p. 133. Chap. 32. Remarkable
Temperance in ^eats, p. 135. Chap. 33. Remarkable Temperance in Drinks, p. 136.
Chap. 34. Remarkable Frugality and Humility in Clothes, Household Stuff, etc. p.
137 Chap. 35. Remarkable Humility in Behavior, p. 139 Chap. 36. Remarkable
Veracity and Love of Truth, p. 1, 2d. Alphabet. Chap. 37. Remarkable
Friendship, p. 2. 2d Al. Chap. 38. Remarkable Hospitality, p. 3. 2d Al. Chap.
39. Remarkable charity and liberality in Giving, p. 6. 2d Alph. Chap. 40.
Remarkable charity in judging and forgiving, p. 10. 2d Alph. Chap. 41.
Remarkable Instances of Munificence, p. 11. 2d Alph. Chap. 42. Remarkable
chastity, p. 16. 2d Alph. Chap. 43. Remarkable meekness, quietness, and
peaceableness, p. 17. 2d. Alph. Chap. 44. Remark moderation and zeal for
reconciling church differences, p. 18. 2d. Alph. Chap. 45. Retractations of
censorious Protestants, p. 20 2d Alph. Chap. 46. Good People extremely
afflicted, and mightily comforted, with several late instances of Persons
troubled in mind, p. 21 2d Alph. Chap. 47. Remarkable Gratitude, p. 26 2d Alph.
Chap 48. Remarkable diligence, laboriousness, and studiousness, p. 27 2d Alph.
Chap. 49. Remarkable instances of contempt of wealth, p. 29 2d Alph. Chap. 50.
Remarkable silence, or reservedness of Men, etc. as also of retirement, p. 30
2d Alph. Chap. 51. Good Wives remarkable Chap. 52. Good Husbands remarkable, p.
41 2d Alph. Chap. 53. Good Children remarkable, p. 42 2d Alph. Chap. 54. An
account of the conversions of little Children, being about 50 in number, and
most of this present age, p. 43 2d Alph. Chap. 55. Good Parents remarkable, p.
52. 2d Alph. Chap. 56. Good Servants remarkable, p. 53 2d Alph. Chap. 57. Good
Masters and Mistresses remarkable, p. 54 2d Alph. Chap. 58. Good Pastors,
Bishops, and Ministers, p. 55 2d Alph. Chap. 59. Reverence to learned or good
Men, p. 55 2d Alph. Chap. 60. People loving and kind to their Ministers, p. 58
2d Alph. Chap. 61. Remarkable Zeal and Devotion; to this Chap. is added, Mr.
Albin's Evidences for Heaven, subscribed, (as sufficient grounds of assurance,)
by Mr. Calamy, and other Divines, which Evidences, were never Printed before,
p. 59 2d Alph. Chap. 62. Remarkable zeal and charity, in propogating Religion,
by Mr. Boil, and oothers, in several parts of the World, p. 72 2d Alph. Chap.
63. Remarkable devotion in singing Psalms, and Hymns of Praise, p. 76 2d Alph.
Chap. 64. Persons remarkable for good Discourse, p. 78 2d Alph. Chap. 65.
Remarkable devotion on the Lords Day, p. 79. 2d Alph. Chap. 66. Remarkable love
of the Holy Scripture, p. 81 2d Alph. Chap. 67. Present retribution to the
Faithful, p. 86 2d Alph. Chap. 68. Present retribution to Plain and faithful
reprovers, p. 86 2d Alph. Chap. 69. Present retribution to the humble and
modest, p. 87 2d Alph. Chap. 70. Present retribution to the Just, p. 88 2d
Alph. Chap. 71. Present retribution to the Temperate, p. 89 2d Alph. Chap. 72.
Present retribution to the Devout, and Praying, or Prayers answered in kind, in
several late Instances, p. 90. 2d Alph. Chap. 73. Present retribution to the
charitable, p. 93 3d Alph. beginning with a single Letter. Chap. 74. Present
retribution to the observers of Sabbaths, p. 97 3d Alph. Chap. 75. Present
retribution to them that have been Obedient to Parents, p. 98. 3d Alph. Chap.
76. Present retribution to the peaceable and quiet, p. 99 3d Alph. Chap. 77.
Present retribution to the merciful, p. 100 3d Alph. Chap. 78. Earnest of a
future retribution, p. 101 3d Alph. Chap. 79. Protection of the good in danger,
p. 105 3d Alph. Chap. 80. Guidance of the good through difficulties, p. 107 3d
Alph. Chap. 81. Persons strangely fitted for great Employments, p. 108. 3d
Alph. Chap. 82. Miraculous cures of diseases in this present age, p. 109. 3d
Alph. Chap. 83. Satan and evil Spirits permitted to hurt the good in their
names, p. 120. 3d. Alph. Chap. 84. Satan permitted to hurt the good in their
health of Body, p. 121 3d Al. Chap. 85. Satan permitted to hurt the good in
their Estates, p. 127. 3d Alph. Chap. 86. Satan permitted to hurt the good in
their Souls, p. 128. 3d Alph. Chap. 87. Satan permitted to disturb the quiet
and peace of persons or families, etc. p. 132. 3d. Alph. Chap. 88. Satan
hurting by charms, spells, amulets, etc. p. 134. 3d Alph. Chap. 89. Satan
hurting by interposing with melancholy diseases, p. 135. 3d Al. Chap. 90. Satan
hurting by temptations, injections, etc. p. 136. 3d Al. Chap. 91. Satan hurting
by dreams, p. 137. 3d Al. Cha. 92. Satan hurting by witchcraft, p. 138. 3d. Al.
Chap. 93. Satan restrained in hurting the good, p. 151. concluding the 3d Al.
of the single Letter. Chap. 94. Satan hurting by obsessions, possessions, etc.
p. 1. beginning another 3d Alph. with a double Letter. Chap. 95. Satan hurting
by storms, p. 2. 3d Al. Chap. 96. Satan hurting by Apparitions, p. 4. 3d Al.
Chap. 97. Satan hurting by false Promises, or Threatenings, p. 5. 3d Al. Chap.
98. Divine Judgments, by way of retaliation, p. 6. 3d Al. Chap. 99. Divine
Judgments upon superstition, p. 8. 3d Al. Chap. 100. Divine judgments upon
blasphemy and profaneness, p. 9. 3d Al. Chap. 101. Divine judgments on scoffers
at other Men's imperfections, or such as counterfeited to have them when they
had them not, p. 12. 3d Al. Chapter 102. Divine judgments on Atheism, p. 13. 3d Al.
Chapter 103. Divine Judgments on cursing, p. 14. 3d Al. Chap. 104. Divine judgments
upon swearing, etc. p. 16. 3d Al. Chap. 105. Divine judgments upon
sabbath breakers, p. 18. 3d Al. Chap. 106. Divine judgments upon scorners, of
their Pastors Preachers, etc. p. 20 3d Al. Chap. 107. Divine judgments upon
persecution, p. 21 3d Al. Chap. 108. Divine judgments upon uncharitableness,
covetousness, etc. p. 23 3d Al. Chap. 109. Divine judgments upon anger,
revenge, etc. p. 24 3d Al. Chap. 110. Divine judgments upon murder, p. 25 3d
Al. Chapter 111. Murder strangely discovered, p. 28 3d Al. Chap. 112. Divine
judgments upon theft, robbery, etc. p. 33 3d Al. Chap. 113. Remarkable
instances of restitution, p. 34 3d Al. Chap. 114. Divine judgments upon
sacrilege, simony, p. 35 3d Al. Chap. 115. Divine judgments upon treachery, p.
37 3d Al. Chap. 116. Divine judgments upon unfaithful husbands, p. 38 3d Al.
Chap. 117. Divine judgments upon unfaithful wives, p. 39. 3d Al. Chap. 118.
Divine judgments upon undutiful children, p 40 3d Al. Chap. 119. Divine
judgments upon careless Parents, p. 41 3d Al. Chap. 120. Divine judgments upon
gluttony, p. 42. 3d Al. Chap. 121. Divine judgments upon drunkenness, p. 43 3d
Al. Chap. 122. Divine judgments upon uncleanness, inordinate love, etc. p. 46.
3d Al. Chap. 123. Divine judgments upon voluptuousness and luxury, p. 47 3d Al.
Chap. 124. Divine judgments upon pride, ambition, etc. p. 49 3d Al. Chap. 115.
Divine judgments upon boasting, p. 50 3d Al. Chap. 126. Divine judgments upon
curiosity, p. 51 3d Al. Chap. 127. Divine judgments upon gaming, p. 52 3d Al.
Chap. 121. Divine judgments upon discontentedness, ill nature, p. 54 3d Al.
Chap. 129. Divine judgments upon idleness, and evil company, p. 55 3d Al. Chap.
130. Divine judgments upon litigiousness, p. 56 3d Al. Chap. 131. Divine
judgments upon carnal confidence, p. 57 3d Al. Chap. 132. Divine judgment upon
bribery, and injustice, p. 59 3d Al. Chap. 133. Divine judgments upon lying and
slandring, p. 60 3d Al. Chap. 134. Divine judgments upon couzenage and
dissimulation, p. 61 3d Al. Chap. 135. Divine judgments upon oppression,
tyranny, p. 62 3d Al. Chap. 136. Divine judgments upon heretics, scismaticks,
p. 64 3d Al. Chap. 137. Divine judgments upon wizards, witches, and charmers,
etc. p. 66 3d Al. Chap. 138. Divine judgments upon backsliders, and apostates,
p. 67 3d Al. Chap. 139. Great effects wrought by weak means, p. 68 3d Al. Chap.
140. Remarkable passages, relating to sickness, death, and funerals; p. 69 3d
Al. Chap. 141. The last wills and testaments of dying persons; this chap.
consists chiefly of modern instances Chap. 142. The last speeches of dying
Penitents, p. 145. 3d Al. Chap. 143. The last wills of persons remarkable for
their oddness and singularity, p. 148 3d Al. Chap. 144. Instances of sudden
death, p. 149. 3d Al. Chap. 145. Epitaphs, to which is added, the most
remarkable in Westminster-Abbey, Stepney-churc^-yard, the new Burying place in
Bun-hill-fields, and other parts, p. 152 3d Al. Chap. 146. Miracles giving
Testimony to Christianity, Orthodoxy, Innocence, etc. p. 160. 3d Al. Chap. 147.
Attestations to the Truth of Christianity, from such as were formerly Enemies
to it, or careless in the Practice of it, consisting chiefly of modern
Instances, p. 164. 3d Al. Chap. 148. Testimonies of ancient and modern Infidels
and Heathens, to the Truth of Christianity, p. 169. concluding the 3d Al. of
the double Letter. Chap. 149. The sufferings and martyrdoms of the Reformed in
the Kingdom of France, with the Remarkable Providence that have attended that
affair, p. 1. 4th Al. Chap. 150. The memorable Speeches and Savings of the Late
Queen Mary, from her Childhood down to the time of her death, extracted from
the best Authorities extant, p. 13. 4th Al.
PART II. Containing the Wonders of NATURE.
Chap. 1. Instances of Sympathy, p. 1. Chap. 2. Instances of Antipathy, p. 2.
Chap. 3. Examples of Superfoetation, p. 4. Chap. 4. Examples of the
fruitfulness of some Women, p. 5. Chap. 5. Examples of the numerous Issue of
some Persons, p. 6. Chap. 6. Children crying in the Womb, p. 7. Chap. 7.
Monstrous births and conceptions of Mankind, p. 8. Chap. 8. Persons of a
wonderful strength, p. 9. Chap. 9. Wonderful Eaters, p. 10. Chap. 10. Persons
of wonderful shapes, figures, members, entrails, etc. p. 11 Chap. 11. Of
Pigmies, p. 13 Chap. 12. Of Dwarfs, etc. p. 13 Chap. 13. Persons of a wonderful
stature, Giants, p. 14 Chap. 14. Of such Persons as have changed their Sex, p.
15 Chap. 15. Instances of skill in Physiognomy, p. 16 Chap. 16. Great Sleepers,
p. 17 Chap. 17. Instances of such as have used to walk, and perform strange
things in their sleep, p. 18 Chap. 18. Persons remarkable for waking long, p.
19 Chap. 19. Abstainers from Drink, p. 19 Chap. 20. Immoderate Drinkers, p. 19
Chap. 21. Great fasters, p. 20 Chap. 22. Children petrified in the Womb, p. 22
Chap. 23. Accidents upon Persons Birth-days, etc. p. 22 Chap. 24. Children
marked in the womb, p. 23 Chap. 25. Children abiding in the womb beyond their
time, p. 23 Chap. 26. Children born preternaturally, p. 24 Chap. 27. Monstrous
Animals, p. 25. Chap. 28. Instances of an early, or rather ripe wit, p. 27
Chap. 29. Instances of an extraordinary Memory, p. 28. Chap. 30. Instances of
extraordinary Fatness, etc. p. 29. Chap. 31. Instances of extraordinary
Leanness, p. 30. Chap. 32. Persons long lived, p. 30. Chap. 33. Examples of a
vegete, and healthful old Age, p. 31 Chap. 34. Persons reviving after a
supposed death, p. 31. Chap. 35. Women excellent in the Arts, p. 35 Chap. 36.
Wonderful distempers, p. 37 Chap. 37. Strange Birds, p. 40 Chap. 38. Strange
Beasts p. 41 Chap. 39. Strange Fish, p. 45 Chap. 40. Strange Serpents, p. 47
Chap. 41. Strange Insects, p 49 Chap. 42. Strange Vegetables, Trees, Plants,
etc. p. 53 Chap. 43. Strange Minerals, p. 59 Chap 44. Metals, Gold, Silver,
Copper, etc. p. 62 Chap. 45. Precious stones, p. 64 Chap. 46. Stones less
precious, p. 66 Chap. 47. Strange stones, and of admirable figures or
signatures, p. 67 Chap. 48. Strange Hills, p. 63 Chap. 49. Vulcanoes, p. 69
Chap. 50. Strange Winds and Hurricanes, p. 69 Chap. 51. Damps, p. 71 Chap. 52.
Rain, Ha^l, Snow, Frosts, etc. p. 73 Chap. 53. Concerning Thunder-holts, or
Thunder-stones, p. 53 Chap. 54. Comets, Blazing-stars, p. 74. Chap. 55.
Lightnings and Thunder, p. 75 Chap. 56. Earthquakes, p. 76
PART III. Containing the Curiosities of ART.
Chap 1. The English tongue improved, p. 1. Chap. 2. Blind Persons improved by
art and industry, p. 2. Chap. 3. Persons deaf and dumb, much improved by art,
p. 2. To which chap. is added, other defects of nature supplied by art, p. 5.
Chap. 4. Improvements in physic, and experimental philosophy, etc. p. 6. Chap.
5. Improvements in music, p. 8 Chap. 6. Improvements in aftronomy, p. 9. Chap.
7. Improvements in navigation, p. 11. Chap. 8. Improvements in law, p. 12. with
a scheme of the law, extracted out of Sir Matthew Hales's Pleas of the Crown,
and Sir H. Finches's common Pleas. Chap. 9. Of heraldy, p. 14. Chap. 10.
Improvements in the military art, p 16. Chap. 11. Improvements in Architecture,
p. 17. Chap. 12. Improvements in mechanics, agriculture, etc. p. 20. Chap. 13.
Improvements in fowling, fishing, hunting, p. 25, Chap. 14, Curiosities in
writing, cyphering, etc. p. 26. Chap. 15. Improvements in sculpture, picture,
etc. p. 27. Chap. 16. Curiosities in the hydratilick art, or waterworks, p.
27. Chap. 17. Artificial knick-knacks, projects, and curiosities, p. 30.
The NAMES of those modern Authors and Persons of note, from whose Printed
Works, or Manuscripts, etc. the Author has received great Assistance in the
Compiling of this Book^ to name all would be Tedious, and the more Unnecessary,
because the Reader will find them Cited in the Work it self, but those which
follow, are enough to give an Idea of the undertaking.
ELias Ashmole, Esquire; Dr. Annesley, Mr. Abbot, Mr. Adams, Dr. Addison, Mr.
Albin, Mr. Allen, Mr. Alsop, Dr. Atherton, Physician of Carmarthen, John
Aubery, Esquire; Mr. Baxter, Dr. Barrow, Dr. Bates, Sir Nath. Barnardiston, Dr. J.
Bathurst, Mr. Barker, Mr. Brand, Mr. Beard, Dr. Bernard, Mr. Boil, Mr. Bohun,
Dr. Bretton, Sir Tho. Pope Blunt, Mounsieur Brousson, Dr. Burnet, Lord Bishop
of Salisbury, Dr. Burthogg, Dr. Cave Mr. Edm. Calamy, Countess Dowager of
Warwick, Mr. Claude, Mr. Clark, Camerarius, Mr. Chetwind, Mr. Clogie, Minister
of Wigmore, Roger Coke, Esquire; Mr. Crook, of Wrington in Somersetshire, Gervase
Disney, Esquire; Mr. Eliot of New England, Mr. Ereeve, Mr. Sam. Fairclough, Mr.
Flavel, Mr. Firmin, Dr. Fowler, Lord Bishop of Gloucester, Mr Foe, Mr. Francius,
Tho. Fludd of Kent, Esquire; Mr Fuller, Will. Garraway of Ford in Sussex, Esquire; Mr.
Grevius, Mr Henry Gearing, Mr. Glanvil, Mr. Goldsmith, Dr. Grew, Mr. Tho.
Gouge, Sir Matthew Hale, Dr Hammond, Mr, Hammond, Mr Hales of Eaton, Mr Henry,
Henry Hilton, Esquire; Mr. Tho. Hill of Westminster, Dr. Horneck, Mr. How, Dr.
Hopkins, late Bishop of Londonderry in Ireland, Dr. Holder, Mr. Hook, Mr.
Hurst. Mr. Janeway, Dr. Johnson, Mr. Herbert Jones of Monmouth. Mr. J. Jones of
Jesus College, Oxon. Monsieur Jurieu. Mr. (Samuel) Lawrence, Minister at
Namptwich in Cheshire, Mr. Langford. Mr. (John) Lane, of Horsly Lane, in
Southwark, Mr. Lewis, of Cardigan-shire. Dr. Lightfost, Lewis du Moulin, Mr.
(Jo) Lydal, Mr. (Increase) Mather, of Harvard College in New England, Mr.
(Cotton) Mather of New England. Dr. Mayo, Mr. Mead, Mr. Machin, Andrew
Mackpherson of Scotland, Mrs (Elizabeth) Moore Mr. Morden, Dr. More, Dr.
Needham. Mr. Knight, Sir (John) Norris, Mr. Norwood of Deptford, Mr. Ortwinius,
Mr. Parsons, Sir Will. Petti, Dr. Perizonius, Philosophical Transactions, Sir
(Peter) Pet, Dr. Plot, Mr. (Henry) Read of Barnham, Mr, (Geo.) Ridpath, Paul
Ricaut, Esquire; Mr (Tim.) Rogers, Dr, Sherlock, Mr, Sinclar, Mr. Sacheverel, Dr.
Salmon, Mr. Simpson, Mr. Singleton, of Hogsdon Square, Dr. Stern, Mr. Slingsby
Bethel, Dr. Stillingfleet, Lord Bishop of Worcester. Mr. (John) Showers. Mr.
Slater, Mr. Smithies, Mr. Spademan, of Roterdam, Mr. Steel, Mr. (Joseph)
Stevens, Mr. Spanhemius Mr John Stewart, Provost of Aaire in Scotland, Mr.
Stubbs, Dr. (Jer.) Tailor, Dr. (Thomas) Tailor, Mr. (Nathanael) Tailor Dr.
(Edmond) Trench, Mr, (Thomas) Tilson, Minister of Aylesford in Kent, Dr,
Tenison, Archbishop of Canterbury Dr. Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury,
Mr. Tyson, Mr, Veal, Mr, (Nath,) Vincent, Bishop Usher, Dr, Wallis, Dr, Wake,
Dr, Walker, Mr, Wanley, Sir Christopher Wren, Dr, Willis, Bishop Wilkins,
Daniel Waldow. Esquire; Mr, (Dan,) Williams, Counselor Wiat, of Sergeants Inn,
near Fleet Street, Mr, Nicholas West, of Putney in Essex, Sir Peter Wyche, Mr,
(Patrick) Wian, Minister of Lesbury Mr, Woodcock, Mr, Wilson, Mr, White, Mr,
John Young, M, A, of Magdalene Hall,
Mr. HERBERT's POEM upon Providence.
O Sacred Providence, who from End to End,
Strongly and sweetly movest! Shall I write,
And not of thee, through whom my fingers bend
To hold my Quill? Shall they not do thee (...)?
Of all the Creatures both in Sea and Land,
Only to Man thou have made known thy ways,
And put the Pen alone into his Hand,
And made him Secretary of thy Praise.
Beasts fain would sing; Birds ditty to their Notes?
Trees would be running on their native Lute,
To thy Renown: But all their Hands and Throats
Are brought to Man, while they are Lame and Mute.
Man is the World's High Priest: He does present
The Sacrifice for all; while they below
Unto the Service mutter and assent,
Such as Springs use that fall, and winds that blow.
He that to Praise and Laud thee does refrain,
Does not refrain unto himself alone,
But robs a Thousand, who would Praise thee fain;
And does commit a World of Sin in one.
The Beasts say, Eat me; but, if Beasts must teach,
The Tongue is yours to Eat, but mine to Praise.
The Trees say, pull me: But the hand you stretch,
Is mine to write, as it is yours to raise.
Wherefore, most sacred Spirit, I here present
For me, and all my fellows, Praise to thee:
And just it is that I should pay the rent,
Because the Benefit accures to me.
We all acknowledge both thy Power and Love
To be exact, transcendent, and Divine;
Who do so strongly and so sweetly move,
While all things have their Will, yet none but thine.
For either thy Command, or thy Permission
Lay hands on all: They are thy right and left,
The first puts on with speed and expedition;
The other curbs Sins Stealing Pace and Theft.
Nothing escapes them both: All must appear,
And be disposed, and dressed, and tuned by thee,
Who sweetly temper'st, all. If we could hear
Thy Skill and Art, what Music would it be!
Thou art in small things great, not small in any:
Thy even Praise can neither rise nor fall.
Thou art in all things one, in each thing many:
For thou art infinite in one, and all.
Tempests are Calm to thee, they know thy hand,
And hold it fast, as Children do their Fathers,
Which cry and follow. Thou have made poor sand
Check the Proud Sea, even when it swells and gathers.
Thy cupboard serves the World: The meat is set,
Where all may reach: No Beast but knows his feed:
Birds teach us Hawking: Fishes have their Net:
The great prey on the less, they on some weed.
Nothing ingender'd does prevent his Meat:
Files have their Table spread, e're they appear.
Some Creatures have in Winter what to Eat;
Others do sleep, and envy not their cheer.
How finely do thou times and seasons spin?
And make a twist Checkered with Night and Day!
Which as it lengthens, winds, and winds us in,
As Bowls on, but turning all the way.
Each Creature has a wisdom for his good.
The Pigeons feeds their tender offspring, crying,
When they are Callow; but withdraw their Food
When they are Fledge, that need may teach them flying.
Bees work for Man; and yet they never bruise
Their Masters Flower, but leave it, having done,
As fair as ever, and as fit to use:
So both the Flower does stay, and Honey run.
Sheep Eat the Grass, and Dung the ground for more:
Trees after bearing drop their Leaves for soil:
Springs vent their Streams; and by expense get store:
Clouds cool by heat; and Baths by cooling boil.
Who has that virtue to express the rare,
And curious virtues both of Herbs and Stones?
Is there an herb for that? O that thy care
Would show a Root that gives expressions!
And if an Herb has Power, what have the Stars!
A Rose, besides his Beauty, is a cure.
Doubtless our Plagues and Plenty, Peace and Wars
Are there much surer then our Art is sure.
Thou have hid Metals: Man may take them thence;
But at his Peril: When he digs the place,
He makes a Grave; as if the thing had sense,
And threatened Man, that he should fill the space.
Even Poisons Praise thee. Should a thing be lost?
Should Creatures want, for want of heed their due?
Since where are Poisons, Antidotes are most;
Thy help stands close, and keeps the fear in view.
The Sea, which seems to stop the Traveller,
Is by a Ship the speedier passage made;
The Winds, who think they rule the Mariner,
Are ruled by him, and taught to serve his Trade.
And as thy house is full, so I adore
Thy curious Art in Marshalling thy Goods.
The Hills with health abound; the Vales with store;
The South with Marble; Norths with Furs and Woods.
Hard things are Glorious; easy things good Cheap.
The common all Men have: That which is rare,
Men therefore seek to have, and care to keep.
The healthy Frost with Summer Fruits compare.
Light without wind is Glass: Warm without weight
Is Wool and Furs: Cool without closeness shade;
Speed without pains, a Horse: Tall without height
A Servile Hawk: Low without loss, a spade.
All Countries have enough to serve their need:
If they seek fine things, thou do make them run
For their offense; and then do turn their speed
To be Commerce and Trade from Sun to Sun.
Nothing wears Clothes but Man; nothing does need
But he to wear them. Nothing uses fire,
But Man alone, to show his Heavenly breed:
And only he has fuel in desire.
When the Earth was dry, thou made a Sea of wet;
When that lay gathered, thou did broach the Mountains:
When yet some places could no moisture get,
The Winds grew Gardeners, and the Clouds good Fountains.
Rain does not hurt my Flowers, but gently spend
Your Honey drops: Press not to smell them here:
When they are ripe, their odor will ascend;
And at your Lodging with their thanks appear.
How harsh are Thorns to Pears! And yet they make
A better Hedge, and need less Reparation.
How smooth are Silks compared with a stake,
Or with a Stone! Yet make no good Foundation.
Sometimes thou do divide thy Gifts to man,
Sometimes unite. The Indian Nut alone,
Is Clothing, Meat, and Trencher, Drink and Kan,
Boat, Cable, Sail, and Needle, all in one.
Most herbs that grow in Brooks, are hot and dry:
Cold Fruit's warm Kernels help against the Wind;
The Limon's Juice and Rind cure mutually;
The Whey of Milk does loose, the Milk does bind.
Thy Creatures leap not, but express a Feast,
Where all the Guests sit close, and nothing wants.
Frogs marry Fish and Flesh, Bats, Bird and Beast;
Sponges, Nonsense and Sense; Mines; the Earth and Plants.
To show thou art not bound, as if thy Lot
Were worse than ours, sometimes thou shiftest hands.
Most things move the Vnder-Jaw, the Crocodile not.
Most things sleep lying, the Elephant leans or stands.
But who has Praise enough? Nay, who has any?
None can express thy Works, but he that knows them;
And none can know thy Works, which are so many,
And so complete, but only he that owes them.
All things that are, though they have several ways,
Yet in their Being, join with one advice
To honor thee: and so I give thee Praise
In all my other Hymns, but in this Twice.
Each thing that is, although in Use and Name
It go for one, has many ways in store
To honor thee; And so each Hymn thy Fame
Extolleth many ways, yet this one more.
A Complete History OF THE MOST Remarkable Providence BOTH OF Judgment and
Mercy, Which have happened in this Present Age. etc.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Appearance and Manifestation of God Himself in the
World.
DEsigning to Treat in this Book, of that most Noble Exercise of the Divinity,
The Government of the World, and of that only so far as it is Remarkably the
Operation and Effect of the Infinite Supreme Being; it will not be Improper in
the first place to enquire, If ever this God has made any Visible
Manifestation of himself in Form or Figure to the World; If ever any Man saw
him in any Material adequate shape and lived: Or if he has not; what should be
the Reason, that He never strikes our senses with his Essential presence, that
he hides from us in the Retirements of an Invisible and Spiritual Majesty;
leaving us to search out his Footsteps, and read the marks of his Boundless
Properties in the Works of Creation and Providence.

We are told indeed, in sacred Scripture, of his frequent Appearance to
Abraham, Genesis 12.7. to Isaac, Genesis 26.2, 24. to Jacob, Genesis 28.10, etc. to
Moses, Exodus 3.2, etc. But all these Apparitions come to no more then this,
that these persons were struck either with the outward sight, or inward sense
of the signs of the presence of something Extraordinary, that they could
resolve the cause to be nothing less then the great God. And besides, the
Conviction was intended no further primarily, then themselves, and so far it
was effectual, and there it rested: They were convinced, and believed, and
obeyed. And tho their Faith and Obedience was designed for a strong Argument to
draw their Posterity after them, yet when the Freshness of these Stories were
worn off, the following Generation called for fresh Evidences, and repeated
Miracles, and the Marks of a singular Providence; or else they were in danger
of lapsing backward into downright Infidelity and Disobedience again. And
therefore, though it has pleased Almighty God at sundry times, and in diverse
manners, to make himself known to the world, yet we may safely conclude upon
these Two Points, as certainly True: 1. That no mere Man in this world did ever
see God as he is, in himself, and live, John 1.18. 1 John 4.12. Not Abraham,
not Isaac, nor Jacob, nor Moses; they but saw his back-parts, the Signs of his
Presence, the Effects of some particular Attributes, and no more. 2. That it is
impossible for Man, in a state of Mortality, to see him, Exodus 33.20. Thou
can not see my Face (that is, my Essence) for there shall no Man see me and
live. And the Reason is plain and easy, if we consider, The Glory of that
Infinite Majesty is enough to crack our weak corruptible Bodies, and astonish
our senses, and strike us into a Dissolution or Confusion.


2. The present Weakness and Sinfulness of Humane Nature, 1 Timothy 6.16. God only
is said there to have Immortality, which no Man can approach unto, -- whom no
Man can see. And besides all this, the Intuition or Vision of God is reserved
for the Reward of our Faith; and therefore it is unseasonable now; we must wait
for it, till we have done our work, and are got safe into the other World; and
then we shall have purer Intellectuals, and more refined Souls, and more
Glorious Bodies, fitted up on purpose, and disposed for such Ravishing Glory,
and such a Transcendent Object.

Obj. It is said, Genesis 32.30. Jacob called the Name of the place Peniel; for I
have seen God face to face, and my Life is preserved.

Answ. Still I say, Jacob saw not God in his Essence, but in some visible
Representation, and that not adequate to the Nature or Glory of God, but far
beneath it: For the shape of a Man is no more the excellency of God, than a
Rush-candle, or a poor silly Glowworm to the Noon-Sun; nor so much neither.

All the ways of God's Appearance and Manifestation in the World, that I can
think of, may be reduced to these following Particulars.

(1.) By a Voice only, as in the Case of Adam and Eve, Genesis 3.8, 9. of Noah,
Genesis 6.13, etc. of Abraham, Genesis 12.1, 7, chapter 13, 14.

(2.) By a Vision, as he did to Abraham, Genesis 15.1. to Balaam, Numb. 24.4, 16.
to Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.15. to Nathan, 2 Samuel 7.17. 1 Chr. 17.15. to the Prophets
frequently. These Visions are sometimes called Trances, as in the Case of
Balaam, Numb. 24.4. where the man seemed to fall into a fit of Ecstasy, with
his Eyes open, v. 16. He is said to exercise Two of his Senses, Hearing and
Seeing, and both of them with his Eyes open. Peter ( Acts 10.10.) is said to
fall into One of these Trances, where he both heard a Voice, and saw a Vision.
S. Paul ( Acts) 22.17.) affirms of himself, That whilst he was praying in the
Temple, he was in a Trance. Cornelius, Acts 10.3. is said to have seen a Vision
evidently, viz. an Angel of God coming to him, but with such a Glorious
appearance, that seeing him, he was afraid, and said, Lord, what is it? etc. S.
Paul, quite contrary to Balaam (in the Vision mentioned before) fell to the
Earth, and heard a Voice; And though at first he saw a Light shining round
about him, yet afterward we have Reason to believe that his Eyes were shut;
for it is said, Acts 9.8. Saul arose from the Earth, and when his Eyes were
opened, he saw no man; and he continued three days without sight.

(3.) By Angels, in the shape or form of men, as One Angel is said to find
Hagar by a Fountain of water, Genesis 16.7. etc. Two appear to Lot, Genesis 19.1, 2,
etc. Three to Abraham, Genesis 18. Many to Jacob, Genesis 32.1, 24. An Angel appeared
to Moses in a Flame of Fire, out of the midst of a Bush, Exodus 3.1, 2. etc. And
yet it is said, God called unto Muses out of the midst of the Bush, saying, I am
the God of thy Father, etc.

(4.) By Dreams; As to Abimelech, Genesis 20.3. to Laban, Genesis 31.24. to Jacob,
Genesis 31.11. But here likewise there was often the Appearance of an Angel, as in
the last Instance of Jacob; and Mat. 1; 20. and c. 2.13, 19, etc. an Angel
appeared to Joseph in a Dream.

(5.) By Angels in a Pillar of Cloud and Fire; as Exodus 13.21. c. 14.24, etc.

(6.) By such Works either of Creation or Providence, as must necessarily be
accounted the Effects of Infinite Wisdom and Power, and can be supposed to
proceed from no other Being in the World, but One of Unlimited Attributes;
that both Knows, and Wills, and acts in such a way as none can do, but he that
has all the World at his Command, and all the diverse Classes of the
Creatures at his back.

I meddle not here with that Universal Character, that Idea of the Divine
Nature, which is impressed upon the Mind of all Mankind, by him that made us;
Our Creator (it seems) would not suffer us to come out of his Hands, till he
had instamp'd his own Mark upon us. But this I insist not here upon, because
that Impression was made upon the inward Tables of the Heart, for the use of
the Man himself; And it is so soyl'd with the Corruption of our Nature; and Men
are often so resolved upon the Trade of sinning, and so exposing themselves to
the Displeasure and Judgment of him that made them; that they take no delight
in Reading and Acknowledging this Divine Inscription; Nay, some are so set
against it, that they do all they came to blot out the Characters, and expunge
them clearly out.

When men are once arrived at this Degree of Obstinacy, it is a hard matter to
deal with them. Our utmost Aim and Design here is, to present the world with
such a Scheme of Divine Providence; so strange and so true Relations, put into
a method, and marshelled under their proper Heads, that if our Scepticks and
Atheists would but read what follows in this book, and come to a fair
Examination and Consideration of the matter, they would find themselves so
overpowered with Evidence and so pinched with the strength of Arguments and
Attestations, that they must either honestly surrender up the Cause, and
acknowledge the Footsteps of the Divinity very plain and legible in the curious
and wonderful Transactions of Providence; or else very stoutly and impudently
fly in the Face of all History, Sacred and Profane, Ancient and Modern, Civil
and Ecclesiastic, Foreign and Domestic; and very foolishly and dangerously
encounter not only the Reason of all the World besides, but their own
Consciences too, and even the Common Senses of Many, Wise, and Good Men.

In short, God has manifested himself to us Inwardly and Outwardly, by
imprinting the Notion of Himself upon our Hearts, and discovering his Excellent
properties to us in his works; the one legible to our Reasonable Minds and
Consciences, the other to our Common Senses: And what more could we wish a God
to do? Bur if after all, men will resolve to wink at the Light within and
without too, they are worthy (in plain English) neither of the Reason nor the
Sense they are endowed with; and the Curious Works of Divine Providence are
drawn in vain to such dull Souls that are sunk down so deep into the Brutish
Nature, and almost choked up with the Thick Fumes of mere Flesh and Blood.

The God of heaven, that Governs the World with so much Wisdom, and Goodness,
and Power, and Constancy, give a blessing to the Contents of this book, and
show himself a little in every Chapter of it to every particular Reader, with
the like efficacy, and brightness, and kindness, as he does in all the various
Scenes of Providence, in his Government of the World.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Appearance of Good Angels.
FOR those that will admit the Testimony of Sacred Scripture, it will be easy
to satisfy such, That Good Angels do exist, and are exercised in the Affairs of
this Little World; as in the Case of Hagar, Genesis 16.7, etc. of Abraham, Genesis
18. of Lot, Genesis 19. of Jacob, Genesis 31. of Moses, Exodus 3. of Balaam, Gideon,
Manoah, Elijah; etc. in the Old Testament. And in the Case of the Baptist's and
our Savior's Birth, in the New Testament they appeared to the Two Mary's,
Zechariah, and the Shepherds, Act. 10.3. Cornelius is said to have seen a
Vision evidently, viz. An Angel of God coming to him. More may be observed by
Men of Leisure and Ingenuity, that will take the pains to examine their
Concordance, and turn over a few leaves of the Bible.

The greatest difficulty is with Men of an Infidel Nature, not only of the
Sadducean humor, who Account Angels no more then Divine Praises; or of the
Familist's Principle, who say they are mere Phantasms, created for the present
occasion, and then presently, when their Business is over, manumitted into Old
Vanity and Nothing; but Hobbists, and Scepticks, and Atheists: The first of
which Symbolizes much with the Old Sadduces, the Sceptick doubts, and the
Atheist flatly denies them. To all which I have no more to say (it being not my
business now to engage in the Lists of Disputation, which would swell my Book
into a Volume too big for the Purses of the present Age,) but to submit fairly
the aforesaid Texts, and the following stories to the Sober and Mature
consideration of the Reader. Only be pleased to take this distinction along
with you, that Angels may appea^ visibly to the Eye of the mind, as well as to
the Eye of sense. And now let us lay aside our Bible a while, to humor the
Infirmity of this Unbelieving Club, who could be well enough content there
might be Good Angels concerned for us, so there were no Bad ones against us.

Bodinus, who had it from the Mouth of the Man, whom it concerned, a Holy and
Pious Man, and an Acquaintance of Bodinus's, tells us; that he had a certain
Spirit, that did perpetually accompany him, which he was then first aware of,
when he was about Thirty Seven years of Age, but conceived that the said Spirit
had been with him all his Life time; as he gathered from certain Monitory
Dreams and Visions, whereby he was forewarned as well of several Dangers, as
Vices. That this Spirit discovered himself to him, after he had for a whole
year together earnestly prayed to God, to send a Good Angel to him, to be the
Guide and Governor of his Life and Actions; adding also, that before and after
Prayer he used to spend two or three hours in Meditation and Reading the
Scriptures, diligently enquiring with himself, what Religion might be the Best,
beseeching God that he would be pleased to direct him to it. And that he did
not allow of their way, that at all adventures pray for Confirmation of them in
that Opinion they are in, whether right or wrong. That whilst he was thus busy
in matters of Religion, he light on a passage in Philo Judeus de Srcrificiis,
where he Writes, That a Good and Holy Man can offer no greater, nor more
acceptable Sacrifice to God, then the oblation of himself; And therefore
following Philo's Counsel, that he offered his Soul to God: And after that,
amongst many other Divine Dreams and Visions, he once in his sleep seemed to
hear the Voice of God, saying to him, I will save thy Soul, I am he that
appeared unto thee: Afterward the Spirit would every day knock at the Door
about three or four a Clock in the Morning, tho he rising and opening the Door,
could see no body. This Trouble and Boysterousness made him begin to conceit,
that it was some ill Spirit, that thus haunted him; and therefore he daily
Prayed earnestly to the Lord, that he would be pleased to send his Good Angel
to him; and often also Sung Psalms, having most of them by heart. Wherefore the
Spirit afterward knocked more gently at the Door, and One day discovered
himself to him Waking, which was the first time, that he was assured by his
senses, that it was He; for he often touched and stirred a Drinking-Glass, that
stood in his Chamber, which did not a little amaze him. Two days after, when he
entertained a Friend of his, Secretary to the King, his Friend was much
abashed, while he heard the Spirit thumping on the Bench hard by him, and was
stricken with fear; but he bid him be of good courage, there was no hurt
toward him; and the better to assure him of it, told him the truth of the
whole matter. From that time; says Bodinus, he did affirm, that this Spirit
was always with him, and by some sensible Sign did ever advertise him of
things; as by striking his Right Ear; if he did any thing amiss; if otherwise,
his left: If any body came to Circumvent him, his right Ear was struck; but his
left, if a good Man, and to good Ends, accosted him: If he was about to Eat or
Drink any thing that would hurt him, or intended to do any ill Action, he was
inhibited by a Sign; and if he delayed to follow his Business, he was quickened
by a Sign given him. When he began to Praise God in Psalms, and to declare him
Mavelous Acts, he was presently raised and strengthened by a Supernatural
Power. He daily begged of God, that he would teach him his Will, and set one
day of the Week a part for meditation, and Reading the Scripture, and Singing
of Psalms, and did not stir out of his House all that day: But in his ordinary
Conversation, he was sufficiently merry, and of a cheerful mind; for which he
cited that saying, Vidi facies sanctorum letas. But in his conversing with
others, if he had talked Vainly and Indiscreetly, or had some days together
neglected his Devotions, he was forthwith Admonished thereof by a Dream. He was
also Admonished to rise betime every Morning, about four a Clock, with a Voice
coming to him, while he was asleep, saying, Who gets up first to Pray? He was
often Admonished likewise to give Alms; and observed, the more Charity he
bestowed, the more Prosperous he was. On a time, when his Enemies sought after
his Life, knowing he was to go by Water, his Father in a Dream brought two
Horses to him, the one white, the other Bay; and thereupon he bid his Man hire
him two Horses, and tho he said nothing of the Colors, his Man brought him a
White Horse and a Bay one. In all Difficulties, Journeyings, etc. He used to
ask Counsel of God, and one Night when he had begged his Blessing, while he
slept he saw a Vision, wherein his Father seemed to Bless him. At another time,
when in great danger, and was newly gone to Bed, he said the Spirit would not
let him alone, till he had raised him again, whereupon he watched and prayed
all that Night; the day after he escaped the hands of his Persecutors in a
wonderful manner; which done, in his next sleep, he heard a Voice saying, Now
Sing Qui sedet in latibulo altissimi, etc. He once attempting to speak to this
Spirit, he struck the Door with a vehemence, as if he had knocked upon it with
a hammer, to signify his dislike of the matter: If he took an ill Book into his
hand to Read, the Spirit would strike it, that he might lay it down; and so
likewise would hinder him from Writing and Reading overmuch. Bodinus enquiring
whether he ever saw the shape and form of the Spirit; he told him, that whilst
awake, he never saw any thing but a certain light very bright and clear, and of
a circular Figure; but that once being in Jeopardy of his Life, and having
heartily prayed to God, that he would be pleased to provide for his safety,
about break of Day, amidst his slumberings and wakings, he espied on his Bed
where he lay, A young Boy, clad in a white Garment tinctured with Purple, and
of a Visage admirably Lovely and Beautiful to behold. This he confidently
affirmed to Bodinus for a certain Truth. H. More Antid. against Atheism. Edit.
2d. p. 245, etc.

2. Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastical story reports, that one Theodorus a Martyr,
told him, that when he was hanging ten hours upon the Rack for Religion, under
Julian's Persecution, his Joints distended and distorted, and his body
exquisitely tortured with change of Executioners; so as never Age could
remember the like; he felt no pain at all, but continued all the while in the
sight of all Men, singing and smiling, for there stood a comely young Man by
him on his Gibbet, which with a clean Towel still wiped off his sweat, and
poured cool Water upon his Limbs, wherewith he was so refreshed, that it
grieved him to be let down. So far Dr. Joseph Hall. Socratis scholasticus,
adds, that Ruffinus had Acquaintance with this Theodorus, and discoursed him
upon it: to whom he said, he was so comforted and confirmed in the Faith
thereby, that the hour of Torment was unto him rather a delectable Pleasure,
than a doleful Pain. Socrat. Schol. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 16.

3. Edwyn King of Northumberland, then a Pagan, being by himself alone and
Solitary, there appeared to him One, who said, I known well the cause of thy
heaviness, what would thou give to him that would deliver thee from this
fear? I would, said Edwyn, give all that ever I could make. And what, said the
other, if I make thee a mightier King than any of thy Progenitors? Edwyn
answered as before. Then said the other, What if I show thee a better way, and
kind of Life, than was ever known to any of thy Ancestors? Will thou obey, and
do after may Counsel? Yes, said he, with all my Heart. Then the other laying
his Hand on his Head, said, When this Token happens unto thee, then remember
this time of thy Tribulation, and the Promise that thou have made, and the
Words I have spoken; and so he vanished out of his sight. But afterward being
overborn by the Counsel of his Nobles, he deferred to perform his Promise.
Afterward, being struck at with the envenomed Sword of a certain Ruffian, sent
by the King of the West Saxons to assassinate him; but escaping by the
interposition of one of his Servants, (who received the Sword through his own
Body) being himself wounded only with the Sword's Point; with which Wound he
lay long. Upon Recovery, he goes against those West Saxons, promising Jesus
Christ, upon Victory, to be Baptized. Which though he obtained, yet still he was
slow to be Baptized. Only he left off his Idolatrous Services, and heard Bishop
Paulinus Preach; 'till the Bishop came to the King at a fit Season, and laying
his Hand on his Head, asked him if he remembered not that Token? upon which, he
was presently Baptized, and destroyed his Idols with their Altars. Clark's
Exampl. and Martyrol. etc.

4. When Theodosius Jun. sent his Army under Ardubarius against the Persians,
and for the Relief of the Persecuted Christians, and the Citizens were sad and
heavy, fearing the Event of the War, a Company of Angels appeared to certain
Christians in Bythinia, that were traveling to Constantinople, and willed them
to be of good Cheer, and to Pray, and put their Trust in God, and then to
expect confidently the good Success and Victory of Ardubarius: For God had sent
them as Governors and Sovereign Captains of that War. Idem.

5. Cotterus accounted by Comenius as a Prophet of Silesia, and persecuted
stoutly by the Emperor's Prefect, was A. C. 1628, entertained by Adam Pohe, a
Sadler of Sprattovia for half a Year gratis, till the time of his Imprisonment.
The next Year Adam falling Sick and Lame, his Nerves shrank up, and was
confined to his Bed for half a Year. A Day before the Emperor's Commissioners
came to reform the Town (as they called it) a Young Man appeared by his
Bedside in white Clothing, saying Adam, this is the Day wherein God has
decreed to take Vengeance on this City: Arise, Go in the name of the Lord, put
on thy clothes, and with thy Wife and Young Daughter fly away, make hasie; upon
which he recovered and escaped. Hisi. Prophet. p. 22.

6. Cutbert Symson, Deacon of the Congregation in London, in Queen Mary's
Reign, being imprisoned in the Stocks the Day before his Condemnation, about
Eleven of the Clock toward Midnight, heard one coming in, first opening the
outward Door, then the Second, then the Third, and so looking into the said
Cutbert, having no Candle or Torch, that he could see, but giving a comfortable
Brightness and Light, joyful to the Heart, and saying Ha! unto him, departed
again. Fox Martyrol.

7. Samuel Wallace, of Stamford in Lincolnshire, a shoemaker, having been 13
Years sick of a Consumption; upon Whitsunday after Sermon, 1659, being alone in
the House, and reading in a Book called Abraham's Suit for Sodom, he heard
somebody wrap at the Door, upon which he rose, and went with his Stick in one
Hand, and holding by the Wall with the other, to see who was at the Door; where
he found a proper grave Old Man, with Hair as white as Wool curled up, and a
white broad Beard, of a fresh Complexion, with a fashionable Hat, little narrow
Band, Coat and Hose of a Purple Color, pure white Stockings, and new black
Shoes tied with Ribbons, of the same color with his Clothes, without Spot of
Wet or Dirt upon him, though it rained when he came in, and had done, all that
Day; Hands as white as Snow, without Gloves: Who said to him, Friend, I pray,
thee give to an Old Pilgrim a Cup of thy small Beer. Samuel Wallace answering,
I pray you Sir, come in. To which he replied, Friend, call me not Sir, for I am
no Sir; but yet come in I must; for I cannot pass by thy Door before I come in.
Wallace, with the help of his Stick, drew a little Jug-Pot of Small-Beer; which
the Pilgrim took, and drank a little; then walked two or three times to and
fro, and drank again; and so a Third time, before he drank it all. And when he
had so done, he walked Three or Four times as before; and then coming to
Wallace, said, Friend, I percieve that thou art not well: Wallace replied, No
truly, Sir, I have not been well these many Years. Then he asked what his
Disease was ^ A Deep Consumption, and our Doctors say it is past Cure, answered
Wallace. To which the old Pilgrim replied, They say well, but what have they
given thee for it? Truly nothing, said he, for I am very poor, and not able to
follow the Doctor's Prescriptions, and so I have committed my self into the
Hands of Almighty God, to dispose of me as he pleases. The Old Man answered,
Thou say very well: But I will tell thee by the Almighty power of God what
thou shall do; only observe my words, and remember them and do it; but
whatsoever thou do, Fear God, and serve him. To Morrow Morning to into thy
Garden, and get there Two Red Sage Leaves, and one Leaf of Bloodwort, put these
into a Cup of Small Beer, let them lie there for the space of Three Days
together, drink thereof as often as need requires, but let the Leaves still
remain in the Cup; and the Fourth Morning cast them away, and put Three fresh
ones in their room; and thus do for 12 Days together, neither more nor less: I
pray thee remember what I say, and observe and do it. But above all, Fear God
and serve him. And for the space of these Twelve Days, thou must neither drink
Ale, nor Strong Beer; yet afterward thou may to strengthen Nature; and thou
shall see that before these Twelve Days are expired, through the great mercy
and help of Almighty God, thy Disease will be cured, and the frame of thy Body
altered, etc. With much more to this purpose; adding withal, that he must
change the Air, and then his Blood would be as god as ever it was, only his
Joints would be weak as long as he lived. But above all, said he, Fear God, and
serve him. Wallace asked him to eat some Bread and Butter or Cheese; he
answered, no Friend, I will not eat any thing, the Lord Christ is sufficient
for me; neither but very seldom do I drink any Beer, but that which comes from
the Rock: And so Friend, the Lord God in Heaven be with thee. At parting,
Samuel Wallace went to shut the Door after him, to whom the Old Man returning
half way into the Entry again, said, Friend, I pray remember what I have said,
and do it: But above all; Fear God, and serve him. Wallace said, he saw him
pass along the Street some half a Score Yards from his Door, and so he went in.
But no Body else saw this Old Man, though many People were standing in their
Doors near Wallace's House. Within Four Days, upon the use of this Drink, a
Sc^rf arose upon his Body, and under that a new fresh Skin, and in Twelve Days
he was as strong as ever he had been, and healthful, except only a little
weakness in his Joints. And once in the Twelve Days, by the importunity of some
Friends, drinking a little Strong Drink, he was struck speechless for 24 Hours.
Many Ministers hearing the report of this wonderful Cure, met together at
Stamford, and considering and consulting about, it for many Reasons, concluded
the Cure to be done by the Ministry of an Angel.

8. Monsieur Jurieu, a Banished Minister of France, wrote in one of his
Pastoral Letters out of Holland. to the Persecuted Protestants in France, a
very surprising Relation, of Songs and Voices heard in the Air, A. C. 1685, in
these Words, -- This Year 1685, has been as abundant in Prodigies, as any for
a long while; wherein we have heard of extraordinary Storms, Fires falling from
Heaven, others coming out of the Earth, Signs in the Air, and Insects of
unknown Shapes, which have been believed to have fallen from Heaven, and
particularly the Singing of Psalms and Voices in the Air. It is near a Year
since we heard any Speech concerning it, and they told us, that these Singings
had been heard in Bearn, the first Province whether the Dragoons were sent.
Behold our Witnesses, every one will judge of what worth they are: Monsieur
Mag^udy, Pastor of the Church of Orthez, having been questioned concerning this
Affair, has interrogated diverse Persons, according as it appears by his
Certificate. I do declare that Monsieur Bazin, a Younger Brother, and an
Inhabitant of Bearn has told me, that walking with some of his Friends after
Midday near the City of Orthez, he heard Voices which sung Psalms, and as he
imagined that it might be some Women that washed Linen, he ran to demand of
them, whether it was they that sang; they told him no, and that they themselves
had for a long time heard the same singing of Psalms. This happened some Months
before the Interdiction of our Church. The said M. Bazin is a very Honest Man,
very Judicious, and of Integrity. I add, that Mademoiselle de Casenaue of
Orthez, being not able to believe that which was said concerning Singing of
Psalms, a Woman said to her, that if she had the Curiosity to hear them sing,
she would call on her at her own House at a time convenient; which she did: For
this Woman being at Eleven at Night, in the uttermost part of the City, with
Multitudes of other Persons, to hear those Voices which sung in the Air the
Praises of God; having heard this singing of Psalms, she ran to Mademoiselle de
Casenaue, who immediately gets out of her Bed, causes one of her Neighbors to
rise; and they ran to that Quarter of the City which was far from her House;
where they found Multitudes of Persons, who were ravished with that pleasant
Melody which they heard in the Air; they themselves returned to their Houses,
with this great Consolation, to have heard those Psalms sung in the Air, which
they could no more sing in their Church; which had been interdicted for some
Months past: They added, that they seemed to hear them sing in the same manner,
which they used to sing in their Church; and after the Singing ceased, there
was a Voice which spoke, but in an articulate and confufed manner, so that they
could not distinguish what was said. This Gentlewoman is very well worthy of
Credit. M^reover I attest, that an infinite number of Persons of Orthez do say,
that they heard the singing of Psalms, which they call the Singing of Angels:
And that they exhorted each other in the Day, to be present in the Night, in
certain Places of the City, to satisfy this holy curiosity; which was the
reason that the Magistrates of Orthez published an Ordinance, whereby they
forbad all Persons from going out of their Houses, or assembling themselves by
Night to hear these Voices; which filled this poor afflicted People with Joy,
and extraordinary Consolation. This is that which has been told me concerning
this singing of Psalms, to which I find no difficulty to give a full assent,
because the Persons that reported it, are of great sincerity. Given at
Amsterdam, Nov. 23, 1686. Signed Magendie, heretofore Minister of Orthez in
Bearne.

M. Garfin, another Minister of the said Church of Orthez, declares the like,
and cites his Brother in Law de Roux, for the witness thereof; as also M.
Clarier, a Lawyer of the same City, who informed him, that the Curate of the
Place, and a certain Priest called Dusan, and Monsieur Lichbigarai, another
Lawyer, and a Brother of the Curate called M. de la Roque, who sent to search
out a certain Popish Damsel, to know of her if it were true, that she had said,
that she had heard this Singing of Psalms, and that she told them, -- Yea, --
etc. Given at Amsterdam, Sept. 23. 1689. Signed Garfin, Minister. One Peter
Mauberg, of the City of Orthez, has signed the same thing; as does also one M.
Bergerit, and John de la Bordotten, and Mademoiselle Deformalagues, (adding
withal, that her Ears were entertained with a Melody so ravishing, that she
never heard any thing like it; and that she heard many Persons say, they could
plainly and distinctly hear the first Verse of the Forty Second Psalm, Like as
the Heart does breath and bray, etc. Others, that they heard the whose Psalm
sung. M. de Brassalay, a Person of Honor, and acknowledged such by all that
knew him, has abundantly attested the same thing. Dr. Faur, a Physician, and
Papist, and Magistrate of the same City, confessed that he heard it, etc. It
were too tedious to give the Reader all the Certificates that have been made of
it; these I have cited, are enough to silence the Objections of any Reader,
that is not resolved to be incredulous above the common rate of Mankind. But
neither was it heard here only, but the like has happened in Cevenues,
together with the bearing of Drums, as has been certified by the Affidavits of
no less than Four several Credible Persons, viz. Barjune, Minister of S.
Marselle in Cevenues, La Roquette, Minister of Manoblet, Saligne de Marnis in
Cevenues, M. Jane de Vignoles, etc. Hic consulat lector Athanasium de subtle.
Demon.

One of the most Astonishing Passages that I my self have been witness of, of
this nature, and which happened in my own House, is that which follows. In the
Year 1683, whilst I lived at Shipley, my Wife took a Neighbor's Daughter, Mary
Holland by Name, to be her Servant, aged about 16 or 17 Years, jolly and
corpulent, honest, humble and innocent, free from all Pride and Guile naturally
(so far as I could judge) but of no sharp Intellectuals, nor extraordinary
Knowledge, constant to her private Prayers, so far as we could make
Observation: Her Parents were Persons of god same, and great hospitality, and
lived fashionably and plentifully as any of the Parish. This Damsel having
fetched in Water to brew with the next day; she went to Bed that Night, fell
into a deep Sleep (as she was by Nature inclined to do) presently; but which
was extraordinary, next Morning she could not be awaked: And so she continued
all that Day, and till the middle of the Third Night. The Physician taking the
Distemper for a Coma, gave his Advice accordingly, but without Success: Her
Parents gave Order for Two Women to watch with her the Third Night. About
Midnight, I and my Wife lying in the next Chamber, and hearing her talk
sensibly to the Women, rose up, and went to her Bedside, asking her, how she
did? She replied, What do you think of me? To which I answered, by way of
Question again, whether she meant concerning her Bodily Health or Salvation?
Turning to my Wife, she asked, Mistress, what do you think? Shall I be saved or
no? To whom my Wife said, how do you think to be saved, by your Faith or Works?
She answered, by her Works: But recalling the Words again, after a little
pause, she said -- O no! it must not be by my works, it must be by says in
Jesus Christ. After some more Discourse upon this point, I asked her, if I
should pray by her? She answered, Yes, if you please. Upon which we all kneeled
down, she her self of her own accord putting her self into that posture in bed.
In the midst of Prayers she broke out into such passionate and strange
Expressions, as seemed to have proceeded from a sense of some Extraordinary
Assault from Devils. I was strangely surprised, and thought it advisable to
make a stop in my Prayers, and give my self, and the company a little time to
make observation upon this strange Occurrence. She continued her passionate
conflict in words which have slipped my memory: Afterward I prayed again, and
she fell into an Agony, as before. After Prayer she desired to see her Parents,
and was afraid, she should not see them before she died. We promised her to
send presently for them, which we did: But she fearing they would not come in
due time, asked for my little Daughter, Pat; and the key of her Box, which we
were not willing to give her, alleging, that we had purposely delivered up the
key to her Mother the day before; and tho she had put it into our hands again,
yet it would not look well in us to part with it, till she returned, etc. In
the mean time, I told her, if she had any thing to say, we would report it
truly to her Father and Mother when they came, and we doubted not but they
would consent to the Execution of her Will. Upon which, she bequeathed a little
box with some Money in it to Pat, her best Clothes to such, and her old ones to
such and such Persons, adding withal, If my Father and Mother please. And after
this, she called one of the Women that attended, to whisper something to her in
the Ear, which we heard not; the Women said afterward, it was about an Egg,
that they had purloyned from my Wife. After this was over, and all calm, I
prayed with her again, and she was attacked again, as before: Upon which I by
and by left off, and with my Pen in my hand Noted down these following
Expressions, which I deliver to the World for an A^igma, desiring a candid
solution of it. Men of a licentious wit may banter any thing, The Bible, and
Providence, and God himself. Bar give me a sober Judgment upon the following
Expressions. -- He comes, the Serpent, he comes in now; there is nothing now but
Devils. -- Here Is another Man is come now, and has taken the Pen our of my
hand: But it is no matter, I am He that have Prayed for you all this while. --
For Christ's sake, come, take me out here, for Christ's sake: For Christ's
sake, for Christ's sake, for Christ's sake, Lord have mercy. Lord, never
forsake, Lord never forsake; Lord, never forsake me, etc. For the Lord's sake
don't forget me. Lord God, do not forget me. Don't forsake me now. Lord, send
thy hand. -- That Is the Man has begged for you so long. They will not let me
come, they will not let me come, they will not let me come to serve my God, my
own God. The Lord has been my God all this time; and will thou forsake me now!
He has promised never to forsake me; I Will never forsake you. let me never come
into the World more. Lord have mercy, Lord, etc. Christ have Mercy, Christ,
etc. For the Lord's sake come fetch one of thy Angels. Lord have Mercy upon me;
Lord, sure you will; sure you will; sure you will: Oh! I Will lend thee my hand.
I that have been begging upon my Knees, or -- upon the Bed all this while, Lord
have pity on me. Beat them, Beat them, Beat them; I can Beat them, Lord; I am
thy child, I am thy child, I am, etc. -- I have been in Heaven among your
Angels, 'O it is rare. Let me for the Lords sake go thither again. Oh! For
Christ his sake, for Christ his sake, for Christ's sake, O let me in, I have
fenced against the Serpent, and now I cannot get in. The Lord send the back
again. I have beat Satan, Oh! it is a deluding Serpent! Come unto me, all you
that have been in. Oh! You must have an Eye to Satan! Oh! You must have an Eye
to Satan. I Will never come again into this World. O it is a rare being in Heaven!
For the Lord's sake restore me, for the Lords sake restore, for the Lord's
sake, etc. -- Oh! For the Lords sake restore me! -- I am none of yours. I am
one of the Holy Angels. (I suppose she meant of the Holy Angels company.) O for
Christ's sake -- the other end, and I Will meet you there. -- Oh? What do ye do?
Do not disturb me; I am going a journey: I am going to Heaven. Oh! What shall I
do to get in there! How shall I get in there! Here I lack to go in! -- I have
been at Heaven, Oh! it is a rare place! And Satan would fain have me; and I have
much ado to get in again. Stay for me, for Christ's sake stay, for the Lord's
sake stay. Lend me your hands. For Christ's sake do not go away without me.
Here they come thick upon me. -- Christ came and took me by the Coat, and yet I
could not follow! I cannot come for the Crowd! -- Here Is the side, Lord Jesus
help me. I have labored hard to keep to thee, I have labored hard to keep to
thee, I have labored hard, etc. -- This hand, this hand, -- I have labored
hard to keep to thee, Lord Jesus take me, Lord Jesus take me, O from whence you
will, O from whence you will, O from whence you will. -- I am one of thy
children, and cannon tell which way to get to thee: Oh! which way can I come to
thee? I have stood very hard. Unlock the key [ I suppose this must go for a
slip of the Tongue,] and let thy ANGELS in. For Christ's sake lend's any hand,
-- it is not THEE I call, get thee gone, get thee gone, get thee gone, get thee
gone: Lord have Mercy, Lord have Mercy: Go ye out of my sight; what will you be
revenged against me for? What do ye holding a curtain there? What do ye stand
there for? Get ye in again. Lord have Mercy, Lord have Mercy. O whither shall I
get to Christ? -- I Believe we can get up now, cannot we? Cannot we? I believe
we can get up now, cannot we? OH! HOW WILL GOD GET HIS ANGELS IN! OH! HOW WILL
GOD GET HIS ANGELS IN! -- Here Is one yet! HFRE'S ONE YET! HERE IS ONE YET --
Stay, let me alone; will ye? I am going up with these Angels: Ye don't know
what I do sure, You don't know what I do sure. -- Oh! Ye han't me yet. Cannot
ye pull me up a little further? Pull me up a little further. Angels, have ye
pulled it there? Angels, have ye, etc? Take hold by my hand, and get me through
there somewhere. -- I Will go round to the Door, and meet you there. I am coming,
I am coming, I am coming. Lord have Mercy upon us, Put a string down, put a
string down, put a string down. My Dear Christ, my Dear Christ, pull me up,
pull me up, pull me up. Have me in some-how. Oh! The bravest Angels, that
Christ has! Her Mother coming to her and finding her upon her Knees in this
conflict, and calling upon her to lie down and sleep; She made Answer, Ah!
Christ will forget me then! And when she bid her take her Rest; she replied, --
Rest, quoth you, I shall Rest enough when I get to Heaven. And afterward, O to
see, how the Ugly one stands! Said she. -- I do not know how to get thither,
not I. When they would have laid her down instead of kneeling, O, says she,
Mother, what do you do? I wonder, you will be so obstinate; If you did but know
-- etc. I must pray heartily. And afterward -- Says she, Christ has carried
away my Soul already. -- We can Dance about, when we are in Heaven. Oh! Heaven
is a Rare place! And now Christ is come to the bottom of the Stairs to fetch
away my Body. -- But how will Christ get my Body thither? Said she. When it was
Answered her, at the Resurrection he will have it: O, said she, that will be a
long while to. To the Truth of this I my self, my Wife, her Father still
living, and one or both of the Women that watched with her, are ready to give
Testimony. After the Afore-mentioned Agony, she died within a few hours, to the
best of my Remembrance, at most, before the following day was expired.

10. Gervase Disney Esquire; among the Remarkable Passages of his Life, Writ with
his own Hand, and Published, A. C. 1692. Tells us, that December the 3d, 1685.
Being at Family Prayer at Night (through Extraordinary Drowsiness) he fell
asleep two or three times; and awaking again, did not use the best means he
could and should, of standing up to prevent the Drowsiness; hoping it might go
off without it. Upon which being dropped again asleep, something gave him a great
Blow upon the middle of his Back, which presently awaked him in a fright, which
he did really feel paining him some minutes after he was awaken, p. 111. Upon
this the same Author tells another story of a like nature, Viz. That his Eldest
Brother being to repeat the Sermon in his Father's Family, he (Gervase) being
then very young, and cried to go to Bed, which was indulged him, and he, with
his Brothers being after some repulse, allowed to depart, and got into Bed;
Gervase, before he fell asleep, felt the bottom of the Bed-cloaths lift up,
where presently something pulled him by the Toe, and yet there was nothing to
be seen. This, he says, affrighted him when young, and he concluded it to be a
rebuke for hindering a pious exercise. Idem, p. 112. I am not sure, that these
stories are set in their proper places; but I am sure that they have the token
of Credibility, and are Remarkable either here, or somewhere: If I have
mistaken, I desire the Reader's Candor.

11. Even Plato himself in his Theage tells us, that Socrates had his Familiar
Spirit, who used to admonish him, if at any time he were going to do that which
was not like to succeed well, he himself saw him not, others heard him not.

12. Dr. Tate, with his Wife and Children, being stripped, and forced to flee
for their Lives by the Irish, when they were murdering Thousands in their
Rebellion in 1641. They were wandering in unknown places, upon Commons covered
with Snow, and having no Food, and she carrying a Sucking Child, and having no
Milk, she went to lay down the Child to die; and on the Brow of a Bank she
found a Suck-bottle with sweet Milk in it, no Footsteps appearing in the Snow
of any that should bring it thither, and far from any Habitation; which
preserved the Child's Life, who after became a Blessing to the Church. Histor.
Discourse of Apparit. etc. p. 159.

13. When Prince Rupert marched with his Army through Lancashire, to
York-Fight, where he was overthrown, the Town or Bolton made some Resistance in
his Passage, and he gave them no Quarter, but killed Men and Women. When he was
gone, those that escaped came out from the Places where they lucked, and an Old
Woman found in the streets a Woman killed, and a Child by her not Dead: The old
Woman took up the Child, and to still its crying, put her own Breast to the
Child, which had not given Suck, as I remember, of above twenty years: The
Child being quieted, she presently perceived Milk to come; and continued to
give the Child sufficient Milk, till it was provided for. I had the full
Assurance of this from my worthy Friend, Mrs. Hunt, Wife to Mr. Rowland Hunt,
of Harrow on the Hill; who told me, that she her self was one that was
appointed by the Committee to make Trial of the case, and she found it true,
and the Old Woman's Breasts to give the Child Milk, as was reported. And she
told me in 1665. That the said Child was at that time alive, a Servant-woman in
London. Ibid.

14. The African Bishops, or Preachers, all spoke well, when their Tongues were
cut out by the Command of the Arrian King: And Victor, Aenaeas, Gazaeus and
Procopius said, they saw them, and heard them speak after. But one of them
says, that one of the Bishops was after drawn into the Sin of Fornication, and
his Speech went away again. Ibid.

15. It is a very memorable thing, which (from the Mouth of a very credible
Person, who saw it) George Buchanan relates concerning James the Fourth, King
of Scotland, who intending to make a War with England, a certain Old Man, of a
very venerable Aspect, and clad in a long blue Garment, came to him at the
Church of St. Michaels at Linlithgow, while he was at his Devotion, and leaning
over the Canons Seat, where the King Sat, said, I am sent unto thee, O King,
to give thee warning that thou proceed not in the War thou art about, for if
thou do it, it will be thy Ruin: And having so said, he withdrew himself back
among the Multitude: The King, after service was ended, inquired earnestly for
him. But he could no where be found, neither could any of the standers by feel,
or perceive how, when, or where he passed from them, having as it were Vanished
in their hands; but no warning could divert his Destiny, his Queen fancying
that she had seen him fall from a great precipice, that she had lost, one of
her Eyes, etc. But he Answering, these were but Dreams; Marched on and faught
with the English, and was slain in Flodden Field, with a great Number of his
Nobility and Soldiers upon Sept. 9. 1513. Bakers Chron.

16. When Melancthon, with others, was on a time at Spires, Faber Preached, and
spoke many shameful things touching Transubstantiation, and the Worshipping of
Consecrated Bread. Which when Grineus had heard, he came to him, when his
Sermon was done, and said, that for as much as he had heard his Sermon
concerning the Sacrament, he was desirous to speak with him privately about
that matter, which when Faber heard, he Answered with Courteous Words and
Friendly Countenance, that this day was most of him desired, that he should
speak with Grineus, especially concerning such a matter, and bid him home to
his House. The next day after, Grineus suspecting nothing amiss, went his way;
who returning to them, said, that to morrow he should dispute with Faber: But
in the mean time he practicing to entrap Grineus, went to a Noble Man and
opened to him the whole matter, and at length he obtained what this Noble Man
commanded, that the Burgermasters should cast Grineus in Prison. When they had
scarcely begun Dinner, there came an Old Man to the place where they Dined, and
sent for Melancthon to come, and speak with him at the Door; asking him for
Grineus, whether he were within? To whom he made Answer, that he was; he said
moreover, that he was in danger, which if he would avoid, he should fly
forthwith; which when he told Grineus, and counseled him to flee, he did as he
was willed. Melancthon, Dr. Cruciger, and he, Arose from the Table, went out,
their Servants followed, and Grineus went in the middle; they had not passed
four or five hours, but by and by the Servants were where they Lodged, seeking
for Grineus; and not finding him there, they left off searching: He asked many,
if they knew this Man? being desirous to give him thanks for his good Turn. But
none could tell who he was, nor could see him afterward. I think Verily this
Man was an Angel. When they had brought Grineus to the Rhine, he took a Boat,
and passed over in safety. Maul loc. commun. Fol. 17. Doom. warning to the
Judgm. p. 420.

17. Melancthon reported that he knew of a surety by a substantial and credible
Person, that in a Village near to the City of Cignea, a certain Woman commanded
her Son to fetch home the Cattle that were feeding by a Woods side, and when
the Boy had stayed somewhat too long, there fell a great Snow that covered all
the Hills there abouts. Night drew on, neither could the Boy pass those Hills:
The day following, the Parents being no more careful for their Cattle, but for
the Life of their Son, looking for his coming, neither could they by reason of
the depth of the Snow, pass those Hills to seek their Son. The third day they
going forth to seek their Boy, they found him sitting in an open place of the
Wood, where there was no Show, who smiled upon his Parents as they came: And
the Boy being asked why he returned not home? Answered that he looked when it
should be Night, not knowing that a day was already past, neither had he felt
any Annoy, or Tempest of the Snow. And when he was further asked, whether he
had eaten any thing? He Answered, that there came a Man unto him, who gave him
Bread and Cheese. So doubtless, this Man was saved by Angels in the middle of
Winter, and without doubt that Man was an Angel that gave the Boy Bread and
Cheese. Manlius, Folio. 17. Batman's Doom, p. 421.

18. Mr. Patrick Simpson's Wife (Martha Barson) in her last Sickness was sorely
Assaulted by Satan, who suggested to her, that she should be given over into
his hands: And it ended in a Visible Distraction, which for a time grew upon
her: So that, most unlike to her former practice, she would break forth into
dreadful and horrid Expressions, and it was most violent on a Sabbath Morning,
when Mr. Simpson was going to Preach; whereupon, with an heavy Countenance he
stood silent for a time, and at last kneeled down and Prayed, which she no whit
regarded: After which, he turned to the Company that were present, and said,
that he was sure that they who were now Witnesses of that sad hour, should yet
see a Gracious change, and that the Devil's Malice against that poor Woman
should have a shameful toil.

Her Distraction still continued until Tuesday, August the Ninth, which
Morning, at the very dawning of it, he went into his Garden, and shut the Door,
where, for many hours he was alone: But a Godly Woman, one Mrs. Helen Garner,
Wife to one of the Bailiffs of Sterling, who had been with his Wife all
Night, apprehending that Mr. Simpson might much wrong himself by much grief and
fasting, by some help, she did climb over into the Garden: But as she came near
to the place where Mr. Simpson was, she was terrified with an Extraordinary
Noise, which made her fall to the Ground: It seemed to her like a mighty
Rushing of Multitudes running together, and withal, she heard such a Melodious
sound, as made her Judge, that it was more then humane: VVhereupon she prayed
to God to pardon her Rashness, which her Affections to that Good Man of God had
carried her to. Yet afterward, going forwards, she found him lying upon the
ground; she earnestly entreated him to tell her what he had from God? He (whom
she had promised not to reveal it so long as he lived) said, O what am I, being
but Dust and Ashes, that the Holy ministering Spirit should be sent by the Lord
to deliver a message to me! Adding, that he had seen a Vision of Angels, who
did with an audible Voice, give him an Answer from the Lord, concerning his
Wife's condition. And returning into his House, he said to all that were
present, Be of good cheer, for e're ten hours be past, I am sure, that this
Brand shall be plucked out of the Fire. After, praying by his VVife's Bedside,
and making mention of Jacob's wrestling in Prayer, she sat upright in the Bed,
and drawing aside the Curtain, said, Thou art this day Jacob, who have wrestled
and also prevailed: And now God has made good his words, which he spoke this
Morning to you; for I am plucked out of the hands of Satan, and he shall have
no more Power over me. This Interruption made him silent a while (as I remember
my self was in the Case of my Maid, Mary Holland, mentioned before.) But
afterward, with great melting of heart, he proceeded in Prayer, and Magnified
the Riches of Gods Love toward her. And from that hour she spoke most
Comfortably, and Christianly, even to her Death, which was Friday following,
Aug. 13. A. C. 1601. Her last words were with a loud Voice, Come Lord, Into thy
hands I commend my Spirit. Clark's Lives, last Vol. p. 217, 218.

19. In the Year 1539, not far from Sitta in Germany, in the time of a great
Dearth and Famine, a certain Godly Matron having two Sons, and destitute of all
manner of Sustenance, went with her Children to a certain Fountain hard by,
praying unto Almighty God, that he would there relieve their Hunger by his
infinite goodness: As she was going, a certain Man met her by the way, and
saluted her kindly, and asked her whither she was going? who confessed that she
was going to that Fountain there, hoping to be relieved by God, to whom all
things are possible; for if he nourished the Children of Israel in the Desert
40 years, how is it hard for him to nourish me and my Children with a Draught
of Water? And when she had spoken these Words, the Man (which was doubtless an
Angel of God) told her, that seeing her Faith was so constant, she should
return Home, and there should find Six Bushels of Meal for her and her
Children. The Woman returning, found that true which was promised. Beard's
Theat. p. 442.

20. Under the Emperor Mauritius, the City of Antioch was shaken with a
terrible Earthquake, after this manner: There was a certain Citizen so given to
bountifulness to the Poor, that he would never Sup nor Dine, unless he had one
poor Man to be with him at his Table. Upon a certain Evening, seeking for such
a Guest, and finding none, a Grave Old Man met him, in the Marketplace,
clothed in white, with Two Companions with him, whom he entreated to sup with
him: But the Old Man answered him, That he had more need to pray against the
destruction of the City; and presently shook his Handkerchief against One part
of the City, and then against another; and being hardly entreated, forbore the
rest. Which he had no sooner done, but those Two parts of the City, terribly
shaken with an Earthquake, were thrown to the Ground, and Thousands of Men
slain. Which this good Citizen seeng, trembled exceedingly. To whom the Old Man
in white, answered and said, by reason of Charity to the Poor, his House and
Family were preserved. And presently these three Men (which to question were
Angels) vanished out of sight. This Story Sigisbert in his Chronicle reports,
Anno 583.

21. Hottinger tells a strange Story out of Nauclerus and Evagr. to this
purpose; it was an ancient custom at Constantinople, at Communion, to call for
the Young Children that went to School and give them the Parcels of Bread and
Wine that were left; at doing of which, the child of a certain Nobleman, a Jew,
was with the Children, who took of the Bread and Eat with them; his angry
Father, who was a Glass-Maker, put him into an Oven burning hot with Coals, his
Mother after Three Days finding him alive in the Furnace, he told her, a Woman
in Purple habit came often to him, and brought Water to quench the Coals, and
Meat to allay his Hunger. The Mother and the Child were afterward Converted
and Baptized; and the Father Crucified by command of Justinian the Emperor. Mr.
Beard relates the same out of Nicephorus, Lib. 17. Chap. 35.

See more in The Chapters of Miraculous Cures of Diseases, and Earnests of a
Future Retribution, and the last Example in the Chapter of Prediction of Prophets,
etc.

22. Oh! said Mrs. Katharine Stubs, upon her Deathbed, if you saw such
glorious Sight as I see, you would rejoice with me: for I see a Vision of the
Joys of Heaven, and of the Glory that I shall go unto, and I see infinite
Millions of Angels attendant upon me, and watching to carry my Soul into the
Kingdom of Heaven. See her Life.

23. I Remember (says Mr. Increase Mather, in his Disc. of Angels) that once in
Discourse with the Learned Doctor Spencer in Cambridge, concerning his Book of
Prodigies, he said to me, that his Judgment was, That the Evil Angels had
Prenotions of many Future Things, and did accordingly give strange Premonitions
of them. No doubt it is often so, and yet as Lavater, Schottus, and others have
noted, there are sometimes Things signified by Angels, which it is not easy to
determine of what sort those Genii are. What shall be thought of the Phantom
which appeared to General Vesselini, assuring him that he might take the City
of Muran, by the Assistance of a Widow which Lived in that City, which
strangely came to pass accordingly, in the Year 1644. There comes to my mind a
very Unaccountable Thing, which happened at London above Thirty Years ago. It
was this; One Mr. Cutty (an honest Citizen) passing between Milk-street and
Wood-street in Cheap Side, on March 2d, 1664, took up a Letter Sealed; The
Superscription whereof, was these Words following, From Geneva, to a Friend.
Within the Letter these Words were written. This is to give both timely and
speedy Notice, that in the Year 1665, in the latter end of May, shall begin a
Plague, and hold very hot, till the latter end of December, and then cease, but
not quite; and then go on till the latter end of the Spring the next Year. And
in 1665 and 66, putting both together, shall not only happen a Plague, but
great Sea Fights, such as the like was scarce ever heard of; and this shall not
be all, but in the Year 1666, on the Second of September, shall happen a Fire
that shall burn down one of the Eminentest Cities in the World. Mr. Cutty
carried the Letter to the then Lord Mayor. A Reverend Divine in London, who was
of his Acquaintance, had a Copy of it, before the sad Things here Predicted
came to pass; and at my last being at London, was pleased to favor me with it,
as it is here Related. This Account being certainly true, and very surprising, I
thought it not unworthy the Publication.

24. There are sometimes very unaccountable Motions and Impressions on the
Spirits of good men, which are wrought in them by the ministry of Holy Angels,
whose work it is to prevent and disappoint the Designs of Satan and of his evil
Angels. I remember one relates a remarkable Passage of a good man, that when he
was reading in his House, he could not rest in his Spirit, but he must step out
of Doors: which he had no sooner done, but he saw a Child in a Pond of Water,
ready to perish, which would have been gone past recovery, had not he gone out
of his Doors, just at that moment. This Impression must needs be from a good
Angel. And an other like Passage is related in the Life of that Holy Man, Mr.
Dod: One Evening (though he had other work to attend) he could not but he must
got to such a Neighbor's House; when he came to him, he told him he knew not
what he was come for; but he could not rest in his Spirit, until he had visited
him. The poor man was astonished, for he had in the Violence of a Temptation,
put a Rope into his Pocket, with an intent to have destroyed himself, had not
Mr. Dod's thus coming prevented it. Surely an Angel of the Lord was in this
Providence. Bishop Hall speaks of one whom he knew, that having been for
Sixteen Years a Cripple, had these monitions in his Sleep, that he should go
and wash in St. Matherns Well in Cornwell, which he did, and was suddenly
recovered. This he thinks was from Angelical Suggestion. Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, did in a Dream receive the Prescript of a Remedy for his Disease,
which the Physicians could not cure. A Physician of Vratislavium followed the
Counsel he had given him in a Dream, concerning the cure of a Disease which was
to him incurable, and he recovered the Patient. It added to the wonder, that a
few Years after, he met with that Receipt in a Book then newly Printed.
Histories report, that the like to this happened to Philip, and to Galen. If
Angels may Suggest things beneficial unto the minds of Men who are Strangers to
God, much more unto them that fear him! Thus far Mr. Mather.

Converse with Angels and Spirits, Extracted from the Miscellanies of John
Aubery, Esquire;

25 Dr. Richard Nepier was a Person of great Abstinence, Innocence, and Piety:
He spent every Day Two Hours in Family Prayer: When a Patient, or Querent came
to him, he presently went to his Closet to Pray; and told to admiration the
Recovery, or Death of the Patient. It appears by his Papers, that he did
converse with the Angel Raphael, who gave him the Responses.

26. Elias Ashmole, Esquire; had all his Papers, where is contained all his
Practice for about Fifty Years; which he, Mr. Ashmole, carefully bound up,
according to the year of our Lord, in -- Volumes in Folio, which are now
reposited in the Library of the Museum in Oxford. Before the Responses stands
this Mark, viz. R is. which Mr. Ashmole said, was Responsum Raphaelis. The
Angel told him, if the Patient were curable or incurable. There are also
several^ other Queries to the Angel, as to Religion, Transubstantiation, etc.
which I have forgot; I remember one is, Whether the Good Spirits, or the Bad be
most in Number? R is, The Good.

It is to be found there, that he told John Prideaux D. D. Anno 1621, that
Twenty Years hence [1641] he would be a Bishop; and he was so, sc. Bishop of
Worcester.

R is, did resolve him, That Mr. Booth of -- in Cheshire should have a Son that
should inherit; Three Years hence [ sc. Sir George Booth, the first Lord
Delamere] viz. from 1619. Sir George Booth aforesaid, was born December. 18th.
Anno 1622. This I extracted out of Dr. Nepier's Original Diary, then in the
possession of Mr. Ashmole. It is impossible, that the Prediction of Sir George
Booth's Birth could be found any other way, but by Angelical Revelation. This
Dr. Richard Nepier was Rector of Lynford in Bucks, and did practice Physick^
but gave most to the Poor that he got by it. It Is certain, he foretold his own
Death to a Day and Hour; he died Praying upon his Knees, being of a very great
Age, 1634. April the First.

One says, why should one think the Intellectual World less Peopled than the
Material? -- Pliny in his Natural History tells us, that in Africa do sometimes
appear Multitudes of Aerial Shapes, which suddenly Vanish. -- Mr. Richard
Baxter in his certainty of the World of Spirits, has a Discourse of Angels,
and wonders they are so little taken notice of; he has counted in Newman's
Concordance of the Bible the word Angel in above 300 places. -- Thus far Mr.
Aubery.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Appearance of bad Angels, or Demons.
HEre I have a great Task, and yet a spacious Field to turn me in; having to
deal with a Tribe of Men, that have as much Faith as Goodness, and perhaps
little more; and yet being to handle a Point, wherein God himself has taken
care to obviate the Scruples and Infidelity of Ill Men more than in the former
case, where Self-Interest disposes them to a Belief. The Devil in the Serpent
tempting Eve, the Evil Angels sent among the Egyptians, Psalm. 78.49. The Devil
in the case of Job 's Affliction, Job 1.17, 19. of our Savior, Mat. 4. of the
Demoniacs, up and down in the Gospels, etc. One would think, were enough to
startle these Infidel Bravadoes into (at least) a modest fear, and humble
silence and suspension of Judgment. But because they are so obstinate, we shall
here muster up a Legion of Devils to attack and outface their Confidence; and
let them look to it, and consider well with themselves in due time, how they
will be able to stand to the adventure of such a Conflict. I shall not stay to
tell all the Stories at large, that I meet with, but give a short Epitome of
them, enough to satisfy any People of an unbiassed Judgment, and clear
Intellectuals: And if at last they do not surrender up their Faith, I shall be
ready to say, as John 10.20. Themselves have Devils, and are mad.

(1.) Among the Ancients we have several Stories of such Apparitions and
Specter.

1. When Cassius and Brutus were to pass out of Asia into Europe, and to
transport their Army into the Opposite Continent, and horrible Spectacle is
said to appear unto Brutus in the dead of the Night, the Moon not shining very
bright, and all the Army being in silence, a black Image of a huge and horrid
Body standing by him silently, is said to offer itself to Brutus; his Candle
being almost out, and he musing in his Tent about the Issue of the War, Brutus
asked, what Man or God he was? The Spirit answered, O Brutus, I am thy Evil
Genius, and thou shall see me again at Philippi. Brutus replied, I will meet
thee there then. The Spirit disappeared, but according to his Promise, appeared
again in the Fields of Philippi to Brutus, the Night before the last Fight.
Plutarch in Vit. Bruit, p. 1000. Camerar. Medit. Hist. l. 4. etc.

2. The same Cassius in the very same Battle, in the Field of Philippi, is
reported by Historians to have seen one in the shape of Julius Caesar, of a
more than ordinary height, coming toward him on Horseback, with an angry
Countenance, and a forced Gallop to strike him; which struck such a Fear into
him, that he turned back upon his Enemies, and soon after killed himself.
Camerar. ibid. l. 4. p. 289.

3. The like befell Cassius of Parma, a renowned Poet, who followed the side of
Brutus and Cassius (say Acron and Porphyrio) being Colonel of a Regiment of
Foot. His Masters being dead, he retired to Athens, where Qu. Varus sent for
that purpose by Augustus, slew him. But Valerius Maximus adds, That whilst he
was at Athens, one Night being overwhelmed with cares, he thought that he saw a
very great Black Man, with long Hair, and his Beard uncombed, stand before him;
who being asked what he was, answered, I am the Evil Spirit. Cassius affrighted
with that fearful Countenance, and so fearful a Name, called aloud for his
Servants, asked if they saw such a Person come into his Chamber, or go out?
they all swore, they saw none. VVhereupon he laid him down, and began to take
some rest; but the same Phantome appeared again, and so awakened him, that he
called for a Light, and charged his Servants not to leave him. Between this
Night and his Death, there passed not many Days. Idem lib. 4. ex val. Max.

4. Dio of Syracuse before he was killed by those that conspired against him,
sitting one evening very Pensive and Solitary in his Gallery, a sudden Noise
made him lift up his Head, and looking toward the other side of the Gallery,
he espied a great Woman of such a Face and Dressing, as one of the Furies is
represented with, sweeping the place; upon which in great Amazement, he called
his Friends and wished them to stay with him all Night, fearing the return of
the Spectre. A while after a young Son of his, in a Transport of Passion, threw
himself headlong from the Top of the House and was killed. Plutarch. in vit.
Dion. et ex eo Camerar. medit. Hist. l. 4.

5. Cornelius Sylla being in the Country, saw an ill Spirit that called him,
which in the Morning he told his Friends, made his Will, Sealed it in the
Evening, and the Night following died of a Fever, Aged Sixty Years. Camerar.
Ibid. l. 4. Wanley's wonders, etc. Book 6.

6. Xerxes had a Spectre appeared twice to him in his Sleep, stirring him up to
make War upon the Grecians, and the last time, with a pair of burning Tongues
in his Hands, as if he would have put out his Eyes, because he opposed the
Counsels of War. Ibid.

7. Julian the Apostate, the Night before he was declared Emperor, told his
Friends, that as he reposed himself, there stood before him as it were a
Genius, or Familiar Spirit, saying to him in pretty rough Terms, -- Julian, I
have a long time, without making any ado, waited at thy Lodging-door, desiring
to make thee Great; sometimes I have gone away, as if no reckoning had been
made of me; if now thou reject me, tho many are of the same mind to advance
thee, I will take my leave and go away very sorrowful: For the rest, mark this
well, that I will not tarry much longer with thee. And a little before he was
killed in the War against the Persians, the same Genius, or Demon appeared to
him again, all ragged and filthy to look upon, with a horn of plenty in his
hand covered with a Linen Cloth, walking very sadly a-long by the Hangings of
his Tent. Amm. Marcell. l. 20. Camerar. medit. Hist. l. 4. Lavater de Spectr.
c. 12. Wanley's Wonders of the little World. Book. 6. p. 612.

8. Curtius Rufus being come into Africa with the Governor, being yet of
little Credit or Reputation, walking one day at Noon in the Portico, or Gallery
before his House, a Woman greater and fairer then ordinary appeared to him,
whereat he was abashed; but she said to him, I will foretell thee thy Fortunes;
thou shall return to Rome, shall be advanced to great Office, shall be chosen
Proconsal and Governor of Africa, and shall die in that Dignity: Plin.
Secundus lib. 3. Epist. Camerar. Ibid. Wanley, etc. Ibid.

9. A Woman pretending to have the Holy Ghost, proved a Witch, and did many
Wonders: She had a gift of Prayer, and did Baptize, and Administer the Lords
Supper in the ordinary way, etc. Epist. Firmil. ad Cypr. 75. p. 238. This is
much like the story of Magdalena Cracia, etc.

10. To come nearer to our own times; as Luther was once walking in his Garden,
the Devil appeared to him in the shape of a Black Boar, but he slighted him,
and so the Demon Vanished away. Another time, as he was sitting in a certain
place on his Stool, there was a great stone over his head in the Vault, which
being stayed up Miraculously whilst he Sat there, so soon as he was up,
immediately it fell upon the place where he Sat, being sufficient to have
crushed him in pieces, if it had light upon him. Clark's marrow of Eccl. Hist.
p. 145. And again, a young Man about Wittemberg, being kept bare and needy by
his Father, was tempted by the Devil to give himself to him, upon condition to
have his wish satisfied with money, and thereupon an Obligation was made by the
young Man, Written with his own Blood, and delivered to the Devil. But
presently after he began to decay in his Health, so that (the thing being
suspected) he was brought before Luther, and Examined; who at last made
confession of the whole matter. upon which Luther calling the whole
Congregation together, where he Prayed with so much Earnestness and Affection,
that the Devil was at last compelled to throw in his Obligation at the VVindow.
Ibid.

11. It is credibly reported, that the Devil in the likeness of a faithful
Ministers, (at St. Ives near Bos^on in Lincolnshire) came to one that was in
trouble of Mind, telling her the longer she lived, the worse it would be for
her; and therefore advising her to Self-murder: An eminent Person still living
had the Account of this matter from Mr. Cotton (the Famous Teacher of both
Bos^ons.) He was well acquainted with that Minister, who related to him the
whole Story, with all the Circumstances of it: For Mr. Cotton was so affected
with the Report, as to take a Journey on purpose to the Town where this
happened, that so he might obtain a satisfactory Account about it, which he
did. Some Authors say, that a Doemon appeared in the form of Sylvanus (
Hierom's Friend) attempting a dishonest thing, the Devil thereby designing to
blast the Reputation of a Famous Bishop.

12. Melancthon, in his Epistle to Hubert Languetus, says, Twelve years ago
there was a Woman in Saxony, that never Learnt Letters, and yet when she was
Acted by the Devil, after Torment she spoke Greek and Latin of the future Saxon
War.

Sixteen years ago there was in that Market, a Girl, that when she pulled Hairs
from Clothes, they were turned into Mark-mony, which the Girl devoured with
long and loud Gnashing of Teeth; and those Figures (or Shapes) of Money
sometimes suddenly snatched out of her Hands, were true Money, which are yet
kept by some; and after the Girl felt great Torment! But she was delivered from
all that Disease after some Months, and yet lives in Health: But frequent
Prayers of Godly Persons were made for her, and other Ceremonies were purposely
then omitted.] Thus Melancthon. Epist. l. 2. p. 550, 551.

(2.) In Modern times we have a Multitude of Instances, as,

1. John Winnick of Molseworth in Huntingtonshire, being Examined, April. 11.
1646. Confessed as follows, having lost him Purse with Seven Shillings in it,
for which he suspected one in the Family where he Lived, he says, that on a
Friday while he was making Hay-bottles in the Barn, and Swore and Cursed and
Raged, and wished to himself that some wise Body would help him to his Purse and
Money again, there appeared unto him a Spirit in the shape of a Bear, but not
so big as a Coney, who promised, upon condition that he would fall down and
Worship him, he would help him to his Purse. He assented to it, and the Spirit
told him to Morrow about this time, he should find his Purse upon the floor
where he made Bottles, and that he would then come himself also; which was done
accordly: And thus at the time appointed recovering his Purse, he fell down
upon his knees to the Spirit, and said, My Lord and my God I thank you. This
Spirit brought then with him two others, in the shape the one of a white Cat,
the other of a Coney, which at the command of the Bear-Spirit he Worshipped
also. The Bear Spirit told him he must have his Soul when he dyed, that he must
suck of his Body, that he must have some of his Blood of seal the Covenant. To
all which he agreed, and so the Bear Spirit leaping up to his shoulder, pricked
him on the head, and thence took Blood. After that, they all three Vanished,
but ever since came to him once every twenty four hours; and sucked on his
Body, where the Marks are found. And that they had continually done thus for
this twenty nine years together. That all these things should be a mere Dream,
is a conceit more slight and foolish then any Dream possibly can be. For that
receiving of his purse was a palpable and sensible pledge of the truth of all
the rest. And it is incredible that such a series of Circumstances, backed with
Twenty Nine years Experience of being sucked and visited daily, sometimes in
the day time, most commonly by Night, by the same three Familiars, should be
nothing but the hanging together of so many Melancholy Conceits and Fancies.
More's Antid. against Atheism. l. 3. c. 6.

2. To that of John Winnick, it will not be amiss to add a more late and more
notable Narration concerning one Ann Bodenham, a Witch, who Lived in
Fisherton-Anger, adjacent to the City of New Sarum in the County of Wilts, who
was Arraigned and Executed at Salisbury, 1653. He that has a mind to read the
Story more at large, he may consult Edmond Bower. But I shall only set down
here what is most material to our present purpose, partly out of him, and
partly from others who were then at the Assizes, and had private Conference
with the Witch, and spoke also with the Maid that gave evidence against her.

This Ann Bodenham, it seems, concealed not her skill in foretelling things to
come, and helping Men to their stolen Goods, and other such like feats, that
the more notable sort of Wizards and Witches, are said to pretend to and to
practice.

Amongst others that resorted to her, there was one Ann Styles, Servant to
Rich. Goddard, Esquire; of the Close in New Sarum, sent by Mr. Mason, this
Goddard's Son in Law (he having a design to commence a Lawsuit against his
Father) to Learn of the Witch what would be the event of the Suit. Who being
asked by the Maid, who had three Shillings to give her for her pains, she took
her Staff and there drew it about the House, making a kind of a Circle, and
then took a Book, and carrying it over the Circle with her hands, and taking a
green Glass, did lay it upon the Book, and placed in the Circle an Earthen Pan
of Coals, wherein she threw something, which burning, caused a very noisome
stink, and told the Maid she should not be afraid of what she should then see,
for now they would come (they are the words she used) and so calling Beelzebub,
Tormentor, Satan, and Lucifer, appear, there suddenly Arose a very high VVind,
which made the House shake, and presently the Back door of the House flying
open, there came five Spirits, as the Maid supposed, in the likeness of ragged
Boys, some bigger then others, and ran about the House, where she had drawn the
Staff; and the VVitch threw down upon the ground Crumbs of Bread, which the
Spirits picked up, and leapt over the Pan of Coals oftentimes, which she set in
the midst of the Circle, and a Dog and a Cat of the Witches Danced with them;
and after sometime the VVitch looked again in her Book, and threw some great
white Seeds upon the ground, which the said Spirits picked up, and so in a
short time the VVind was laid, and the VVitch going forth at her back Door, the
Spirits Vanished. After which they VVitch told the Maid, that Mr. Mason should
demand Fifteen Hundred Pound, and one Hundred and Fifty Pound per Annum, of Mr.
Goddard, and if he denied it, he should Prosecute the Law against him, and be
gone from his Father, and then he should gain it: With which message the Maid
returned and acquainted Mr. Mason. The same Maid being sent again to her from
the same Party, to enquire in what part of the House the Poison was, that
should be given her Mistress: Hereupon she took her Stuff as before, and making
therewith a Circle, the VVind rose forthwith; then taking a Beesome, she swept
over the Circle, and made another, and looking in her Book and Glass, as
formerly, and using some words softly to her self, she stood in the Circle and
said, Beelzebub, Tormentor, Lucifer and Satan, appear: There appeared first a
Spirit in the shape of a little Boy, as she conceived, which then turned into
another shape something like a Snake, and then into the shape of a shagged Dog
with great Eyes, which went about in the Circle; and in the Circle she set an
earthen Pan of Coals, wherein she threw something which burned and stank, and
then the Spirit Vanished. After which the Witch took her Book and Glass again,
and showed the Maid in the Glass, Mrs. Sarah Goddard's Chamber, the color of
the Curtains, and the Bed turned up the wrong way, and under that part of the
Bed where the Bolster lay, she showed the Poison in a white Paper. The Maid
afterward returned home, and acquainted Mistress Rosewel with what the Witch
had showed her in a Glass; that the Poison lay under Mistress Sarahs Bed, and
also spoke to her that they might go together and take it away. When the Maid
was another time sent to procure some exemplary Punishment upon Mr. Goddard's
two Daughters, who yet were unjustly, as it seems, aspersed with the suspicion
of endeavoring to Poison their Mother in Law; The Witch receiving the Wenches
errand, made a Circle, as formerly, and set her Pan of Coals therein, and burnt
somewhat that stunk extremely, and took her Book and Glass as before is
related, and said, Beelzebub, Tormentor, Lucifer and Satan appear, and then
appeared five Spirits, as she conceived, in the shape of little Ragged Boys,
which the VVitch commanded to appear, and go along with the Maid to a Meadow,
at Wilton, which the VVitch showed in a Glass, and there to gather Vermin and
Dill; and forthwith the Ragged Boys ran away before the Maid, and she followed
them to the said Meadow, and when they came thither, the Ragged Boys looked
about for the Herbs, and removed the Snow in two or three places before they
could find any, and at last they found some, and brought it away with them; and
then the Maid and the Boys returned again to the VVitch, and found her in the
Circle pairing her Nails; and then she took the said Herbs, and dried the same,
and made Powder of some, and dried the Leaves of other, and threw Bread to the
Boys, and they Eat and Danced as formerly, and then the VVitch reading in a
Book they Vanished away: And the VVitch gave the Maid in one Paper the Powder,
in another the Leaves, and in the Third the paring of the Nails; and which the
Maid was to give her Mistress: The Powder was to put in the young Gentlewomens,
Mrs. Sarah, and Mrs. Ann Goddard's Drink or Broth, to rot their Guts in their
Bellies; the Leaves to rub about the Brimbs of the Pot, to make their Teeth
fall out of their Heads; and the paring of the Nails, to make them drunk and
mad. And when the Maid came Home, and delivered it to her Mistress, and told
her the Effects of the Powder, and the other things, her Mistress laughed, and
said, that it is a very brave thing indeed. But yet she had the discretion not
to make use of it.

This Powder was shown at the Assizes, so that is could be no Fancy or Dream)
together with a piece of Money that she received of the Spirits, which one of
them first bit, and gave it to the VVitch, and then the VVitch gave it to the
Maid. The Hole also in her Finger was then shown, out of which, Blood was
squeezed to subscribe a Covenant with the Devil; as you may see in the Fourth
and Last bout of Conjuring the VVitch performed in the Maids presence. For she
being advised by Mr. Goddard's Household to go to London, she went to the
Witches first before she quitted the Country, who being made acquainted with
her Journey, asked her whether she would go to London High or Low? To which she
replied, what do you mean by that? She answered, if you will go on High, you
shall be carried to London in the Air, and be there in Two Hours; but if you go
a low, you shall be taken at Sutton Town's End, and before, unless you have
help: But before the Maid departed, the VVitch earnestly desired the Maid to
live with her, and told her if she would do so, she would teach her to do as
she did, and that she should never be taken. Then the Maid asked her, what she
should do? She answered, you shall know presently, and forthwith she appeared
in the shape of a great black Cat, and lay along by the Chimney; at which the
Maid being much affrighted, she came into her own Shape again, and told her, I
see you are afraid, and I see you are willing to be gone; and told her, if she
was, she should say so, and not speak against her Conscience; and the Maid
replied, she was willing to go, and not dwell with the VVitch: Then the VVitch
said, she must seal unto her Body and Blood not to discover her; which she
promising to do, she forthwith made a Circle, as formerly she had done; and
looking in her Book, called Beelzebub, Tormentor, Lucifer, and Satan, appear.
Then appeared Two Spirits, in the likeness of great Boys, with long shagged
Hair, and stood by her, looking over her Shoulder; and the VVitch took the
Maio's Forefinger of her Right Hand in her Hand, and pricked it with a Pin,
and squeezed out the Blood, and put it into a Pen, and put the Pen in the Maids
Hand to write in a great Book, and one of the Spirits laid his Hand or Claw
upon the Witch whilst the Maid wrote; and when she had done writing, whilst
their Hands were together, the Witch said Amen, and made the Maid say Amen, and
the Spirits said Amen, Amen. And the Spirits Hand did feel could to the Maid as
it touched her Hand, when the Witches Hand and hers were together writing: And
then the Spirit gave a piece of Silver (which he first bit) to the Witch, who
gave it to the Maid; and also stuck Two Pins in the Maids Head-cloaths, and bid
her keep them, and bid her be gone; and said also, I will vex the Gentlewoman
well enough, as I did the Man in Clarington Park, which I made walk about with
a Bundle of Pales on his Back all Night in a Pond of Water, and could not lay
them down till the next Morning.

All these things the Maid deposed upon Oath; and I think it now beyond all
Controversy, evident, that unless she did knowingly forswear her self, that
they are certainly true: For they cannot be imputed to any dreaming Fancy, nor
melancholy. Now that the Maid did not forswear herself, nor invent these
Narrations she swore to, many Arguments offer themselves for Eviction.

As first, that it is altogether unlikely, that a sorry Wench that could
neither write nor read, should be able to excogitate such Magical Forms and
Ceremonies, with all the Circumstances of the effects of them, and declare them
so punctually, had she not indeed seen them done before her Eyes.

Secondly, if she had been so cunning at inventing Lies, she could not but have
had so much wit as to frame them better for her own Advantage, and for theirs
by whom she was employed, or told so much only of the truth, as would have been
no Prejudice to her self, nor any else to have it revealed.

For in brief, the case stood thus; her Mistress either had, or feigned her
self to have a Suspicion that her Two Daughters in Law, Mrs. Sarah, and Mrs.
Ann Goddard, complotted to poison her. Hereupon this Maid, Anne Styles, was
sent to the Witch, upon pretense to know when this Poisoning would be, and how
to prevent it; and at the Second time she consulted her, the VVitch sent her to
the Apothecaries to buy her some white Arsenick, and bring it her, which she
taking, told her she would burn it, and so prevent the poisoning of her
Mistress. The buying of this Arsenick, was the great occasion of the Maids
flying; for it coming to the knowledge of the Two Sisters, how they were
suspected to endeavor the poisoning of their Mother, and that they had bought
an Ounce and half of Arsenick lately at the Apothecaries; they, to clear
themselves from this Suspicion, made diligent Enquiry at all the Apothecaries
Shops throughout Sarum, and at last found where the Poison was bought. Hereupon
the Maid was desired by her Mistress to go away, and shift for her self, to
avoid that trouble and disgrace that might come upon them, if she should stay
and be examined before some Justice. While she was upon her Journey, Mr.
Chandler, Son in Law to Mr. Goddard, hearing how his Mother in Law was in
danger of being poisoned, and that a Servant of hers that had bought the Poison
was fled, he forthwith, with another Man, made after her, overtook her near
Sutton, had her there into an Inn, where she confessed what has been above
related. Which Confession, I say, cannot be any feignment or forged Tale, but
certain Truth, it making nothing for the Parties Advantage, or their that
employed her, but rather against them, and mainly against her self; when as if
she had confessed the buying of the Arsenick, with the purpose of preventing
her Mistress being poisoned, by the help and skill of the VVitch or
VVise-VVoman, it might have gone for a tolerable piece of Folly, and could not
seem so criminal and execrable as these other Acts do. Nothing therefore but a
guilty Conscience, and the power of truth, did extort from her this impartial
Confession, which thus every way touches her Friends, her Self and the VVitch.

Thirdly, that her Compact with the Devil was no Fable, but a sure Truth (and
if that be true, there is no reason to doubt of the rest) was abundantly
evinced by the real effects of it. For after she had delivered the Piece of
money abovementioned, and the Two Pins to Mr, Chandler, she said she should be
troubled for not keeping these things secret: For the Devil told her, so long
as she kept them secret, she should never be troubled; but now she said, having
revealed them, she feared she should be troubled. At her Recovery of the first
Fit she fell into, both Mr. Chandler, and William Atwood, the man that went
with him, saw a black Shade come from her, whereupon presently she came to
herself.

Again, she was so strong in her Fits, that Six Men or more could not hold her;
and once as they were holding her, she was caught up from them so high, that
her Feet touched their Breasts. As also at another time about midnight, she
being miserably tormented, and crying out, the Devil will carry me away, she
was pulled from them that held her, and cast from the low Bed where she lay, to
the top of an high Bed, with her Clothes torn off her Back, and a piece of her
Skin torn away. The Candle in the Room standing on the Table, was thrown down,
and put out; at which time there being a little Boy that was almost asleep, but
with this noise being affrighted, had no power with the rest to go out of the
Room, stayed there, and saw a Spirit in the likeness of a great black man, with
no Head, in the Room, scuffing with the maid, who took her and set her into a
Chair, and told her that she must go with him, he was come for her Soul, she
had given it to him. But the maid answered, that her Soul was none of her own
to give; and he had already got her Blood, but as for her Soul, he should never
have it; and after a while, tumbling and throwing about of the maid, he
vanished away.

And that which the Boy heard and saw, was no Fancy of his own, but a real
object of his Senses; the Witches condition in another Chamber at the same
time, does not obscurely argue; for she was then seen with her Clothes off, in
her Fetters, running about like mad, and being asked why she ran about the
Room, she replied, she could not keep her Bed, but was pulled out by violence;
and being asked the Reason why, she replied, pray you what is the matter in
your Chamber? Nothing, said they, but a Child is not well: To which she
answered, Do not you lie to me, for I know what is the matter as well as your
selves.

But to return to the maid, from whom we may draw further Arguments relating
also to the Witch; as that, when the maid had not for many days and nights
together, taken any rest, and being then under most grievous hurryings and
tortures of the Body, the Witch being brought into the Room where she lay, the
Design unknown to her, and the time of her entering, yet so soon as the Witch
had set one Foot into the Room, she gave a most hideous glance with her Eyes,
and shut them presently after, falling asleep in a moment, and slept about
Three Hours, so fast, that when they would have wakened her, they could not by
any art or violence whatever; as by stopping her Breath, putting things up her
Nostrils, holding her upright, striking of her, and the like. The Witch also
declared her unwillingness that she should be wakened, crying out, O pray you
by no means awake the maid, for if she should awake, I should be torn in
pieces, and the Devil would fetch me away bodily. And a further Evidence, that
this sleep of the maid did some way depend upon the Witch, is, that so soon as
the Witch had gone from under the Roof where she was, the maid wakened of her
self; and so soon as the maid awakened, and was at ease (the Devil, as she
said, having gone out of her Stomach, but doing her no violence, only making
her body tremble a little) the Witch began to roar and cry out, The Devil will
tear me in pieces. These things you may read more fully and particularly in the
Narration of Edmond Bower, who was an Eyewitness of them.

Fourthly and Lastly, her Behavior at the Assizes, when she gave Evidence
against the Witch, was so earnest and serious, with that strength of mind, and
free and confident Appeals to the Witch her self, that as I was informed of
those that were Spectators of that Transaction, it had been Argument enough to
the unprejudiced, that she swore nothing but what she was assured was true. And
those Floods of Tears, and her bitter Weepings after Sentence was passed on the
Witch, and her bewailing of her own wickedness and madness, and professing her
willingness notwithstanding, if it might be done without sin, that the VVitch
might be reprieved, may further wash away all suspicion of either fraud or
malice.

Nor can the Witches denying (even to her Dying Day) what the maid swore to
en^^vate her Testimony: For the maid tells the whole truth, as it was, even to
the hazard of her own Life; which the Witch indeed denies, but for the saving
of hers. And it is no wonder that one that would bid a Pox on the Hangman, when
he desired her to forgive him at her Death, should lie, and impudently deny any
thing to save her own Life. I think it might be evidently evinced, that she was
a Witch, from what she undoubtedly both did and spoke. As for Example, from her
showing of the Maid in a Glass, the shapes of sundry Persons, and their Actions
and Postures in several Rooms in her Master's House, whither when she had
returned from the Witch, she told them punctually what they had been doing in
her Absence; which made Elizabeth Rosewell, one of the Family, profess, that
she thought Mrs. Bodenham was either a Witch, or a woman of God.

Besides what happened to her in reference to the Fits of the Maid, which has
been already insisted upon, are shrewd Suspicions of her being a VVitch. As
also what she boasted of to Mr. Tucker's Clark, concerning a Purse that hung
about her Neck in a green String, that she could do many Feats with it, and
that if he would give her half a Dozen of Ale, she would make a Toad spring out
of it. Her Confession to Mr. Langely of Sarum, that she lived with Dr. Lamb,
and learnt the art of raising Spirits from him, which she confessed also to
Edmond Bower, to whom also she acknowledged her skill of curing Diseases by
Charms and Spells, that she could discover sto^en Goods, and show any one the
Thief in a Glass; and being asked by him for the Red Book half wrote over with
Blood, being a Catalogue of those that had sealed to the Devil, she denied not
the knowledge of the Book, but said it was with one in Hampshire. She also
professed that she used many good Prayers, and said the Creed backwards and
forwards, and that she prayed to the Planet Jupiter for the curing of Diseases.

She also acknowledged she had a Book, whereby she raised Spirits, calling it a
Book of Charms, and said it was worth Thousands of other Books, and that there
was a particular Charm in it for the finding of a Treasure hid by the old Earl
of Pembroke in the North part of Wilton Garden.

To another Party, she being asked by him, whether there were any Spirits, she
made this Reply, that she was sure there were, and confirmed it to him by
several Passages of late, and particularly by that of one forced to walk about
all Night, with a bundle of Pales on his Back, in a Pond of Water, which is
mentioned at the end of the Fourth Conjuration above recited. She did also
highly magnify her own Art to him, venturing at Astrological Terms and
Phrases, and did much scorn and blame the ignorance of the People, averring to
him with all earnestness and confidence, that there was no hurt in these
Spirits, but that they would do a man all good Offices, attending upon him, and
guarding him from evil all his Life long.

But certainly her ragged Boys were no such, who discharged the maid from
keeping the Commandments of God, and told her they would teach her a better
way, as she also confessed to the same Party.

Add unto all this, that this Ann Bodenham was searched both at the Goal, and
before the Judges at the Assizes, and there was found on her Shoulder a certain
Mark or Teat about the length and bigness of the Nipple of a Woman's Breast,
and hollow and soft as a Nipple, with an hole on the top of it. Dr. Moor's
Antid. against Atheism, l. 3. c. 7.

3. In 1645, there was a notable Discovery of several Witches in Essex, and
among others one Elizabeth Clark was one; of whom, because we have occasion to
speak elsewhere, we shall therefore pass her over here in silence. Anne Leach
of Misley in Essex, was another, concerning whom, see the Story in short, in
the Chapter of Satan's Permission to hurt the Good in their Estates. Also
Hellen the Wife of Thomas Clark was another, and Daughter to Ann Leach. This
Hellen was accused at the same time. Richard Glascock's Wife of Mannintree,
deposed, that there happening some difference between Edward Parsley's Wife,
and this Hellen; she heard Hellen say, as she passed by their Door, that Mary
their eldest Daughter should rue for it; whereupon the maid instantly fell
sick, and died six VVeeks after: Edward Parsley her Father confirmed the same,
and said he did verily believe Hellen Clark was the cause of her Death; who
being her self examined, confessed, that about Six Weeks before, the Devil
appeared to her in her House, in the likeness of a white Dog, and that she
called this Imp or Familiar Spirit Elimanzer, and that she often fed it, and
that the Spirit spoke to her very audibly, and bid her deny Jesus Christ, which
she did then assent to, but denied that she killed the young maid. She was
Executed at Mannintree, Apr. 15. 1645.

4. Anne West, and Rebecca her Daughter, were likewise of this black Society,
against whom Prudence, the Wife of Thomas Heart, of Lawford in Essex, deposed
upon Oath, that about Eight weeks before, going on Sunday to the Parish Church,
about half a mile from her House, being about Twenty weeks gone with Child, and
to her thinking, very well and healthy, upon a sudden she was taken with great
Pains, and miscarried before she came Home And about Two months after, one
Night when she was in Bed, something fell down upon her Right Side, but being
dark, she could not discover its shapes, and that she was presently taken lame
on that side, with extraordinary Pains and burning, and was certainly persuaded
that Anne and Rebecca West, were the cause of her Pains, having expressed much
Malice toward her, and counted her their greatest Enemy.

Mr. John Edes, a Minister, deposed, That Rebecca West confessed to him, that
about Seven Years before, she began to have familiarity with the Devil (by the
instigation of her Mother Anne West) and that he appeared in several Shapes: As
once like a proper young man, who desired to have familiarity with her,
promising that he would then do what she desired, and avenge her on her
Enemies, requiring her also to deny God, and put her faith and trust in him;
which being agreed to, she ordered him to avenge her on one Thomas Heart of
Lawford, by killing his Son; who was soon after taken sick and died: VVhereupon
Rebecca told the Minister, she thought the Devil could do like God, in
destroying whom he pleased: After which, she gave him Entertainment, and he lay
with her as a man: She likewise confessed to him, that when she lived at
Riverhall in Essex, her Mother came and told her, The Barley Corn was picked
up, meaning that the Son of one George Francis, a chief Inhabitant of that Town
was Dead, and his Father very much suspected he was bewitched to Death, and her
Mother hearing of it, said; Be it unto him according to his Faith.

Mr. Matthew Hopkins deposed upon Oath, that going to the Prison where Rebecca
West and five others were, he asked her how she first came to be a Witch, who
told him, that her Mother and she going one Evening after Sunset toward
Mannintree, her Mother charged her to keep secret whatever she saw, which she
promising to do, they went both to the House of Elizabeth Clark, where they
found her together with Ana Leach, Elizabeth Gooding and Hellen Clark, and that
Instantly the devil appeared in the shape of a Dog, then came two Kitlins, and
after them two Dogs more, who all seemed to reverence Elizabeth Clark, skipping
into her lap and kissing her, and then Kissed all in the Room except her self;
Whereupon one of the Witches asked her Mother if her Daughter were Acquainted
with the Business, who assuring them of her secrecy, Ann Leach pulled out a
Book and Swore her not to reveal any thing she saw or heard, and if she did,
she should endure more torments than there could be in Hell; Whereupon she
again engaged to be silent; They told her she must never confess any thing, tho
the Rope were about her Neck, and she ready to be Hanged; To which after she
had given her absolute Engagement, the Devil leapt up into her Lap and Kissed
her, promising to perform whatever she would desire. About halt a year after
the Devil appeared as she was going to Bed, and said he would marry her, which
she could not refuse, whereupon he Kissed her, but was as cold as Clay, and
then took her by the Hand, Leading her about the room, and promised to be her
Loving Husband till Death, and to avenge her of all her enemies; She likewise
obliging her self to be his Obedient Wife till Death, and to deny God and
Christ Jesus; She confessed that after this she sent him to kill the Son of
Thomas Heart, who died within a Fortnight, and thereupon she took the Devil for
her God, and thought he could as God.

Rebecca West, being likewise Examined before the Justices at Mannintree,
confessed that all was true concerning their Meeting at Elizabeth Clarks, where
they spent some time in Praying to their Familiar Spirits, and then every one
made their desires known to them; Elizabeth Clark requested her Spirit, that
Mr. Edwards might be met withal at a Bridge near her House, and that his Horse
might be frighted and he thrown down and never rise again; Mr. Edwards deposed,
that at the same place his Horse started and greatly endangered him, and he
heard something about the House Cry, Ah, Ah, much like a Polecat, and that with
great difficulty he saved himself from being thrown off his Horse; Elizabeth
Gooding desired her Imp to kill Robert Jaylors Horse for suspecting her to be a
Witch, which was done accordingly; Hellen Clark required to kill some Hogs of a
Neighbors; Ann Leach, that a Cow might be Lamed, and Ann West her Mother,
desired her Spirit to free her from all her enemies, and to have no trouble;
And she her self desired that Thomas Hearts Wife might be taken Lame of her
right side; after which they departed, appointing the next Meeting at Elizabeth
Goodings House; for these and several other Notorious Crimes, Ann West was
Sentenced and Executed at Mannintree; Elizabeth Gooding at Chelmsford; and the
Bill found against Rebecca West by the Grand Jury, but was acquitted by the
Jury of Life and Death. Ibid p. 14.

5. Rose Hallybread was another of this black Regiment, against whom Robert
Turner of St. Osyth in Essex, deposed, that about eight days before his Servant
was taken Sick, shaking, shrieking and crying out of Rose Hallybread, that she
had bewitched him, and that he sometimes Crowed like a Cock, sometimes barked
like a Dog, and sometimes Groaned violently beyond the ordinary course of
Nature, and tho but a youth, struggled with so much strength that four or five
lusty Men were not able to hold him down in his Bed, and sometimes he would
Sing several strange Songs and Tunes, his Mouth not being opened, nor his Lips
so much as stirring all the time of his Singing.

She being examined, confessed; That about sixteen years before, one Goody
Hagtree brought an Imp to her House, which she entertained, and fed it with
Oat-Meal, and Suckled it on her Body a Year and a half, and then lost it; She
confessed likewise, that about half a year before, one Joyce Boanes brought to
her another. Imp in the likeness of a small gray Bird which she received, and
carried to the House of one Thomas Toakly of St. Osyths, and put it under his
Door, after which Toaklys Son Languished and Died, calling and crying out upon
her, that she was the cause of his Death. She also declared, that about eight
days before, Susan Cock, Margaret Landish, and Joyce Boanes, brought to her
House three Imps, which Joyce taking her Imp too, carried them all four to
Robert Turners, to Torment his Servant, because her refused to give them some
Chips, his Master being a Carpenter, and that he forthwith fell Sick, and often
barkt like a Dog, and she believed those four Imps were the cause of his Death;
Rose Hallybread was for this Wickedness Condemned to be Hanged, but Died in
Chelmsford Goal, May 9. 1645. Ibid. p. 16.

Susan Lock was another of the Society, concerning whom see more in the Chap.
of Satan's Permission to hurt the Innocent in their Estates.

6. Much about the same time in Huntingtonshire, Elizabeth Weed of great
Catworth, being Examined before Robert Bernard and Nicholas Pedley, Esquire;
Justices of the Peace, March 31. 1646. Said, that about Twenty one years
before, as she was one Night going to Bed, there appeared to her three Spirits;
one like a young Man, and the other two in the shape of Puppies, one white and
the other black; He that was in the form of a youth spoke to her, and Demanded,
Whether she would deny God and Christ? which she agreed to; The Devil then
offered her to do what mischief she would require of him, provided she would
Covenant, he should have her Soul after Twenty one years, which she granted;
She confessed further, that about a week after, at Ten a Clock at Night he came
to her with a Paper, asking whether she were willing to Seal the Covenant? she
said she was; then he told her it must be done with her Blood, and so pricked
her under the left Arm till it bled, with which she scribled, and immediately a
great lump of Flesh rise on her Arm, in the same place, which increased ever
since. After which he came to Bed, and had Carnal Knowledge of her then, and
many times afterward; The other two Spirits came into the Bed likewise, and
sucked upon other parts of her Body where she had Teats, and that the Name of
one was Lilly, and the other Priscil; One of which was to hurt Man, Woman, or
Child, and the other to destroy what Cattle she desired, and the young Man was
to lie with her, as he did often; And says, that Lilly, according to the
Covenant, did kill the Child of Mr. Henry Bedel of Catworth, as she required
him to do when she was angry, tho she does not now remember for what, and that
about two or three days before, she sent him to kill Mr. Bedel himself, who
returned and said, he had no Power, and that another time she sent the same
Spirit to hurt Edward Musgrove of Catworth, who likewise returned saying, He
was not able; And that she sent her Spirit Priscill to kill two Horses and two
Cows of Mr. Musgroves, and Thomas Thorps, in that Town, which was done
accordingly; And being asked when the one and twenty years would be out? she
said, To the best of my Remembrance, about low Sunday next; Being further
demanded, why she did so constantly resort to Church, and to hear the Sermons
of Mr. Pool the Minister? she said, She was well pleased with his Preaching,
and had a desire to be rid of that unhappy Burden which was upon her. Witches
of Huntington, p. 2.

7. About the year of our Lord, 1632. (As near as I can Remember, having lost
my Notes, and the Copy of the Letter to Sergeant Hutton, but I am sure that I
do most perfectly remember the substance of the Story) near unto Chester, in
the street, there lived one Walker, a young Man of Good Estate, and a Widower,
who had a young Woman to his Kinswoman, that kept his House, who was by the
Neighbors suspected to be with Child, and was toward the Dark of the Evening,
one Night, sent away with one Mark Sharp, who was a Collier, or one that dug
Coals under Ground, and one that had been born in Blakeburn-Hundred in
Lancashire; And so she was not heard of for a long time, and no Noise, or
little, was made about it. In the Winter time after, one James Graham, or Grime
(for so in that Country they call them) being a Miller, and living about two
Miles from the place where Walker lived, was one Night alone very late in the
Mill, grinding Corn; and as, about twelve or one a Clock at Night, he came down
the Stairs from having been putting Corn in the Hopper, the Mill doors being
shut, there stood a Woman upon the midst of the Floor, with her hair about her
head hanging down and all Bloody, with five large Wounds on her head. He being
much affrighted and amazed, began to Bless him, and at last asked her, who she
was, and what she wanted? To which she said, I am the Spirit of such a Woman,
who lived with Walker; and being got with Child by him, he promised to send me
to a private place where I should be well looked to until I was brought to Bed,
and well again, and then I should come again and keep his House.

And accordingly, said the Apparition, I was one Night late sent away with one
Mark Sharp, who, upon a Moor (Naming a place that the Miller kn^w) slew me with
a Pike (such as Men dig Coals withal) and gave me these five Wounds, and after
threw my Body into a Coal-Pit hard by, and hid the Pike under a Bank: And his
Shoes and Stockings being Bloody, he endeavored to wash; but seeing the Blood
would not wash forth, he hid them there. And the Apparition further told the
Miller, that he must be the Man to reveal it, or else that she must still
appear and haunt him. The Miller returned home very sad and heavy, but spoke
not one word of what he had seen, but eschewed as much as he could to stay in
the Mill within Night without Company, thinking thereby to escape the seeing
again of that frightful Apparition.

But notwithstanding, one Night when it began to be dark, the Apparition met
him again, and seemed very fierce and cruel, and threatened him, that if he did
not reveal the Murder, she would continually pursue and haunt him. Yet for all
this, he still concealed it until St. Thomas's Eve before Christmas, when being
soon after Sunset walking in his Garden, she appeared again, and then so
threatened him and affrighted him, that he faithfully promised to reveal it the
next Morning.

In the Morning he went to a Magistrate, and made the whole matter known, with
all Circumstances; and diligent search being made, the Body was found in a
Coal-Pit, with five Wounds in the Head, and the Pike, and Shoes, and Stockings
yet Bloody, in every Circumstance as the Apparition had related unto the Miller.

Whereupon Walker and Mark Sharp were both apprehended, but would confess
nothing. At the Assizes following (I think it was at Durham) they were
Arraigned and found guilty, Condemned, and Executed, but I could never hear
that they confessed the Fact. There were some that reported, that the
Apparition did appear to the Judge, or the foreman of the Jury, (who was alive
in Chester in the street about ten years ago, as I have been credibly informed)
but of that I know no certainty.

There are many Persons yet alive that can remember this strange Murder, and
the discovery of it; for it was, and sometimes yet is, as much discoursed of in
the North Country, as any thing that almost has ever been heard of, and the
Relation Printed, tho now not to be gotten. I relate this with the greater
confidence, (tho I may fail in some of the Circumstances) because I saw and
read the Letter that was sent to Sergeant Hutton, who then lived at Goldsborugh
in Yorkshire, from the Judge before whom Walker and Mark Sharp were tried, and
by whom they were condemned, and had a Copy of it, until about the Year 1658,
when I had it, and many other Books and Papers taken from me. And this, I
confess, to be one of the most convincing Stories (being of undoubted verity)
that ever I read, heard, or knew of, and carries with it, the most evident
Force to make the most incredulous Spirit to be satisfied, that there are
really sometimes such things as Apparitions. Thus far he.

This Story is so considerable, that I make mention of it in my Scholia on my
Immortality of the Soul, in my Vol^men Philosophicum, Tom. 2. which I
acquainted a Friend of mine with, a Prudent, Intelligent Person, Dr. J. D. he
of his own accord offered me, it being a thing of such consequence, to send a
Friend of his in the North, for greater assurance of the truth of the
Narration; which Motion I willingly embracing, he did accordingly. The Answer
to his Letter from his Friend Mr. Shepherdson, is this.

I have done what I can to inform my self of the Passages of Sharp and Walker:
There are very few Men that I could meet, that were then Men, or at the Trial,
saving these Two in the enclosed Paper, both Men at that time, and both at the
Trial. And for Mr. Lumley, he lived next Door to Walker; and what he has given
under his Hand, can depose, if there were occasion. The other Gentleman writ
his Attestation with his own Hand, but I being not there, got not his Name to
it. I could have sent you Twenty Hands that could have said thus much and more
by hearsay, but I thought these most proper that could speak from their own
Eyes and Ears. Thus far Mr. Shepherdson, the Doctor's Discreet and Faithful
Intelligencer. Dr. H. Moor's Letter to Mr. Joseph Glanvil, Sadducism.
Triumphat. p. 17, 18, etc.

8. This Story Dr. More has transcribed out of Mr. Webster's Display of
supposed VVitchcraft, which he himself (though otherwise an affected Caviller
against all Stories of Witchcraft and Apparition) is constrained to assent to,
as we may see from his own Confession. -- On Sunday the 15th of November, 1657,
about Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, Richard Jones, then a Sprightly
Youth, about Twelve Years old, Son of Henry Jones of Shepton Mallet, in the
County of Somerset, being in his Father's House alone, and perceiving one
looking in at the windows, went to the door, where one Jane Brooks of the same
Town (but then by Name unknown to this Boy) came to him. She desired him to
give her a piece of close Bread, and gave him an Apple. After which, she also
stroked him down on the Right Side, shook him by the Hand, and so bid him good
night. The Youth returned into the House, where he had been left well, when his
Father and one Gibson went from him; but at their Return, which was within an
Hour or thereabout, they found him ill, and complaining of his Right Side, in
which the Pain continued the most part of that Night. And on Monday following,
in the Evening, the Boy roasted the Apple he had of Jane Brooks, and having
eaten about half of it, was extremely ill, and sometimes speechless; but being
recovered, he told his Father, that a woman of the Town, on Sunday before, had
given him that Apple, and that she stroked him on the Side. He said, he knew
not her Name, but should her Person, if he saw her. Upon this Jones was advised
to invite the women of Shipton, to come to his House, upon the occasion of his
Son's Illness; and the Child told him, that in case the woman should come in
when he was in his Fit, if he were not able to speak, he would give him an
intimation by a Jogg, and desired that his Father would then lead him through
the Room, for he said he would put his Hand upon her, if she were there. After
this, he continuing very ill, many women came daily to see him; and Jane Brooks
the Sunday after, came in with Two of her Sisters, and several other women of
the Neighborhood were there.

Upon her coming in, the Boy was taken so ill, that for some time he could not
see nor speak, but having recovered his sight, he gave his Father the item, and
he led him about the Room. The Boy drew toward Jane Brooks, who was behind her
Two Sisters, among the other Women, and put his Hand upon her, which his
Father perceiving, immediately scratched her Face, and drew Blood from her. The
Youth then presently cried out, that he was well, and so he continued Seven or
Eight Days. But then meeting with Alice Coward, Sister to Jane Brooks, who
passing by, said to him, How do you, my Honey? he presently fell ill again: And
after that, the said Coward and Brooks often appeared to him. The Boy would
describe the Cloths and Habit they were in at the time exactly, as the
Constable and others have found upon repairing to them, though Brooks's House
was at a good distance from Jones's. This they often tried, and always found
the Boy right in his Descriptions.

On a certain Sunday about Noon, the Child being in a Room with his Father and
one Gibson, and in his Fit, he on the sudden called out, that he saw Jane
Brooks on the Wall, and pointed to the place, where immediately Gibson struck
with a Knife. Upon which, the Boy cried out, O Father, Cuz Gibson has cut Jane
Brooks's Hand, and it is bloody, The Father and Gibson immediately repaired to
the Constable, a discreet Person, and acquainting him with what had passed,
desired him to go with them to Jane Brooks's House, which he did. They found
her sitting in a Room on a Stool, with one Hand over the other. The Constable
asked her how she did? She answered, not well. He asked again, why she sat with
one Hand over the other? She replied, she was wont to do so. He enquired if any
thing were amiss with her Hand? Her Answer was, it was well enough. The
Constable desired he might see the Hand that was under; which she being
unwilling to show him, he drew it out, and found it bloody, according to what
the Boy had said. Being asked how it came so, she said, It was scratched with a
Pin.

On the Eighth of December, 1657, the Boy, Jane Brooks, and Alice Coward,
appeared at Castle-Cary, before the Justices, Mr. Hunt, and Mr. Carry: The Boy
having begun to give his Testimony, upon the coming in of the Two Women, and
their looking on him, was instantly taken speechless, and so remained till the
Women were removed out of the Room, and then in a short time, upon Examination,
he gave a full Relation of the Mentioned particulars.

On the Eleventh of January following, the Boy was again examined by the same
Justices at Shepton-mallet, and upon the sight of Jane Brooks, was again taken
Speechless, but was not so afterward, when Alice Coward came into the Room to
him.

On the next appearance at Shepton, which was on the Seventeenth of February,
there were present many Gentlemen, Ministers and others: The Boy fell into his
Fit upon the sight of Jane Brooks, and lay in a Man's Arms like a Dead Person;
the Woman was then willed to lay her Hand on him, which she did, and he
thereupon started, and sprang out in a very strange and unusual manner. One of
the Justices, to prevent all possibilities of Legerdemain, caused Gibson and
the rest to stand off from the Boy, and then that Justice himself held him: The
Youth being blindfolded, the Justice called as if Brooks should touch him, but
winked to others to do it, which Two or Three successively did, but the Boy
appeared not concerned. The Justice then called on the Father to take him, but
had privately before desired one Mr. Geoffry Strode, to bring Jane Brooks to
touch him at such a time as he should call for his Father; which was done, and
the Boy immediately sprang out after a very odd and violent ^ashion. He was
after touched by several Persons, and moved not; but Jane Brooks being again
caused to put her Hand upon him, he started, and sprang out twice or thrice as
before. All this while he remained in his Fit, and some time after; and being
laid then on a Bed in the same Room, the People present could not for a long
time bow either of his Arms or Legs.

Between the mentioned Fifteenth of November, and the Eleventh of January, the
Two Women appeared often to the Boy, their Hands cold, their Eyes staring, and
their Lips and Cheeks looking pale. In this manner, on a Thursday about Noon,
the Boy being newly laid into his Bed, Jane Brooks and Alice Coward appeared to
him, and told him, that what they had begun, they could not perform: But if he
would say no more of it, they would give him Money, and so put a Twopence into
his Pocket. After which, they took him out of his Bed, laid him on the Ground,
and vanished, and the Boy was found by those that came next into the Room,
lying on the Floor, as if he had been dead. The Twopence was seen by many, and
when it was put into the Fire, and hot, the Boy would fall ill; but as soon as
it was taken out, and cold, he would be again as well as before. This was seen
and observed by a Minister, a discreet Person, when the Boy was in one Room,
and the Twopence (without his knowledge) put into the fire in another, and
this was diverse times tried in the presence of several Persons.

Between the Eighth of December, and the Seventeenth of February, in the Year
mentioned, diverse Persons at sundty times, heard in the Boy a noise like the
croaking of a Toad, and a Voice within him, saying, Jane Brooks, Alice Coward,
twelve times in near a quarter of an Hour. At the same time, some held a Candle
before the Boys Face, and earnestly looked on him; but could not perceive the
least motion of his Tongue, Teeth or Lips, while the Voice was heard.

On the Twenty Fifth of February, between Two and Three in the Afternoon, the
Boy being at the House of Richard Isles in Shepton-Mallet, went out of the Room
into the Garden, Isles's Wife followed him, and was within Two Yards when she
saw him rise up from the Ground before her, and so mounted higher and higher,
till he passed in the Air, over the Garden Wall, and was carried so above
ground more than Thirty Yards, falling at last at one Jordan's Door at Shepton,
where he was found as dead for a time: But coming to himself, told Jordan, that
Jane Brooks had taken him up by the Arm out of Isles's Garden, and carried him
in the Air, as is related.

The Boy at several other times was gone on the sudden, and upon search after
him, found in another Room as dead, and at sometimes strangely hanging above
the Ground; his Hands being flat against a great Beam in the top of the Room,
and all his Body Two or Three Foot from ground. There he has hung a Quarter of
an Hour together, and being afterward come to himself, he told those that
found him, that Jane Brooks had carried him to that Place, and held-him there.
Nine People at a time saw the Boy so strangely hanging by the Beam.

From the 15 of Nov. to the 10th of March following, he was by reason of his
Fits much wasted in his body, and unspirited, but after that time, being the
day the two Women were sent to Goal, he had no more of those Fits.

Jane Brooks was Condemned and Executed at Charde Assizes, March 26. 1658.

This is the sum of Mr. Hunt's Narrative, which concludes with both the
Justices Attestation, thus:

The aforesaid Passages were some of them seen by us: And the rest, and some
other Remarkable ones, not here set down, were upon Examination of several
credible Witnesses taken upon Oath before us.

Subscribed,

Rob. Hunts, John Carry.

This is taken out of Mr. Glanvil's Saducismus Triumph. Relat. 2.

9. Elizabeth Style of Stoke Trister, in the County of Somerset, was accused by
Diverse Persons of credit upon Oath before Mr. Hunt, and particularly and
largely confessed her guilt her self, which was found by the Jury at the Trial
at Taunton. But she prevented Execution by dying in Gaol, a little before the
expiring of the Term her confederate Damon had set for her Enjoyment of
Diabolical Pleasures in this Life. I have shortened the Examinations, and cast
them into such an order, as I think fittest for the rendering the matter clear
and intelligible.

Rich. Hill of Stoke Trister, in the County of Somerset, Yeoman, being examined
upon Oath, Jan. 23. 1664. Before Robert Hunt, Esquire; one of his Majesty's
Justices for that County, concerning the bewitching of his Daughter by Eliz.
Hill, about the Age of Thirteen Years, has been for about two Months last
past, taken with very strange Fits, which have held an hour, two, three, and
more; and that in those Fits the Child has told her Father, the Examinant and
others, that one Eliz. Style of the same Parish appeared to her, and is the
Person that Torments her. She also in her Fits usually tells what Clothes Eliz.
Style has on at that time, which the Informant and others have seen and found
true.

He says further, that about a Fortnight before Christmas last, he told Style,
that his Daughter spoke much of her in her Fits, and did believe that she was
bewitched by her. Whereupon Francis White, and Walter, and Rob. Thick being
present, willed her to complain to the Justice against him for accusing of her.
But she having used several put offs, said, she would do worse than fetch a
Warrant. After which the girl grew worse than before, and at the end of a Fit
she tells the Examinant when she shall have another, which happens accordingly,
and affirms, that Style tells her when the next fit shall come. He informs
further, that Monday Night after Christmas Day, about Nine of the Clock, and
four or five times since, about the same hour of the Night, his Daughter has
been more Tormented than formerly, and that tho held in a Chair, by four or
five People, sometimes six, by the Arms, Legs, and Shoulders, she would rise
out of her Chair, and raise her Body about three or four Foot high. And that
after, in her Fits, she would have holes made in her Hand-wrists, Face, Neck,
and other parts of her Body, which the Informant and others that saw them,
conceived to be with Thorns. For they saw Thorns in her Flesh, and some they
hooked out. That upon the child's Pointing with her Finger from place to place,
the Thorns and Holes immediately appeared to the Informant and others looking
on. And as soon as the Child can speak after the Fit, she says that Widow
Style did prick her with Thorns in those several places, which was horrid
Torment, she seemed to the Informant and others standing by, to be in extreme
Pain and Torture. The Child has been so Tormented and pricked with Thorns four
several Nights, at which times the Informant and many other People have seen
the Flesh rise up in little bunches, in which Holes did appear. The pricking
held about a quarter of an hour at a time, during each of the four Fits, and
the Informant has seen the child take out some of those Thorns.

The same Rich. Hil^, examined Jan. 26. 1664. Informs, that when he rode from
the Justices House with a Warrant to bring Style before him, his Horse on a
sudden sat down on his Breech, and he could not after ride him, but as soon as
he attempted to get up, his Horse would sit down and paw with his Feet before.
He says further, that since Style was examined before the Justice, and made
her confession to him, she has acknowledged to the Informant, that she had
hurt his Daughter, and that one Ann Bishop, and Alice Duke, did join in
bewitching of her.

Taken upon Oath before me,

Rob. Hunt.

10. William Parsons, Rector of Stoke Trister, in the County of Somerset,
Nicholas Lambert of Bayford, in the same County; And Richard Oining of Stoke
Trister, Butcher, etc.

Ano. 1664. Alice Duke, Alias Manning, (Witch of Style's knot) of Wincaunton,
in the County of Somerset, Widow made this confession before Robert Hunt, Esquire;
as follows.

That when she lived with Ann Bishop of Wincaunton, about eleven or twelve
years ago, Ann Bishop persuaded her to go with her into the Churchyard in the
Night time, and being come thither, to go backward round the Church, which they
did three times. In their first round, they met a Man in black Clothes, who
went round the second time with them, and then they met a thing in the shape of
a great black Toad, which leapt up against the Examinant's Apron. In their
third round they met somewhat in the shape of a Rat, which Vanished away. After
this the Examinant and Ann Bishop went home, but before Ann Bishop went off,
the Man in Black said somewhat to her softly, which the Informant could not
hear.

A few Days after, Ann Bishop speaking about their going round the Church, told
the Examinant, that now she might have her desire, and what she would wish for;
and shortly after, the Devil appeared to her in the shape of a Man, promising
that she should want nothing. and that if she cursed any thing with a Pox take
it, she should have her purpose, in case she would give her Soul to him, suffer
him to suck her blood, keep his Secrets, and be his Instrument to do such
Mischief as he would set her about. All which, upon his second appearing to
her, she yielded to, and the Devil having pricked the fourth Finger of her right
hand, between the middle and upper joint (where the mark is yet to be seen)
gave her a Pen, with which she made a Cross or mark with her Blood on Paper or
Parchment, that the Devil offered her for the confirmation of the agreement,
which was done in the presence of Ann Bishop. And as soon the Examinant had
Signed it, the Devil gave her Six pence, and went away with the Paper or
Parchment.

Further she confesses, that she had been at several Meetings in Lie Common,
and other places, in the Night, and that her forehead being first anointed with
a feather dipped in Oil, she has been suddenly carried to the place of their
Meeting. That about five or six weeks since (or more) she met in the said
Common in the Night, where were present Ann Bishop, Mary Penny of Wincaunton,
Elizabeth Style of Bayford, and a Man in black Clothes with a little band, whom
she supposed to have been the Devil. At the Meeting there was a Picture in Wax,
which the Man in black took in his Arms, and sized it by the Name of Elizabeth
or Bess Hill, for the Daughter of Rich. Hill. Then the Devil, this Examinant,
Ann Bishop, and Elizabeth Style, Stuck Thorns in the Neck, Head, Hand-wrists,
Fingers, and other parts of the Picture, saying, a Pox on thee, I Will spice
thee. This done, all sat down, a white Cloth being spread on the ground, and
did drink Wi^e, and Eat Cakes and Meat. After all was ended, the Man in black
Vanished, leaving an ugly smell at parting. The rest were on a sudden conveyed
to their homes.

On Monday Night, after Christmas Day last, she met the same Company again,
near about the same place, and the Ann Bishop (who was there in a green Apron,
a French Wastcoat, and a red Petticoat) brought in her Apron a Picture in
blackish Wax, which the Devil Baptized as before, by the Name of John Newman,
for the Son of Rob. Newman of Wincaunton, and then the Devil first, after Ann
Bishop, and this Examinant, thrust in Thorns into the Arms of it. The Picture
Ann Bishop carried away with her. They were all there present in their Clothes,
and the Devil in the Shape of a Man in black.

About five years and a half since, the same Persons were at the Baptizing of
another Image, by the Name of Peter Newman, another Son of Robert Newman, both
which are since Dead, and then Ann Bishop desired the Examinant, to join with
her in the bewitching of Peter and John Newman.

At another time she was carried to a Meeting in the Night, to a green place
near Marnhull, as she was then told, where were present Ann Bishop, Eliz.
Style, Mary Penny, and some unknown to her. Then also an Image in Wax was
Baptized by the Devil, in the fore-related manner, by the Name of Ann, or
Rachel Hatcher, one of Marnhull, as she was then informed. After the Ceremony
was ended, they had Wine, Cakes, etc.

She likewise confesses, that she was at another such Meeting, where twelve
Persons were present, many of whom were unknown to her, but she took notice of
one lame Man in blackish hair among them, and of the Devil, as before.

She says, that after their Meetings, they all make very low Obeisance to the
Devil, who appears in black Clothes and a little Band. He bids them welcome at
their coming, and brings Wine, or Beer, Cakes, Meat, or the like. He sits at
the higher end, and usually Ann Bishop sits next him. They Eat, Drink, Dance,
and have Music. At their parting they use to say, Merry meet, Merry part; and
that before they are carried to their Meetings, their Foreheads are anointed
with greenish Oil, that they have from the Spirit, which smells raw. They for
the most part are carried in the Air. As they pass, they say, Thou, tout a
tout, tout, throughout and about. Passing back, they say, Rentum, Tormentum,
and another word which she does not remember.

She confesses, that her Familiar does commonly suck her right breast about
Seven at Night, in the shape of a little Cat, of a dunnish Color, which is as
smooth as a Want, and when she is sucked, she is in a kind of a Trance.

That she hurt Thomas Garret's Cows, because he refused to write a Petition for
her.

That she hurt Thomas Conway, by putting a Dish into his hand, which Dish she
had from the Devil, she gave it him to give his Daughter for good hansel.

That she hurt Dorothy, the Wife of George Wining, by giving an Iron slate to
put into her Steeling Box.

That being angry with Edith Wats, the Daughter of Edmond Wats, for treading on
her foot, she cursed Edith with a Pox on you, and after touched her, which has
done the said Edith much harm, for which she is sorry.

That being provoked by Swanton's first Wife, she did before her Death curse
her with a A Pox on you, believes she did thereby hurt her, but denies she did
bewitch Mr. Swanton's Cattle.

She says, that when the Devil does any thing for her, she calls for him by
the Name of Robin, upon which he appears, and when in the shape of a Man, she
can hear him speak, but his Voice is very low. He promised her when she made
her contract with him, that she should want nothing, but ever since she has
wanted all things.

Taken before me,

Rob. Hunt.

The Witnesses were Thomas Conway of Wincaunton, in the County of Somerset,
Mary his Wife, Edward Wats of Wincaunton, in the aforesaid County.

11. Anno 1664. Christian, the Wife of Robert Green of Brewham, in the County
of Somerset, Aged about thirty three years, being examined before the aforesaid
Robert Hunt, Esquire; made this confession as follows.

That about a year and a half since (she being in great Poverty) one Catherine
Green of Brewham, told her, that if she would she might be in a better
condition, and then persuaded her to make a Covenant with the Devil. Being
afterward together in one Mr. Hussey's ground in Brewham Forest, about Noon,
Catherine called for the Devil, who appeared in the shape of a Man in blackish
Clothes, and said somewhat to Catherine, which Christian could not hear. After
which the Devil (as she conceived him) told the Examinant, that she should want
neither Clothes, Victuals, nor Money, if she would give her Body and Soul to
him, keep his Secrets, and suffer him to suck her once in twenty four hours,
which at last, upon his and Catherine Green's persuasion, she yielded to; then
the Man in black pricked the fourth Finger of her Right hand, between the middle
and upper joints, where the Sign yet remains, and took two drops of her Blood
on his Finger, giving her four-pence-half-penny, with which she after bought
bread in Brewham. The he spoke again in private with Catherine, and Vanished,
leaving a smell of Brimstone behind.

Since that time the Devil (she says) has and does usually suck her left
Breast about five of the Clock in the Morning, in the likeness of an Hedg-hog,
bending, and did so on Wednesday Morning last. She says it is painful to her,
and that she is usually in a Trance when she is sucked.

She says also, that Catherine Green, and Margaret Agar of Brewham, have told
her, that they are in Covenant with the Devil, and confesses, that she has
been at several Meetings in the Night, at Brewham Common, and in a Ground of
Mr. Hussey's, that she has there met with Catherine Green and Margaret Agar,
and three or four times with Mary Warberton of Brewham; that in all those
Meetings the Devil has been present in the shape of a Man in black Clothes, at
their first coming he bids them welcome, but always speaks very low.

That at a Meeting about three Weeks or a Month since, at or near the former
place, Margaret Agar brought thither an Image in Wax, for Elizabeth, the Wife
of Andrew Cornish of Brewham, and the Devil, in the shape of a Man in black
Clothes, did Baptize it, and after stuck a Thorn into its Head; that Agar stuck
one into its Stomach, and Catherine Green one into its Side. She further says,
that before this time, Agar said to her, this Examinant, that she would hurt
Eliz. Cornish, who since the Baptizing of the Picture has been taken and
continues very ill.

She says, that three or four days before Jos. Talbot of Brewham Died,
Margaret Agar told her, that she would rid him out of the World, because, he
being Overseer of the Poor, he made her Children to go to Service, and refused
to give them such good Clothes as she desired. And since the Death of Talbot,
she confessed to the Examinant, that she had bewitched him to Death. He died
about a year since, was taken ill on Friday, and Died about Wednesday after.

That her Mother-in-Law, Catharine Green, about five or six years ago, was
taken in a strange manner. One day one Eye and Cheek did swell, another day
another, and so she continued in great pain, till she died. Upon her Death she
several times said, in the hearing of the Examinant, that her Sister-in-Law,
Catharine Green, had bewitched her, and the Examinant believes, that she
bewitched her to Death.

That a little before Michaelmas last, the said Catharine Cursed the Horses of
Rob. Walter of Brewham, saying, a murrain on them Horses to Death. Upon which
the Horses being three, all died.

Taken before me,

Robert Hunt.

12. In 1665. Margaret Agar of Brewham, in the aforesaid County of Somerset,
had this Testimony given against her by Catharine Green, alias Cornish of
Brewham, Widow.

Before the aforesaid,

Robert Hunt.

That on Friday in the Evening, in the beginning of March last, Margaret Agar
came to her, and was earnest she should go with her to a Ground called,
Husseys-knap, which she did, and being come thither, they saw a little Man in
black Clothes with a little band. As soon as they came to him, Margaret Agar
took out of her Lap a little Picture in blackish Wax, which she delivered to
the Man in black, who stuck a Thorn into the Crown of the Picture, and then
delivered it back to Agar. Upon which she stuck a Thorn toward the heart of
the Picture, cursing, and saying, A Plague on you; which she told the Examinant
was done to hurt Eliz. Cornish, who, as she has been told, has been very ill
ever since that time.

That a little above a year since, Jos. Talbot, late of Brewham, being Overseer
for the Poor, did cause two of Agars Children to go to Service. Upon which she
was very angry, and said in the Examinant's hearing, a few days before he fell
Sick and Died, that she had trod upon the Jaws of three of her Enemies, and
that she should shortly see Talbot rot, and tread on his Jaws. And when this
Examinant desired her not to hurt Talbot, she swore by the Blood of the Lord,
she would confound him if she could. The Day before he died, she said to the
Examinant, God's Wounds, I Will go and see him, for I shall never see him more;
and the next Day Talbot died.

That she heard Margaret Agar curse Mary Smith, and say, she should live to see
her and her Cattle fall and rot before her Face. Joseph Glanvil, Saducismus
Triumphatus; p. 368.

Taken upon Oath before

Robert Hunt.

Other Witnesses against this Agar, were Elizabeth Talbot, Jos. Smith, Mary the
Wife of William Smith, Mary Green, all of Brewham.

13. Julian Cox, aged about 70 Years, was indicted at Taunton in Somersetshire,
about Summer Assiizes, 1663, before Judge Archer, then Judge of the Assizes
there, for Witchcraft, which she practiced upon a Young Maid, whereby her Body
languished, and was impaired of Health, by reason of strange Fits upon account
of the said Witchcraft.

The Evidence against her was divided into Two Branches; First, to prove her a
VVitch in general: Secondly, to prove her guilty of the Witchcraft contained in
the Indictment.

For the proof of the first particular, the first Witness was an Huntsman, who
swore that he went out with a Pack of Hounds to hunt a Hare, and not far from
Julian Cox her House, he at last started a Hare. The Dogs hunted her very
close, and the third Ring hunted her in view; till at last the Huntsman
perceiving the Hare almost spent, and making toward a great Bush, he ran on
the other side of the Bush to take her up, and preserve her from the Dogs. But
as soon as he laid Hands on her, it proved to be Julian Cox, who had her Head
grovelling on the Ground, and her Globes (as he expressed it) upward. He knowing
her, was affrighted, that his Hair on his Head stood on end; and yet spoke to
her, and asked her what brought her there? But she was so far out of breath,
that she could not make him any Answer. His Dogs also came up with full cry to
recover the Game, and smelt at her, and so left off Hunting any further. And
the Huntsman with his Dogs went home presently, sadly affrighted.

Secondly, Another Witness swore, that as he passed by Cox her Door, she was
taking a Pipe of Tobacco upon the Threshold of her Door, and invited him to
come in, and take a Pipe, which he did. And as he was smoking, Julian said to
him, Neighbor, look what a pretty thing there is; he looked down, and there
was a monstrous great Toad, staring him in the Face. He endeavored to kill it
by spurning it, but could not hit it: Whereupon Julian bad him forbear, and it
would do him no hurt. But he threw down his Pipe and went home (which was about
Two Miles off of Julian Cox's House) and told his Family what had happened, and
that he believed it was one of Julian Cox's Devils. After, he was taking a Pipe
of Tobacco at home, and the same Toad appeared betwixt his Legs. He took the
Toad out to kill it, and to his thinking cut it in several Pieces; but
returning to his Pipe, the Toad still appeared. He endeavored to burn it, but
could not. At length he took a Switch and beat it. The Toad ran several times
about the Room to avoid him, he still pursuing it with Correction. At length
the Toad cried, and vanished, and he was never after troubled with it.

Thirdly, After, another swore, that Julian past by his Yard while his Beasts
were in Milking, and stooping down, scored upon the Ground for some small time.
During which time, his Cattle run mad, and some ran their heads against the
Trees, and most of them died speedily. Whereupon concluding they were
bewitched, he was after advised to this Experiment to find out the Witch, viz.
To cut off the Ears of the bewitched Beasts, and burn them, and that the Witch
would be in misery, and could not rest till they were plucked out, Which he
tried, and while they were burning Julian Cox came into the house, raging and
scolding that they had abused her without cause; but she went presently to the
Fire, and took out the Ears that were burning, and then she was quiet.

Fourthly, Another VVitness swore, That she had seen Julian Cox fly into her
own Chamber Window in her full proportion, and that she very well knew her, and
was suit it was she.

Fifthly, Another Evidence was the Confession of Julian Cox her self, upon her
Examination before a Justice of Peace, which was to this purpose. That she had
been often tempted by the Devil to be a Witch, but never consented. That one
Evening she walked about a Mile from her own house, and there came riding
toward her, Three Persons upon Three Broomstaves, born up about a Yard and an
half from the Ground. Two of them formerly knew, which was a Witch and a
Wizzard, that were hanged for Witchcraft several Years before. The Third Person
she knew not. He came in the shape of a black Man, and tempted her to give him
her Soul, or to that effect, and to express it by pricking her Finger, and
giving her Name in her Blood, in token of it, and told her that she had Revenge
against several Persons that had wronged her, but could not bring her purpose
to pass without his help; and that upon the Terms aforesaid, he would assist
her to be revenged against them. But she said; she did not consent to it. This
was the Sum of the general Evidence to prove a Witch.

But now for the Second particular, to prove her guilty of the VVitchcraft upon
the Maid, whereof she was indicted, this Evidence was offered:

It was proved, that Julian Cox came for an Alms to the house where this Maid
was a Servant, and that the Maid told her she should have none, and gave her a
cross Answer that displeased Julian. VVhereupon Julian was angry, and told the
Maid she should repent it before Night, and so she did: For before Night she
was taken with a Convulsion Fit, and after that left her, she saw Julian Cox
following her, and cried out to the People in the house to save her from Julian.

But none saw Julian but the Maid, and all did impute it to her imagination
only. And in the Night she cried out of Julian Cox, and the black Man, that
they came upon her bed, and tempted her to drink something they offered her.
But she cried out, she desired not the Devil's Drenches. This also they imputed
to her imagination, and bad her be quiet, because they in the same Chamber with
her, did not see or hear any thing, and they thought it had been her Conceit
only.

The Maid the next Night expecting the same Conflict she had the Night before,
brought up with her a Knife, and laid it at her bed's head. About the same time
of the Night as before, Julian and the black Man came again upon the Maid's
bed, and tempted her to drink that which they brought, but she refused, crying
in the audience of the rest of the Family, that she defied the Devil's
Drenches, and took the Knife and stabbed Julian, and as she said, she wounded
her in Leg, and was importunate with the Witness to ride to Julian Cox's House
presently, to see if it were not so. The Witness went and took the Knife with
him. Julian Cox would not let him in; but he forced the Door open, and found a
fresh wound in Julian's Leg, as the Maid had said, which did suit with the
Knife, and Julian had been just dressing it when the Witness came. There was
Blood also found upon the Maid's Bed.

The next Morning the Maid continued her outcries, that Julian Cox appeared to
her in the House wall, and offered her great Pins, which she was forced to
swallow: And all the Day the Maid was observed to convey her Hands to the House
wall, and from the Wall to her Mouth; and she seemed by the motion of her
Mouth, as if she did eat something. But none saw any thing but the Maid, and
therefore thought still it might be her Fancy, and did not much mind it. But
toward Night, this Maid began to be very ill, and complained, that the Pins
that Julian forced her to eat-out of the Wall, did torment her in all parts of
the Maids Body; several great Swellings appeared, and out of the heads of the
Swellings, several great Pins points appeared; which the Witnesses took out,
and upon the Trial, there were about Thirty great Pins produced in Court (which
I my self handled) all which were sworn by several Witnesses, that they were
taken out of the Maid's Body, in manner as is aforesaid.

Judge Archer, who tried the Prisoner, told the Jury, that he had heard, that a
Witch could not repeat that Petition in the Lord's Prayer, viz. And lead us not
into Temptation: And having this occasion, he would try the Experiment, and
told the Jury, that where she could or could not, they were not in the least
measure to guide their Verdict according to it, because it was not legal
Evidence, but that they must be guided in their Verdict by the former Evidence
given in upon Oath only.

The Prisoner was called for up to the next Bar to the Court, and demanded if
she could say the Lord's Prayer? She said she could, and went over the Prayer
readily, till she came to that Petition. Then she said, [And lead us into no
Temptation,] but could not say, [And lead us not into Temptation] though she
was directed to say it after one that repeated it to her distinctly. But she
could not repeat it otherwise than is expressed already, though tried to do it
near half a score times in open Court. After all which, the Jury found her
guilty, and Judgment having been given, within Three or Four Days she was
executed, without any Confession of the Fact.

14. In the Town of Beckington, by Froome in Somersetshire, lives Mary Hill, a
Maid of about Eighteen Years of Age, who having lived very much in the neglect
of her Duty to God, was some time before Michaelmas last past, was Twelve
Month, taken very ill, and being seized with violent Fits, began to Vomit up
Two Hundred crooked Pins. This so stupendous an Accident, drew a numerous
Concourse of People to see her: To whom, when in her Fits, she did constantly
affirm, that she saw against the Wall of the Room, wherein she lay, an old
Woman named Elizabeth Carrier, who thereupon being apprehended by a VVarrant
from a Justice of Peace, and Convicted by the Oaths of Two Persons, was
committed to the County Goal.

About a Fortnight after, she began to Vomit up Nails, pieces of Nails, pieces
of Brass, Handles of Spoons, and so continued to do for the space of Six Months
and upwards: And in her Fits, she said there did appear to her an Old Woman,
named Margery Coombes, and one Anne Moor, who also by a Warrant from Two
Justices of tho Peace, were apprehended, and brought to the Sessions held at
Brewton for the County, and by the Bench committed to the County Goal. The
former of these died as soon as she came into the Prison; the other Two were
tried at Taunton Assizes, by my Lord Chief Justice Holt, and for want of
Evidence, were acquitted by the Jury. The Persons bound over to give Evidence,
were Susanna Belton, and Ann Holland, who upon their Oaths deposited, that they
book'd out of the Navel of the said Mary Hill, as she lay in a dead Fit,
crooked Pins, small Nails, and small Pieces of Brass, which were produced in
Court before the Judge, and from him handed to the Jury to look upon them.
VVhereupon Mr. Francis Jesse, and Mr. Christopher Brewer declared, that they
had seen the said Ma^y Hill, to Vomit up at several times, crooked Pins, Nails,
and Pieces of Brass; which they also produced in open Court; and to that end
they might be ascertained it was no Imposture, they declared, they had searched
her Mouth with their Fingers before she did Vomit

Upon which the Court thought fit to call for me, who am the Minister of the
Parish, to testify the knowledge of the matter, which I did to this Effect;
that I had seen her at several times, after having given her a little Small
Beer, Vomit up crooked Pins, Nails, and pieces of Brass. That to prevent the
supposition of a Cheat, I had cause her to be brought to a Window, and having
looked into her Mouth, I searched it with my Finger, as I did the Beer before she
drank it. This I did, that I might not be wanting in circumstantial Answers, to
what my Lord and Court might propose.

I well remember a Gentleman on a Saturday came to my House (Incognito,) to
know of me the truth of the Country Report about this Maid, having seen some
of the Nails, etc. she had vomited up. I told him it was very true, and if he
would stay in Town till the Morning, he might see it himself for his own
satisfaction. Which he did, and early in the Morning was called to see her.
But because Beer was not given her when she wanted it, she lay in a very
deplorable Condition, till past Two in the Afternoon; when with much
difficulty, she brought up a piece of Brass, which the said Gentleman took away
with him; though before the piece of Brass came up, he told me he was satisfied
of the Truth of the thing, because it was impossible for any Mortal to
counterfeit her miserable condition. She sometimes lying in a dead Fit, with
her Tongue swelled out of her Head, and then reviving, she would fall to
vomiting; but nothing came out till about two a Clock in the Afternoon. Nay, so
curious wa^^he to anticipate any Cheat, that he searched her Mouth himself, gave
her the beer, held her up in his Hand, and likewise the Basin, into which she
vomited, and continued with her all this time, without Eating and Drinking,
which was about Eight Hours, that he might be an Eyewitness of the Truth of
it. Nay, further, he found the Maid living only with a Brother, and Three poor
Sisters, all young Persons, and very honest, and the Maid kept at the charge of
the Parish, which were sufficient Testimonies they were incapable of making a
Cheat of it. The Gentleman I now mentioned, was (as I afterward learned)
Esquire Player of Castle-Cary.

I have often wondered how it was possible for all that Trumpery to be conveyed
into her Body, which at Intervals she cast up; I therefore made all the
Observation I could to satisfy my self and others. I found that those things
which she brought up in the Morning, were conveyed into her Body by some
Diabolical Power, when she was in Bed at Night; what induced me easily to
believe this, was by considering these following Circumstances.

That it was only in the Morning that she vomitted up Nails, and scarce did any
thing in the Afternoon.

I found by Enquiry, that she always slept with her Mouth open, and could not
help it; and when asleep, she could not be awakened, either by calling, jogging
or pulling of her, for some considerable time; though at the same time she
fetched such deep and painful Groans, as if she were awaked, and sensible of
her sad Condition.

For my farther satisfaction, I got some at my own Charge to sit up at Nights
with her, and watch her Mouth, and to see it was kept close shut. Whilst this
was done, the Vomiting of Nails ceased, and that for Thirteen Nights
successively; but when it was neglected, she would be sure to bring up
something of Nails, or some such Stuff. I then had her lodged at a Neighbor's
House, to see whether her vomitting of Nails would totally cease, but it did
not. For coming one Day to my House to refresh her self, she had not been there
Two Hours, before she began to be ill, we immediately gave her some Beer, and
she vomited up a great Board Nail: Some time after this, she threw up a great
piece of Brass, which I saw followed with much Blood; and she being extremely
weakened with striving, and falling into a Fit, I caused a Woman to open her
Mouth, who took out as much Blood, as she could hold in the hollow of her Hand.

After the Assizes aforementioned was ended, and she was turned Home, she grew
worse than ever, by Vomitting of Nails, pieces of Glass, etc. And falling one
Day into a violent Fit, she was swelled to an extraordinary bigness; some Beer
being given her, she threw up several pieces of Bread and Butter, besmeared
with poisonous Matter, which I judged to be Mercury. This so much affrighted
the Neighbors, that they would come no more near her. So that one Day she
being taken desperate ill, I was sent for to pray with her; and compassionating
the Deplorablenels of her Condition, I at last resolved to take her into my own
House, where in a short time the Vomiting ceased; though for some space, her
Distorting Fits followed her: But, blessed be God, is now, and has been for a
considerable time last past, in very good Health, and fit for a Service.

April 4th, 1691.

May-Hill, Minister of Beckington, in the County of Somerset.

15. In the beginning of the late War, Colonel Bowen in Glamorganshire, being
oppressed by the King's Party, took Arms under the Earl of Essex, and by his
Valor obtained a good Repute in the Army; so that in a short time he got the
Command of Lieutenant Colonel. But as soon as the heat of the War was abated,
his Case and Preferment led him to a careless and sensual Life, and he became
an absolute Atheist, denying Heaven or Hell, God or Devil, (acknowledging only
a Power, as the Heathens did Fate,) accounting Temporal Pleasures all his
expected Heaven: So that at last he became hateful, and hating all Civil
Society, and his nearest Relations.

About December last, he being in Ireland, and his Wife, a Pious Gentlewoman,
living in his House in Glamorgan, was very much troubled one Night with a great
Noise much like the sound of a Whirlwind, and a violent beating of the Doors
or Walls, as if the whole house were falling in Pieces: And being in her
Chamber, with most of her Family, after Praying to the Lord, (accounting it
Sinful Incredulity to yield to fear, she went to Bed, and suddenly after, there
appeared unto her something like her Husband, and asked her whether he should
come to Bed? she sitting up, and Praying to the Lord, told him, he was not her
Husband, and that he should not. He urged more earnestly: What! Not the Husband
of thy Bosom? What! Not the Husband of thy Bosom? (Yet had no Power to hurt
her.) And she, together with some Godly People, spent the Night in Prayer,
being very often Interrupted by this Apparition.

The next Night, Mr. Miles, (a Godly Minister,) with four other Godly Men, came
to watch and pray in the House that Night, and so continued in Prayer, and
other Duties of a Religion, without any Interruption or Noise at all that
Night. But the Night following, the Gentle woman, with several other Godly
Women, being in the House, the noise of a Whirlwind began again, with more
violence than formerly, and the Apparition walked in the Chamber, having an
unsufferable stench, like that of a putrified Carcass, filling the Room with a
thick smoke, smelling like Sulphur, Darkening the Light of the Fire and Candle,
but not quite Extinguishing it; sometimes going down the Stairs, and coming up
again with a fearful Noise, disturbing them in their Prayers, one while with
the sound of words, which they could not discern, otherwise striking them, so
that the next Morning their Faces week black with the smoke, and their Bodies
swollen with bruises.

This was attested by Colonel Rogers, the Governor of Hereford, by a Letter to
Mr. Baxter, Dated August 23. 1656. As likewise by Mr. Sam. Jones's of
Cocdreken, Mr. Maur. Bedwell's of Swansy, Mr. Daniel Higs and Captain Samuel
Foley's, both of Clonmell.

16. In the year of our Lord, 1652. Mary, the Daughter of Edward Ellins, of the
Borough of Evesham, in the County of Worcester, Gardener, then about nine or
ten years old, went in the Fields on a Saturday with some other children to
gather Cowslips, and finding in a Ditch by the way side, at the said Town's
End, one Catherine Huxley, a single Woman, Aged then about Forty years (as is
supposed, easing Nature) the children called her Witch, and took up Stones to
throw at her, the said Mary also called her Witch, and took up a Stone, but was
so affrighted, that she could not throw it at her; then they all run away from
her, and the said Mary being hindmost, this Huxley said to her [ Ellins, you
shall have Stones enough in your -- ] Whereupon Mary fell that day very ill,
and continued so Weak and Languishing that her Friends feared she would not
recover; but a Month after, she began to void Stones by the urinary Passages,
and some little Urine came away from her; also when she voided any Stone, the
Stone she voided, was heard by those that were by her, to drop into the Pot or
Basin, and she had most grievous Pains in her Back and Reins, like the pricking
of Pins, the Number of the Stones she voided, was about eighty, some plain
Pebbles, some plain Flints, some very small, and some about an Ounce Weight;
this she did for some space, (a Month or two, or thereabouts) until upon some
strong Suspicions of Witchcraft, the forenamed Huxley was apprehended, examined
and searched, (at whose Beds-head there was found several Stones, such as the
said Mary voided (and was sent to Worcester, where at the Summer Assizes in the
said Year 1652. (then at hand) she was upon the Prosecution of the Friends of
the said Mary, Condemned and Executed. Hist. Disc. of Apparitions and Witches,
p. 44.

17. Mr. Samuel Clark has published the Apparition to Mr. White of Dorchester,
assessor to the Westminister assembly, at Lambeth, that the Devil in a light
Night, stood by his Bedside: She looked a while whether he would say or do any
thing, and then said, If thou have nothing else to do, I have; and turned
himself to sleep. Many say it from Mr. White himself. Hist. Disc. of
Apparitions and Witches, p. 63.

18. Conveyances through the Air, etc. by Invisible Powers, Extracted from the
Miscellanies of John Aubery, Esquire; -- In a Letter from the Reverend Mr. Paschal,
Rector of Chedzay in Somersetshire, to Mr. Aurbery, are these words, Viz. The
most Remarkable of all happened in that Day that I passed by the Door in my
return hither, which was Easter-Eve, when Fry returning from Work (that little
he can do) he was caught by the Woman Spectre by the Skirts of his Doublet, and
carried into the Air; he was quickly mist by his Master and the Workmen, and
great enquiry was made for Fran. Fry, but no hearing of him; but about half an
Hour after Fry was heard Whistling and Singing in a kind of a Quagmire. He was
now affected as he was wont to be in his Fits; so that none regarded what he
said; but coming to Himself an Hour after, he solemnly protested, That the
Demon carried him so high that he saw his Master's House underneath him no
bigger than an Hay-cock, that he was in perfect Sense, and prayed God not to
suffer the Devil to destroy him; That he was suddenly set down in that
Quagmire. The Workmen found one Shoe on one side of the House, and the other
Shoe on the other side; his Periwig was espied next Morning hanging on the Top
of a tall Tree. It was soon observed, that Fry's part of his Body that had laid
in the Mud, was much benumbed, and therefore the next Saturday, which was the
Eve of Low-Sunday, they carried him to Crediton to be let Blood; which being
done, and the Company having left him for a little while, returning, they found
him in a Fit, with his Forehead all bruised and swollen to a great bigness, none
being able to guess how it came, till he recovered himself, and then he told
them, That a Bird flew in at the Window with a great force, and with a Stone in
its Mouth, flew directly against his Forehead. The People looked for it, and
found on the Ground just under where he sat, not a Stone, but a weight of
Brass, or Copper, which the People were breaking, and parting it among
themselves. He was so very ill, that he could not ride but one Mile, or little
more that Nighr, since which time I have not heard of him, save that he was ill
handled the next Day, being Sunday. Indeed Sir, you may wonder that I have not
Visited that House, and the poor afflicted People; especially, since I was so
near, and passed by the very Door: I am very well assured of the Truth of what
I have Written, and (as more appears) you shall hear from me again.

19. A Copy of a Letter from a Learned Friend of mine in Scotland, Dated March
25. 1695. -- Honored Sir, I received yours Dated May 24 1694. In which you
desire me to send you some Instances and Examples of Transportation by an
Invisible Power. The true cause of my delaying so long to reply to that Letter,
was not want of Kindness; but of sit Materials for such a Reply. As soon as I
read your Letter of May 24. I called to mind a Story which I heard long ago,
concerning one of the Lord Duffus ( in the Shire of Murray) his Predecessors,
of whom it is reported, That upon a time, when he was walking abroad in the
Fields near to his own House, he was suddenly carried away, and ^ound the next
day at Paris in the French King's Cellar with a Silver Cup in his Hand; that
being brought into the King's Presence and Questioned by him, Who he was? And
how he came thither? He told his Name, his Country, and the place of his
Residence, and that on such a Day of the Month (which proved to be the Day
immediately preceding) being in the Fields, he heard the noise of a
Whirlwind, and of Voices crying Horse and Hattock (this is the World which the
Fairies are said to use when they remove from any place); whereupon he cried
(Horse and Hattock) also, and was immediately caught up, and Transported
through the Air by the Fairies to that place, where after he had Drunk
heartily, he fell asleep, and before he awoke, the rest of the Company were
gone, and had left him in the posture wherein he was found. It Is said, the King
gave him the Cup which was found in his Hand, and dismissed him.

This Story (if it could be sufficiently attested) would be a Neble Instance
for your purpose, for which cause I was at some pains to enquire into the truth
of it, and found the means to get the present Lord Duffus's opinion thereof;
which shortly, is. That there has been, and is such a Tradition.

20. The following Account I received November last, from Mr. Alexander Mowat,
a Person of great Integrity and Judgment, who being Minister at the Church at
Lesly, in the Shire of Aberdene, was turned out for refusing the Oath of Test,
Anno. 1681. He informs, That he heard the late Earl of Cathnes, who was Married
to a Daughter of the late Marquess of Argyle, tell the following Story, Viz.
That upon a time, when a Vessel which his Lordship kept for bringing home Wine
and other Provisions for his House, was at Sea; a common Fellow, who was
reputed to have the Second-sight, being occasionally at his House; the Earl
enquired of him, where his Men (meaning those in the Ship) were at that present
time? The Fellow replied, at such a place, by Name, within four Hours Sailing
of the Harbor, which was not far from the place of his Lordship's Residence:
The Earl asked, what Evidence he could give for that? The other replied, that
he had lately been at the place, and had brought away with him one of the
Sea-mens Caps, which he delivered to his Lordship. At the four Hours end the
Earl went down himself to the Harbor, where he found the Ship newly arrived,
and in it one of the Seamen without his Cap; who being questioned, how he came
to lose his Cap? Answered, that at such a place (the same the Second-sighted
Man had Named before) there arose a Whirlwind which endangered the Ship, and
carried away his Cap: The Earl asked, if he would know his Cap when he saw it?
He said he would; whereupon the Earl produced the Cap, and the Seaman owned it
for that, which was taken from him. This is all the Information which I can
give at present concerning Transportation by an Invisible Power.

21. One Instance I had of one Allen Miller, being in Company with some
Gentlemen, having gotten a little more than ordinary of that strong Liquor they
were Drinking, began to tell Stories and strange Passages he had been at: But
the said Allen was suddenly removed to the farther end of the House, and was
there almost strangled; recovering a little, and coming to the place where he
was before, they asked him, What it was that troubled him so? He Answered, he
durst not tell; for he had told too much already.

22. The Devil appeared to a Dying Man, and showed him a Parchment very long,
Written on every side with the Sins both of words, thoughts and deeds, of the
Sick Man, and said unto him: Behold thy virtues! See what thy Examination shall
be. To whom he Answered, True Satan, but thou have not set all. Thou should
have added, The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all Sin: And he that
believes and is Baptized, shall be saved. Chetwinds Hist. Collect.

23. Luther relates of himself, that being at Prayer, contemplating how Christ
hung on the Cross and suffered for his Sins, there appeared suddenly on the
Wall a bright shining Vision, and therein appeared also a glorious form of our
Savior Christ, with his five wounds, steadfastly looking upon him, as if it had
been Christ himself corporally. Now at the first sight, he thought it had been
some good Revelation, yet presently recollected himself, and apprehending it
some juggling of the Devil; For Christ appears unto us in his word, and in a
meaner and more humble form; like as he was humbled on the Cross for us:
Therefore, said he, I spoke to the Vision in this manner; Away thou confounded
Devil, I know no other Christ, than he that was Crucified, and who in his word
is Pictured and Preached to me: Whereupon the Image Vanished, which was the
very Devil himself. And in like manner, said Luther further; A Gentlewoman, a
Virgin not far from my House at Wittenburg, lay very sick, to whom also
appeared a Vision after this sort following. She beheld, as she thought, a
Glorious form of our Savior, which she was ready to have Worshipped and fall
down before; but I being sent for presently, repaired to her, and saw the
Vision also, as in the form of Christ. I admonished her seriously, that she
should not suffer her self to be deluded by the Devil; whereupon upon she
raised up her self, and spit upon the Face of the Image, and instantly the
Image was changed into a great ugly Snake, which slid to the Gentlewomans Bed,
and bit her by the Ear, so there stood drops of Blood upon the Ear, which
trickled down, and thereupon the Snake vanished. This I beheld with mine Eyes,
said Luther, with diverse others that stood by. Luther's Coll. p. 144.

24. There was in Scotland, one [an Obsessus] carried in the Air several times,
in the view of several Persons, his Fellow Soldiers. Major Henton has seen him
carried away from the Guard in Scotland sometimes a Mile or two. Sundry Persons
are living now (1671,) that can attest this Story. I had it from sir Robert
Harley (the Son) who Married Major Henton's VVidow; as also from E. T. D. D.

25. A Gentleman of my Acquaintance Mr. -- M. was in Portugal, Anno 1655, when
one was Burnt by the Inquisition for being brought thither from Goa in
East India, in the Air, in an incredible short time.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Existence and Appearance of Separate Souls.
THat the Souls of Men do not expire with the Breath and Vital Union; or fall
into a deep Sleep, never to be awaked till the General Resurrection; according
to the Opinions of some Drowsy People, whose Reasons at present are asleep in
their Bodies, is a Truth (I think) easily evincible out of the Topics of all
Religions, that make any Noise and Figure in the World; out of the clear Text
of Sacred Scripture, and from the very nature of our Souls, as they now are and
act in the Body, whilst in union with it. Mr. Stevens in his late Sermons upon
the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, tells us, that one of the Fathers calls the
Good Angels (Enocatores Animarum) the Callers forth of Souls, and such as show
them (Paraturam Diversonii) the preparation of those Mansions they are going
to. Hence (says he) we observe when good Men are dying, they are often in
silent Raptures, and express a kind of impatience till they are dissolved. And
why? because they spiritually see what they cannot utter; as did St. Paul when
he was wrapped up into the Third Heaven. There is a kind of a Draught presented
to them by their Guardian Angels, of those Transcendent Joys they are almost
ready to enter in possession of, and therefore long and pine till they are
conveyed into that place of unspeakable Felicity. These Heavenly Spirits
succor and support them under their Pain and Sickness, and when their Souls
are stormed out of their Bodies, they encompass and embrace them, soaring
through the Regions of Evil Angels into Heaven. It Is said, that Lazarus was
safely carried by the Angels into Abraham 's Bosom; so that it is plain, that
the Angels are employed to convey the Souls of true Believers into a fixed
State of blessedness. But because Men are very apt to be incredulous in these
Cases, my Design is to enquire in their Chapter, what knowledge we can pick up
concerning the Existence of particular Souls after their Separation, out of
Ancient and Modern Histories; and I believe it will appear by what follows,
that the Soul is really alive and active, and concerned after Death. I Insist
not on the Parable to the Rich Man and Lazarus, mentioned by our Savior, nor
any particular Instances out of Sacred Writ: Read the following Stories, and if
all of them are not credibly and rightly interpreted and applied; if Satan may
in some be concerned on purpose to put Tricks upon poor Incredulous (shall I
say, or Credulous) Souls, yet it is strange if they are all untrue.

1. A Narrative of an Apparition which a Gentleman in Boston had of his
Brother, just then Murdered in London. -- It was on the Second of May, in the
Year 1687, that a most ingenious, accomplished and well-disposed Gentleman, Mr.
Joseph Beacon by Name, about Five a Clock in the Morning, as he lay, whether
Sleeping or Waking he could not say, (but judged the latter of them) had a View
of his Brother then at London, although he was now himself at our Boston,
distanced from him a Thousand Leagues. This his Brother appeared to him in the
Morning, about five a Clock at Boston, having on him a Bengal Gown, which he
usually wore, with a Napkin tied about his Head; his Countenance was very Pale,
Ghastly, Deadly, and he had a Bloody Wound on one side of his Forehead. Brother!
says the affrighted Joseph. Brother, answered the Apparition. Said Joseph,
What Is the matter Brother? How came you here? The Apparition replied, Brother,
I have been most barbarously and injuriously Butchered by a Debauched, drunken
Fellow, to whom I never did any wrong in my Life. Whereupon he gave a
particular Description of the Murderer; adding, Brother, This Fellow changing
his Name, is attempting to go over unto New England, in Foy or Wild: I would
pray you on the first Arrival of either of these, to get an Order from the
Governor, to Seize the Person whom I have now described; and then do you
Indict him for the Murder of me your Brother: I Will stand by you, and prove the
Indictment: And so he vanished. Mr. Beacon was extremely astonished at what he
had seen and heard; and the People of the Family not only observed an
extraordinary Alteration upon him for the Week following, but have also given
me under their Hands a full Testimony, that he then gave them an Account of
this Apparition.

All this while Mr. Beacon had no Advice of any thing amiss, attending his
Brother then in England; but about the latter end of June following, he
understood by the common ways of Communication, that the April before, his
Brother going in haste by Night to call a Coach for a Lady, met a Fellow then
in Drink, with his Doxy in his Hand: Some way or other the Fellow thought
himself affronted with the hasty passage of this Beacon, and immediately ran
into the Fireside of a Neighboring Tavern, from whence he fetched out a
Fire-fork, wherewith he grievously wounded Beacon in the Skull, even in that
very part where the Apparition showed his Wound. Of this Wound he Languished
until he Died, on the Second of May, about Five of the Clock in the Morning at
London. The Murderer it seems was endeavoring to Escape, as the Apparition
affirmed, but the Friends of the Deceased Beacon seized him; and prosecuting
him at Law, he found the help of such Friends as brought him off, without the
loss of his Life; since which, there has no more been heard of the Business.

This History I received of Mr. Joseph Beacon himself, who a little before his
own pious and hopeful Death, which followed not long after, gave me the Story
written and signed with his own Hand, and attested with the Circumstances I
have already mentioned. See Mr. Cotton Mather's Wonders of the Invisible World.

2. In the City of Athens there was a goodly Lodging, which yet was out of
Request, as a Place very dangerous; for in the Night there was a Spirit that
walked in it, drawing a Chain, and making a Noise, and seemed as if he came
afar off; and then would suddenly be hard by. After that, there would appear a
great Old Man, his Flesh all worn away, having a Long Beard, his Hair standing
an end, and all tangled; Fetters on his Feet, a Chain at his Hands, which he
would always be shaking. They that dwelt in the house could never rest in the
Night, but would grow heavy and pensive, and so fall sick and dye: For in the
very day time, though they saw not the Spirit, yet they would think he always
was in their sight, and that the ringing of his Chain did always beat in their
Ears. Upon this, the Lodging stood empty, though it was by Bills exposed to
sale. After some time. Athenodorus the Philosopher came to Athens, lacked a
House, and purchasing this at a small Rate, the first Night put his Servants
into the back-part of it to lodge; chose for himself the forepart, where he had
a Bed placed, his VVriting-Tables brought, and a Lamp well lighted: Here he
betook to Read, Write and Study very earnestly. And late in the Night, the
Spirit came with his old Noise, Chain and Fetters; the Philosopher continuing
still earnest at his Business: 'Till at last the Spirit shaking his Chain over
his Head, made a Sign to him, as if he desired the Philosopher to follow him:
Upon which he obeyed, taking a Light in his Hand, and following, till such time
as the Ghost vanished away in the Street. Athenodours marked the Place with
some Grass and Leaves which he laid upon it; and the next Day went to the
Council of the City, desired the Place might be searched; which being done,
they found a Dead body all rothen, nothing left but Bones and Chains, which
they took up and buried elsewhere. After which, the House was no more Haunted.
Camerar. Hist. Med. l. 4. ex Plen. 2d Epist. l. 3.

3. The Elder Countess of Donagal, a Lady, Pious, Discreet and Credible, told
me, That one of her Husband's Tennants, (near Belfast, or Carickfergus, where
he was Lord) agreed with him for to put his Son's Life, with his own Life, in a
renewed Lease of a Farm; and he paid part of the Money, and died before the
Lease was made and sealed: His Wife married another Man, and paid the rest of
the Money out of her second Husband's Purse, and therefore put in his Son's
Life, instead of her Son by the former Husband, into the Lease. The Earl of
Donagal going into England, and being then in the West, a Servant of his in
Ireland, his Porter, a stout lusty Man, was haunted with the Apparition of the
Woman's first Husband, telling him, That he must go to his Wife, and tell her,
That she should have no rest till his Sons Life were put in the altered Lease.
He asked why he spoke to him, and what he had to do to meddle in it? It answered
him, Thou art a Man fit for it, and thou shall have no rest till thou do it.
The Man delayed, and was still haunted with this Apparition. He went to the
Minister of the Town, and told him of it; who counseled him to tell the Woman.
She told him, That she took it to be Just, that her Husband that paid most of
the Money, should have the benefit of the Lease; and perhaps, not believing the
Man, delayed. This Apparition came to the Porter again, and said, That she may
believe thee, go tell her of such and such Discourse and Actions, that were
between her and me in secret, which none else knows of. The Man went, and
told her all that he was bid. She confessed that it was all true, and secret
between them, but still delayed, till some trouble (I remember not what)
molested her self. In short, the Porter and she had no rest, till she had drawn
a new Lease, with the Name of the first Husbands Son, and sent it into England,
to the Earl of Donagal, who Sealed it. Historical Discourse of Apparitions and
Witches, p. 40.

4. St. Augustine relates a memorable Story which fell out at Milan, where a
certain Citizen being dead, there came a Creditor, to whom he had been
indebted, and unjustly demanded the Money of his Son; the Son knew the Debt was
satisfied by the Father, but having no Acquittance to show, his Father appeared
to him in his Sleep, and showed him where the Acquittance lay, Aug. in lib. de
cura pro mortuis agenda.

5. It is a thing, both known and frequent, That the Inhabitants of the Scottish
Isles, when their Friends are dying, come to them, and request them, that upon
such or such a day after their Death, and in such a place, they would meet
them, which the Dead accordingly do at the time and place agreed upon, and have
sometimes discourse with them. See Flavel on the Soul.

6. Marsilius Ficinus, having made a solemn Vow with Michael Mercatus (after
they had been pretty warmly disputing of the Immortality of the Soul, out of
the Principles of their Master Plato) that whether of them two died first,
should appear to his Friend, and give him certain Information of that Truth;
Ficinus Died quickly after: Mercatus being early in the Morning very intent on
his Studies, heard a Horse Riding by with all speed, and of served that he
stopped at his VVindow; and therewith heard the Voice of his Friend Ficinus,
crying out aloud. O Michael, Michael, vera, vera sunt illa, i.e. O Michael,
Michael, those things are true. VVhereupon he suddenly opened his VVindow, and
espying Marsilius upon a white steed, called after him, but he Vanished out of
his sight, he sent therefore presently to Florence, to know how Marsilius did,
and understood that he died about that hour he called at his VVindow. Flavel
out of Dr. More, who cites it out of Baronius.

7. Much to the same purpose, is that so Famous and well attested Story of the
Apparition of Major George Sydenham, to Capt, William Dyke, both of
Somersetshire, attested by the worthy and Learned Dr. Thomas Dyke, and by Mr.
Douch, to whom both the Major and Captain were intimately known. The sum is
this: The Major and Captain had many disputes about the being of a God, and the
Immortality of the Soul, in which points they could never be resolved, tho they
much sought for and desired it, and therefore it was at last fully agreed
betwixt them, that he that died first, should the third Night after his
Funeral, come betwixt the hours of twelve and one, to the little House in the
Garden, adjoining to Major Sydenham's House at Dulverton in Somersetshire. The
Major died first. The Captain awaited at the time, and place appointed for his
Major, but no Appearance. About six Weeks after the Captain and Dr. Dyke went
to Eaton, and lay again in the same Inn, but not the same Chamber as before, at
Dulverton. The morning before they went thence, the Captain staid longer than
was usual, in his Chamber, and at length came into the Doctors Chamber, but in
a Visage and Form much differing from himself, with his Hair and Eyes staring,
and his whole body shaking and trembling; whereat the Doctor wondering,
demanded the cause. The Captain Answered, I have seen my Major, if ever I saw
him in my Life, I saw him but now: This morning (said he) after it was light,
some one came to my Bedside, and suddenly drawing back the Curtains, called
Cap, Cap, the Term of Familiarity, used by the Major! To which he added, I
could not come at the time appointed, but I am now come to tell you, that there
is a God, and a very just and terrible one, and if you do not turn over a new
leaf you will find it so. The Cap. eat little, and seemed to have these words
sounding in his Ears frequently, during the remainder of his Life; and often
related it, but with Trepidation and Horror. Flavel ex Sadducismo Triumphato,
2d part. p. 183.

8. Thomas Goddard of Marlborough in the County of Wilts, Weaver, A. 1674. Nov.
23. Says, that on Monday the Ninth of this Instant, as he was going to Ogborn,
at a Style on the High way near Mr. Goddard's Ground, about Nine in the
Morning, he met the Apparition of his Father-in-Law, one Edward Avon of this
Town, Glover, who Died in May last, having on, to his Appearance, the same
Clothes, Hat, Stockings and Shoes, he did usually wear when he was Living,
standing by, and leaning over that Style. Which when he came near, the
Apparition spoke to him with an audible Voice these Words, Are you afraid? To
which he Answered, I am, thinking on one who is Dead and Buried, whom you are
like. To which the Apparition replied with the like Voice, I am he that you
were thinking on, I am Edward Avon your Father-in-Law, come near to me, I will
do you no harm. To which Goddard Answered, I trust in him who has bought my
Soul with his precious Blood, you shall do me no harm. Then the Apparition
said, How stands Cases at home? Goddard asked, What Cases? Then it asked him, How
do William and Mary? Meaning, as he conceived, his Son, William Avon, a
Shooemaker here, and Mary, his Daughter, the said Goddard's Wife. Then it said,
What! Tailor is dead; meaning, as he thought, one Tailor of London, who married
his Daughter Sarah, which Tailor died about Michaelmas last. Then the
Apparition held out its Hand, and in it, as Goddard conceived, Twenty or Thirty
Shillings in Silver, and then spoke with a loud Voice, Take this Money and send
it to Sarah, for I shut up my Bowels of Compassion toward her in the time of
my Life, and now here is somewhat for her. And then said, Mary, (meaning his,
the said Goddard's Wife, as he conceived,) is troubled for me; but tell her,
God has showed Mercy to me, contrary to my Deserts. But the said Goddard
answered, In the Name of Jesus Christ, I refuse, I refuse all such Money. Then
the Apparition said, I perceive you are afraid, I will meet you some other
time. And immediately it went up the Lane, to his appearance. So he went over
the same Stils, but saw it no more that day.

He says, the next Night, about Seven of the Clock, it came and opened his
Shop Window, and stood in the like Clothes, looked him in the Face, but said
nothing to him. And the next Night after, as Goddard went forth into his back
side, with a Candle light in his Hand, it appeared to him again, in the same
shape; but he being in fear, ran into his House, and saw it no more then.

But he says, That on Thursday, the Twelfth instant, as he came from Chilton,
riding down the Hill, between the Mannor-House and Axford-Farm-Field, he saw
somewhat like an Hare cross his way, at which his Horse being frighted, threw
him in the dirt, and as soon as he could recover his feet, the same Apparition
there met him again, in the same Habit, and there standing about Eight Foot
directly before him in the way, spoke again to him with a loud Voice, Source,
(a word he commonly used when living) you have staid long; and then said to
him, Thomas, bid William Avon take the Sword that he had of me, which is now in
his House, and carry it to the Wood as we go to Alton, to the Upper End of the
Wood, by the way side; for with that Sword I did wrong about Thirty Years ago,
and he never prospered since he had that Sword. And bid William Avon give his
Sister Sarah Twenty Shillings of the Money which he had of me. And do you talk
with Edward Lawrence; for I borrowed Twenty Shillings of him several Years ago,
and did say I had paid him, but I did not pay it him; and I would desire you to
pay him Twenty Shillings out of the Money which you had from James Elliot, at
Two Payments. Which Money the said Goddard now says was Five Pounds, which
James Elliot, a Baker here, owed the said Avon on Bond, and which he the said
Goddard had received from the said Elliot, since Michaelmas, at Two Payments,
viz. Thirty Five Shillings at one, and Three Pounds Five Shillings at the
other. Tell Margaret (meaning his own Wife, as he conceived) that I would
desire her to deliver up the little which I gave to little Sarah Tailor, to the
child, or to any one she will trust for it. But if she will not, speak to
Edward Lawrence to persuade her. But if she will not then, tell her that I will
see her very suddenly. And see that this be done within a Twelve Month and a
day after my Decease, and Peace be with you. And so it went away over the Rails
into the Wood there, in the like manner, as any Man would go over a Style, to
his Apprehension, and so he saw it no more at that time. And he says, that he
paid the twenty Shillings to Edward Lawrence^ of this Town, who being present
now, does remember he lent the said Avon twenty Shillings about twenty years
ago, which none knew but himself and Wife, and Avon and his Wife, and was
never paid it again before now by this Goddard.

And this said Goddard further says, that this very day, by Mr. Mayor's order,
he, with his Brother-in-Law William Avon, went with the Sword, and about Nine a
Clock this Morning, they laid down the Sword in the copse, near the place the
Apparition had appointed Goddard to carry it, and then coming away thence,
Goddard looking back, saw the same Apparition again in the like habit as
before. VVhereupon he called to his Brother-in-Law, and said, Here is the
Apparition of our Father; Who said, I see nothing. Then Goddard fell on his
Knees, and said, Lord, open his Eyes that he may see it. But he replied, Lord,
grant I may not see it, if it be thy Blessed Will. And then the Apparition, to
Goddard's Appearance, beckned with his hand to him to come to it. And then
Goddard said, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, what would you
have me to do? Then the Apparition said to him, Thomas, take up the Sword and
follow me. To which he said, should both of us come, or but one of us? To which
it Answered, Thomas do you take up the Sword. And so he took up the Sword and
followed the Apparition about Ten Lugs (that is Poles) further into the Copse,
and then turning back, he stood still about a Lug and an half from it, his
Brother-in-Law staying behind at the place where they first laid down the
Sword. Then Goddard laying down the Sword upon the ground, saw something stand
by the Apparition like a mastiff Dog, of a brown Color. Then the Apparition
coming toward Goddard, he stepped back about two steps, and the Apparition said
to him, I have a Permission to come, and a Commission not to touch you, And
then it took up the Sword, and went back to the place at which before it stood,
with a Mastiff Dog by it, as before, and pointed the top of the Sword into the
ground, and said; In this place lies Buried the Body of him which I Murdered in
the Year 1635. Which is now Rotten and turned to Dust. VVhereupon Goddard
said, I do abjure you in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, wherefore
did you do this Murder? And it said, I took Money from the Man, and he
contended with me, and so I Murdered him. Then Goddard asked him, who was
Confederate with him in the said Murder? And it said, None but my self. Then
Goddard said, What would you have me do in this thing? And the Apparition said,
This is that the World may know that I Murdered a Man, and Buried him in this
place in the Year 1635.

Then the Apparition laid down the Sword on the bare ground there whereon grew
nothing, but seemed to Goddard to be as a Grave sunk in. And then the
Apparition rushing further into the Copse, Vanished, and he saw it no more.
VVhereupon Goddard and his Brother-in-Law Avon, leaving the Sword there, and
coming away together, Avon told Goddard he heard his Voice, and understood what
he said, and heard other words distinct from his, but could not understand a
word of it, nor saw any Apparition at all. Which he now also at present
affirms, and all which the said Goddard then attested under his hand, and
affirmed, he would depose the same, when he shall be thereto required.

In the Presence of Christ. Lypiat, Mayor, Ralph Bailey, Town Clerk, Joshua
Sacheverel, Rector of St. Peter's in Marlborough.

Examined by me, William Bailey.

Thus far out of Mr. Glanvil, which I have related more largely, because I my
self was at Oxford at the same time, when the Relation came fresh to the
Vice Chancellor; And Lodging at Chadlington, not far from Oxford, upon the
Saturday Night after, with the Minister of the Place, then a Fellow of
Merton-Colledge, of thirteen or fourteen years standing: He told me, that
having an occasion of Traveling into Wiltshire, near to the very place where
this Goddard dwelt, he had the very story fully attested to him by many
credible Persons.

7. Mrs. Tailor of the Ford, by S. Neots, in a Letter to Dr. Ezekiel Burton,
relates, how one Mary Watkinson, whose Father lived in Smithfield, but she
Married to one Francis Topham, and she living in York, with her Husband, being
an ill one, who did steal her away against her Parents consent, so that they
could not abide him; That she came often to them, and when she was last with
him, upon their parting, she expressed, that she feared she should never see
him more. He Answered her, if he should die, if God did permit the Dead to see
the Living, he would see her again; now after he had been Buried about half a
year, one Night, when she was in Bed, but could not sleep, she heard Music,
and the Chamber grew lighter and lighter, and she being broad awake, saw her
Father stand at her Bedside: who said, Mall, did I not tell thee that I would
see thee once again? She called him Father, and talked of many things; and he
bad her be Dutiful and Patient to her Mother: And when she told him, that she
had a Child since he died, he said, That would not trouble her long. He bad her
speak what she would now to him, for he must go, and that he should rever see
her more till they met in the Kingdom of Heaven: So the Chamber was darker and
darker, and he was gone with Music; and she said, that she did never dream of
him, nor ever did see any Apparition of him after.

He was a very honest godly Man, as far as I can tell, says the same Mrs.
Tailor in the Clause of a Letter, Ibid. and it is attested by G. Rust likewise,
afterward Bishop of Dromore.

8. Dr. Farrar (a Man of great Piety, and Physician to King Charles the II.)
and his Daughter (Mrs. Pearson's Mother, a very pious Soul) made a Compact at
his Entreaty, that the first of them that died, if happy, should after Death
appear to the Surviver, if it were possible; the Daughter with some Difficulty
consenting thereto.

Some time after, the Daughter, who lived at Gillingham-Lodge, two Miles from
Salisbury, fell into Labor, and by a Mistake, being given a noxious Potion,
instead of another prepared for her, suddenly died

Her Father lived in London, and that very Night she died she opened his
Curtains, and looked upon him. He had before heard not^ing of her Illness, but
upon this Apparition confidently told his Maid that his Daughter was dead, and
after two Days received the News. Her Grandmother told Mrs. Pearson this; as
also an Uncle of hers, and the abovesaid Maid; and Mrs. Pearson I know, and she
is a very Prudent and Good Woman; Says Mr. Edward Fowler, in a Letter to Dr.
H. More, An. 1678. Ibid.

9. Mr. Quick, in his Relation of a Family poisoned at Plymouth, relates this
Story, which he says he had from one Mr. B. Cl. a very Holy Man, and a
Reverend Minister, formerly of Petrocks, by the Castle of Dartmouth. This
Minister was sent for, to visit and pray with a dying Man, under very much
Troubles of Conscience. His Case was this; Sir, said he unto the Minister,
about 7 months since, as I was going to Buscow, I met a Comerade of mine, who
had gone to Sea about a Fortnight since; and taking him by the Hand, wondering
at his Arrival, I said, What cheer Mate? What makes thee return so soon, and
look so pale? I am dead, quoth this Spectrum. Dead? man! and yet walk and talk!
Yes, says he, I am dead. I was took sick shortly after my going to Sea, and
died this day; and about an Hour since, so many Leagues off, I was thrown
overboard.

Now I desire thee to go home, and to tell my Wife of it, and to open my
Coffer, and show my Will, and see my Legacies paid; which having so promised to
do for him, at parting he added, And as for that business between thee and me,
that thou well wotest of, I charge thee that thou never speak of it to any Man
living; for if thou do, I will in that very moment tear thee in a thousand
Pieces. Now, Sir, this lies heavy upon my Conscience. Fain would I declare it;
it is upon my Tongue, but I cannot: And why can you not, said the Minister? Oh!
Sir, do not you see him? Look how terrible he is! there he is just against me!
Oh how does he threaten me! I would tell you, but I dare not.

And whatever Arguments this Reverend Parsonage could use unto the sick man, he
could never bring him to a Confession; but he pined away under his Terrors and
Horrors; till at last, not being able to subsist any longer by reason of them,
he died. See the aforesaid Relation, called Hell opened; or the Infernal Sin of
Murder punished. P. 82, 83.

10. No longer since than the last Winter there was much Discourse in London
concerning a Gentlewoman, unto whom her dead Son (and another whom she knew
not) had appeared: Being then in Lodnon, I was willing to satisfy my self, by
enquiring into the Truth of what was reported; and on Febr. 23. 1691. my
Brother (who is now a Pastor to a Congregation in that City) and I discoursed
the Gentlewoman spoke of; she told us, that a Son of hers, who had been a very
civil young Man, but more airy in his Temper than was pleasing to his serious
Mother; being dead, she was much concerned in her Thoughts about his Condition
in the other World; but a Fortnight after his Death he appeared to her saying,
Mother, you are solicitous about my Spiritual Welfare; trouble your self no
more, for I am happy, and so vanished. See Mr. Increase Mather's Cases of
Conscience, about Witches, p. 11.

11. Apparitions, extracted from the Miscellanies of John Aubrey, Esquire; -- The
Antiquities of Oxford tell us, that St. Edmund, Archbishop of Canterbury, did
sometimes converse with an Angel, (or Nymph) at a Spring without St. Clements
Parish, near Oxford; as Numa Pompilius did with the Nymph Egeria. This Well was
stopped up since Oxford was a Garrison. See the Life of John Donn, D. D. Dean
of St. Paul's, writ by Mr. Isaac Walton, where it is affirmed, that the Dean did
see the Apparition of his Wife.

12. Mr. Cashio Buroughs was one of the most Beautiful Men in England, and
very Valiant, but very proud and Blood-thirsty: There was then in London a very
Beautiful Italian Lady, who fell so extremely in Love with him, that she did
let him enjoy her, which she had never let any man do before: Wherefore, said
she, I shall request this Favor of you, never to tell any one of it. The
Gentlewoman died; and afterward in a Tavern in London he spoke of it; and
there going to make Water, the Ghost of the Gentlewoman did appear to him. He
was afterward troubled with the Apparition of her, even sometimes in Company,
when he was drinking, but he only perceived it: Before she did appear, he did
find a kind of a Chilness upon his Spirits; she did appear to him in the
morning before he was killed in a Duel. This Account I have from an intimate
Friend of mine, who was an Acquaintance of his.

13. In James-street, in Covent Garden, 1647. did lodge a Gentlewoman, a
handsome Woman, but common, who was Mr. Mohun's (Son to the Lord Mohun)
Sweetheart, Mr. Mohun was murdered about Ten a Clock in the Morning, and at
that very time, his Mistress being in Bed, saw Mr. Mohun come to her Bedside,
drew the Curtain, looked upon her, and went away: She called upon him, but no
answer: She knocked for her maid, asked her for Mr. Mohun; she said she did not
see him, and had the Key of her Chamber Door in her Pocket. This Account I had
from the Gentlewoman's own mouth, and her maid's. A parallel Story to this, is,
That Mr. Brown, (Brother-in-law to the Lord Conningsby) discovered his being
murdered to several. His Phantome appeared to his Sister and her maid in
Fleet Street, about the time he was Killed in Herefordshire, which was about a
Year since, 1693.

14. I must not forget an Apparition in my Country, which appeared several
times to Dr. Turbervile's Sister, at Salisbury; which is much talked of. One
married a second Wife, and, contrary to the Agreement and Settlement at the
first VVife's marriage, did wrong the Children by the first Venture. The
Settlement was hid behind a VVainscot in the Chamber where the Doctor's Sister
did lie: And the Apparition of the first Wife did discover it to her. By which
means Right was done to the first Wife's Children.

15. One Mr. Towes, who had been School-fellow with Sir George Villers, the
Father of the first Duke of Buckingham, and was his Friend and Neighbor) as he
lay in his Bed awake, (and it was Daylight) came into his Chamber the Phantome
of his dear Friend Sir George Villers: Said Mr. Towes to him, Why, you are
Dead, what make you here? Said the Knight, I am dead, but cannot rest in Peace
for the Wickedness and Abomination of my Son George at Court. I do appear to
you, to tell him of it, and to advise and dehort him from his Evil ways, Said
Mr. Towes, The Du^e will not believe me, but will say, that I am Mad, or D^at.
Said Sir George, Go to him from me, and tell him by such a Token (some Mole)
that he had in some secret place, which none but himself knew of. Accordingly
Mr. Tomes went to the Duke, who laughed at his message At his return home, the
Phantome appeared again, and told him, that the Duke would be stabbed (he drew
out a Dagger) a quarter of a Year after; and you shall outlive him half a Year;
and the Warning that you shall have of your Death will be, That your Nose shall
fall a-bleeding: All which accordingly fell out so.

16. The Learned Henry Jacob, Fellow of Merton-College in Oxford, died at Dr.
Jacob's, M. D. House in Canterbury. About a Week after his Death, the Doctor
being in Bed, and awake, and the Moon shining bright, saw his Cousin Henry
standing by his Bed, in his Shirt, with a white Cap on his Head, and his Beard
mustaches turning up, as when he was alive. The Doctor pinched himself, and was
sure he was awaked: He turned to the other side, from him, and after some time
took Courage to turn the other way again toward him; and Henry Jacob stood
there still, he should have spoken to him, but did not, for which he has been
ever since sorry: About half an Hour after he vanished. Not long after this,
the Cook-maid going to the Woodpile to fetch VVood to dress Supper, saw him
standing in his Shirt upon the VVoodpile. This Account I had in a Letter from
Dr. Jacob. 1673. relating to his Life, for Mr. Anthony Word, which is now in
his Hands.

17, Mr. T. M. an old Acquaintance of mine, has assured me, that about a
quarter of a Year after his Wives Death, as he lay in Bed awake with his
little Grandchild, his Wife opened the Closet Door, and came into the Chamber
to the Bedside, and looked upon him, and stooped down and kissed him; her Lips
were warm, he fancied they would have been cold. He was about to have embraced
her, but was afraid it might have done him hurt. When she went from him, he
asked when he should see her again? she turned about and smiled, but said
nothing. The Closet Door striked as it uses to do, both at her coming in, and
going out.

18. Mr. Jo. Lydall, or Trinity-College, Soc. Oxon. March 11. 1649, 50. Attests
the ensuing Relation, in a Letter to Mr. Aubrey, thus; -- Mr. Aubrey,
Concerning that which happened at Woodstock, I was told by Mr. W. Haws, ( who
now lives with Sir William Fleetwood in the Park) That the Committee which sat
in the Mannor-house, for Selling the King's Lands, were frighted by strange
Apparitions; and that the Four Surveyors which were sent to measure the Park,
and Lodged themselves with some other Companions in the Manor, were pelted out
of their Chambers by Stones thrown in at the Windows (but from what Hands the
Stones came they could not see) that their Candles were continually put out as
fast as they lighted them; and that one with his Sword drawn to defend a
Candle, was with his own Scabbard in the mean time well Cudgelled; so that for
the Blow, or for fear, he fell Sick, and the others forced to remove; some of
them to Sir William Fleetwood's House, and the rest to some other places. But
concerning the cutting of the Oak, in particular, I have nothing.

Your Friend, To be commanded to my power, John Lydall.

19. A Minister, who lived by Sir John War, in Somersetshire, about 1665,
walking over the Park to give Sir John a Visit, was rencounter'd by a venerable
old Man, who said to him, Prepare your self; for such a day (which was about
three Days after) you shall die. The Minister told Sir John War and my Lady
this Story, who heeded it not: On the Morning fore-warned, Sir John calls upon
the Parson early to ride a Hunting, and to Laugh at his Prediction: His Maid
went up to call him, and found him stark dead. This from my Lady Katherine
Henly, who had it from my Lady War.

20. Dr. -- Twiss, Minister of the New Church at Westminster, told me, That his
Father [Dr. Twiss, Prolocutor of the Assembly of Divines, and Author of
Vindiciae] when he was a Schoolboy at Winchester, saw the Phantome of a
School-fellow of his deceased (a Rakehell) who said to him, I am damned. This
was the occasion of Dr. Twiss [the Fathers] Conversion, who had been before
that time (as he told his Son) a very wicked Boy.

21. John Evelyn showed us at the Royal Society, a Note under Mr. Smyth's Hand
(the Curate of Deptford) that in November 1679, as he was in Bed sick of an
Ague, came to him the vision of a Master of Arts, with a white Wand in his
Hand; and told him, That if he did lie on his back three Hours, viz. from ten
to one, that he should be rid of his Ague. He lay a good while on his Back; but
at last being weary he turned, and immediately the Ague attacked him,
afterward he strictly followed the Direction, and was perfectly cured. He was
awake, and it was in the Daytime.

22. A Dutch Prisoner at Woodbridge in Suffolk, in the Reign of Charles II.
could discern Spirits; but others that stood by could not. The Bell tolled for
a Man newly deceased. The Prisoner saw his Phantome, and did describe him to
the Parson of the Parish, who was with him; exactly agreeing with the Man for
whom the Bell tolled. Says the Prisoner, now he is coming near to you, and now
he is between you and the Wall; the Parson was resolved to try it, and went to
take the Wall of him, and was thrown down; but could see nothing. This Story is
credibly told by several Persons of Belief. Dr. Hook, the Parson of the
Parish, has often told this Story; of which I know many more particulars.

23. Vavasor Powell saw several Apparitions. See page 8. of his Life.

As concerning Apparitions of a Man's own self, there are sundry Instances,
some whereof I shall here set down.

24. The Beautiful Lady Diana Rich, Daughter of the Earl of Holland, as she was
walking in her Father's Garden at Kensington, to take the fresh Air before
Dinner, about Eleven a Clock, being then very well, met with her own
Apparition, Habit and every thing, as in a Looking-Glass. About a Month after
she died of the Smallpox. And it is said, that her Sister, the Lady Isabelta
(Thin) saw the like of her self also before she died. This Account I had from
a Person of Honor.

25. Mrs. E. W. Daughter of Sir W. W. affirms, that Mrs. J. (her Father's
Sister) saw her self (i. e.) her Phantome, half a Year before she died, or a
quarter of an Hour together. She said further, that her Aunt was sickly
Fourteen Years before she died, and that she walked Living (i. e.) her
Apparition, and that she was seen by several at the same time. The like is
reported of others.

26. Mr. Trehern, B. D. (Chaplain to Sir Orlando Bridgman, Lord Keeper) a
Learned and sober Person, was the Son of a Shoemaker in Hereford: One Night as
he lay in Bed, the Moon shining very bright, he saw the Phantome of one of the
Apprentices sitting in a Chair, in his red Wastcoat, and Head-band about his
head, and Strap upon his Knee; which Apprentice was really a Bed and asleep,
with another Fellow-Apprentice in the same Chamber, and saw him.

27. When Sir Richard Nepier, M. D. of London, was upon the Road, coming from
Bedfordshire, the Chamberlain of the Inn showed him his Chamber; the Doctor saw
a dead Man lying upon the Bed: He looked more wistly, and saw it was himself.
He was then well enough in Health. He goes forward in his Journey -- to Mr.
Steward's in Berkshire, and there died. This Account I have in a Letter from
Elias Ashmole, Esquire. They were intimate Friends. Thus far Mr. Aubery.

CHAP. V. Revelation of secret, or future Things, by express Voice.
BY this Title I do not mean any Declarations, Discoveries, Confessions, or
Predictions, made by any Person living, but only such as are uttered, either
with only an audible Voice alone, or with a Voice proceeding from some Phantasm
or Apparition, either in the likeness of some deceased Person, Friend, or
Relation; or of some Ghost dressed up in the Figure of some Animal, that we are
generally acquainted with; as the Serpent to Eve, the Ass to Balaan, etc.
Histories are full of Testimonies and Instances of this kind: to enquire after
all, would be a wild Chase, and nauseous to the Reader, as well as laborious to
the Writer. We will call a few out of many, for a Specimen; which will give
such a luster to the Theme we are upon, that will certainly run us up in our
Meditations and Searches, to Digitus Dei, the Finger of God, as having a signal
stroke in all such Voices and Occurrences, as cannot with any show of Reason be
imputed or ascribed to any Inarticulate, Inorganical, Irrational Being, which
yet appears to be the only Immediate Instrument they proceed from.

1. In Jerusalem, before the Destruction of it by Titus Vespasian, at the Feast
of Pentecost, the High Priest entering into the Temple to offer the usual
Sacrifices, which at that time God regarded no more, there was a sudden Noise
heard, and a Voice immediately following it, which said, (...), Let us depart
hence. Gaffarella's unheard of Curios. Part 2. Chapter 3. out of Josephus. Besides,
we know, that our blessed Savior had by express Words Predicted the same
dismal Calamity to that place and People, with a particulat notation of the
Time when it should happen, viz. before the then present Generation should be
passed away.

2. An Inhabitant of the Town of Guilford in Surrey, who was possessed of some
Copyhold Land, which was to descend to his Children, or in default of such
Issue, to his Brother, dies, having no Child born. And his Wife apprehending
her self not to be with Child (which her Husbands Brother asked her immediately
after his Brother's death) she told him she believed she was not, but afterward
proved to be. Which when she knew, she went, by the instigation of Neighbors,
to her Brother, and told him how it was with her. He railed at her called her
Whore, and told her, That she had procured some Body to g et her with Child,
knowing that such a Field must be Inherited by the Posterity of her Husband,
but her whoring should not fool him out of the Estate. The poor Woman went home
troubled, that not only her Child should lose the Land, but, which was worse,
that she should be thought a Whore. However, she quieted her self, and resolved
to sit down with the loss.

When her times came, she was delivered of a Son, he grew up, and one Summer's
Night, as she was undressing him in her Yard, her Husband appeared, and bid her
go to his Brother, and demand the Field: which she did, but was treated very
ill by him. He told her, That neither she, nor her Devil (for she had told him
her Husband appeared, and bid her speak to him) should make him forego his
Land. Whereupon she went home again: But some time after, as her Brother was
going out of this Field home-ward, the dead Man appears to him at the Style,
and bids him give up the Land to the Child, for it was his Right. The Brother
being greatly frighted at this, runs away, and not long after comes to her, and
tells her, she had sent the Devil to him, and bids her take the Land, and so
gave it up, and her Son is now possessed of it. His Name is Mat. he lived in the
Service of Mr. Reading's Brother for some Years, but he has forgot his
Surname, though he knows him very well. Related in a Letter of Dr. Ezekias
Burton to Dr. H. More. Mr. Glanvil's Saducism. Triumph. p. 417.

3. Dr. Bretton, late Rector of Ludgate and Deptford, lived-formerly in
Herefordshire, and married the Daughter of Dr. S. --. This Gentlewoman was a
Person of extraordinary Piety, which she expressed, as in her Life, so at her
Death. She had a Maid, that she had a great kindness for, who was Married to a
near Neighbor, whose Name, as I remember, was Alice. Not long after her death,
as Alice was rocking her Infant in the Night, she was called from the Cradle by
a knocking at the Door, which opening, she was surprised at the sight of a
Gentlewoman, not to be distinguished from her late Mistress, neither in Person
nor Habit. She was in a Morning Gown, the same in appearance with that she had
often seen her Mistress wear. At first sight she expressed very great
Amazement, and said, Were not my Mistress dead, I should not question but that
you are she. She replied, I am the same that was your Mistress, and sook her by
the Hand. Which Alice affirmed was as cold as a Clod.

She added, That she had Business of great Importance to employ her in, and
that she must immediately go a little way with her. Alice trembled, and
beseecht her to excuse her, and entreated her very importunately to go to her
Master, who must needs be more fit to be employed. ^he answered, That he who
was her Husband, was not at all concerned, but yet she had a desire rather to
make use of him, and in order thereunto had several times been in his Chamber,
but he was still asleep, nor had she power to do more, than once uncover his
Feet toward the awakning of him. And the Dr. said, That he had heard a walking
in his Chamber in the Night, which, till now, he could give no account of.
Alice next objected, That her Husband was gone a Journey, and she had no one to
look to her Child, that it was very apt to cry vehemently, and she feared if it
awaked before her return, it would cry it self to death, or do it self
mischief. The Spectre replied, The Child shall sleep till you return.

Alice seeing there was no avoiding it, sorely against her will, followed her
over a Style into a large Field, who then said to her, Observe how much of this
Field I measure with my Feet. And when she had taken a good large and leasurely
compass, she said, All this brlongs to the Poor, it being gotten from them by
wrongful means. And charged her to go and tell her Brother, whose it was at
that time, that he should give it up to the Poor again forthwith, as he loved
her and his deceased Mother. This Brother was not the Person who did this
unjust Act, but his Father. She added, That she was the more concerned, because
her Name was made use of in some Writing that related to this Land.

Alice asked her, How she should satisfy her Brother that this was no Cheat,
or delusion of her Fancy. She replied, Tell him this Secret, which he knows
that only himself and I are privy to, and he will believe you. Alice having
promised her to go on this Errand, she proceeded to give her good Advice, and
entertained her all the rest of the Night, with most heavenly and divine
Discourse. When the Twilight appeared, they heard the Whistling of Carters,
and the noise of House-Bells, whereupon the Spectre said, Alice, I must be seen
by none but your self, and so she disappeared.

Immediately Alice makes all haste home, being thoughtful for her Child, but
found it as the Spectre had said, asleep as she left it. When she had dressed
it, and committed it to the care of a Neighbor, away she went to her Master
the Doctor, who amazed at the account she gave him, sent her to his
Brother-in-Law. He at first hearing Alice's Story and Message, laughed at it
heartily; but she had no sooner told him the secret, but he changed his
Countenance, told her he would give the Poor their own, and accordingly he did
it, and they now enjoy it.

This, with more Circumstances, has several times been related by Dr. Bretton
himself, who was well known to be a Person of great Goodness and Sincerity. He
gave a large Narrative of this Apparition of his Wife to two of my Friends.
First, to one Mrs. Needham, and afterward, a little before his Death, to Dr.
Whichcot.

Some Years after I received the foregoing Narrative ( viz. near four Years
since) I light into the company of three sober Persons of good Rank, who all
lived in the City of Hereford, and I traveled in a Stage Coach three days with
them. To them I happened to tell this Story, but told it was done at Deptford,
for so I presumed it was, because I knew that Dr. Bretton lived there. They
told me, as soon as I had concluded it, that the Story was very true in the
main, only I was out as to the place; for it was not Deptford, but as I
remember they told me Pembridge near Hereford, where the Dr. was Minister
before the Return of the King. And they assured me, upon their own knowledge,
that to that Day the Poor enjoyed the piece of Ground. They added, That Mrs.
Bretton's Father could never endure to hear any thing mentioned of his
Daughters appearing after her death, but would still reply in great anger, That
it was not his Daughter, but it was the Devil. So that he acknowledged that
something appeared in the likeness of his Daughter.

This is Attested by me, this 16th, of Febr. 1681.

Edward Fowler.

This Narrative was sent to Dr. H. More, from Mr. Edward Fowler, Prebendary of
Gloucester. Glanv. Sad. Triumph. p. 419.

4. These Relations seem strange indeed, but was it now as strange, that
Constantine the Great, praying earnestly to God, should see the sign of the
Cross figured in the Air, with an Inscription in it, (...), in hoc vince, by
this overcome! And yet Eusebius Reports it in these words: While the Emperor
was thus earnestly praying unto God, and besought him, that he would reveal
himself to him, and that he would assist him in his purposes and resolutions;
while he was thus earnestly at his Prayers, a divine and wonderful Vision
appeared unto him, which was scarce credible, if himself had not related it.
But seeing this victorious Emperor did with an Oath confirm it to be true,
when he related it to me, who intended to write his History long after, when
taking notice of me, he admitted me to familiar Conference with him, who can
doubt of the Truth of his Relation, which (even then was seen and admired by
his whole Army, and) afterward, in process of time, was confirmed in a
miraculous manner. He said moreover, that in his sleep Christ appeared unto
him, with the former sign of the Cross, And bid him make the like Figure to
wear in his Banner. Eusebius. in Vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 22, 23. See the next Chap.

I dare not insist upon the Truth of that Relation, that when this Emperor
gave the Tithes to the Church, a Voice was heard in the Air, saying, Nunc
venenum infaesum est Ecclesia, now Poison is poured into the Church; though
Hermannus Gigas Reports it for true. Melleolus Relates it thus, When
Constantine gave to Pope Sylvester, the Palace of the Laterane, the City of
Rome, and Provinces of Italy, a Hand was seen writing upon a Wall of the
Laterane, Hodie vacuum Ecclesia infusurus. Centur. Magdeb, cant. 4. c. 13.

5. Voices Extracted from the Miscellanies of John Aubery, Esquire; -- In the Life
of King Henry IV. of France, writ by the Archbishop of Paris, it is recorded,
That Charles IX. (who caused the Massacre) was wont to hear Screaches, like
those of the Persons Massacred.

6. St. Augustine heard a Voice, saying, Toll, lege. He took up his Bible, and
dipped on Romans 13.13. Not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, etc. and Reformed his Manners upon it.

7. One Mr. Smith, a Practitioner of Physiek at Tamworth in Warwickshire, an
understanding sober Person, reading -- Hollinshead's Chronicle, found a
relation of a great Fight between Vortigern and Hengest, about those Parts, at
a place called Colemore: A little time after, as he lay awake in his Bed, he
heard a Voice that said unto him, You shall shortly see some of the Bones of
those Men and Horses slain, that you read of: He was surprised at the Voice,
and asked in the Name of God, who it was that spoke to him? The Voice made
answer, That he should not trouble himself about that, but what he told him
should come to pass. Shortly after, as he went to see Colonel Archer (whose
Servants were digging for Marle) he saw a great many Bones of Men and Horses;
and also Pot-sherds; and upon a view it appeared to be according to the
description in Hollingshead's Chronicle; and it was the place where the Fight
was, but it is now called Blackmore. This was about the Year 1685. and I had
the account from my worthy Friend and old Acquaintance, Tho. Mariett of
Warwickshire, Esquire; who is very well acquainted with Mr. Smith aforesaid.

8. It was since the Restoration of King Charles II. that Martin Luther's
Table Talk was Translated into English, by -- but about half a Year before, as
he lay in his Bed awake, he heard a Voice, which did bid him Translate that
Book: but by reason of some Business, he neglected it. The Voice demanded, Why
he had not done it? he replied he had not leisure: Said the Voice, You shall
have leisure enough shortly: And shortly after he was Arrested, and put in the
Gate House at Westminster; where he remained many Months: and there was the
Translation finished. See the Preface before the Book. Thus far I Am beholden to
Mr. Aubrey's Collections.

9. Philip Vp-John (the Son of a Reverend Divine) being about 11 Years of Age,
whilst he lived with Dr. Annesley in Spittle-yard, in the Year 1686. being
alone, reading the Bible, he thought he heard a Voice, Bidding him prepare for
Death, for he should die in a short time. Upon which this Boy being surprised,
he came down Stairs, and acquainted the Family with it: Two or three days after
he heard this Voice, he went to one Mr. Mallerye, a Joyner, who worked to the
Family, and seeing him making a Coffin, he told Mr. Mallerye, he should die
shortly, and desired he would make for him such a Coffin as that was; which
passage Mr. Mallerye acquainted the Family with the same Day, and though then
in perfect health, in a few days after fell sick, of which sickness he died.
This remarkable Passage I received from a Person who was at Dr. Annesley's
House when this happened.

10. Mrs. Elizabeth Dunton, as she was walking through Moor-Fields (to see her
Reverend Father Dr. Annesley, who then lay dangerously ill) she fancied she
heard a Voice saying to her, You need not be so much concerned for your Father,
for as near as he is to death, you shall go before him. This made a great
Impression upon her Mind, and in a few Days after she fell Sick, and her
Recovery is much doubted. This happened about the latter end of October, 1696.

CHAP. VI. The Discovery of things Secret or Future, by Signs, common Sounds,
and Voices.
THis Title is near akin to the foregoing, and differs only in this; that
there an Articulate Voice and Express words were heard; here only some
Inarticulate sound, of no natural signification, or particular sense is
requisite; or some noise in General, which can be supposed to import nothing
move then the Presence and Agency of some Invisible being: Of which, it will
not be necessary, to give many Instances, because of the Affinity this has to
several other Heads, or Titles in this Book.

1. A. D. 1630. A very Miraculous thing happened at Geismar in Hassia, two
Soldiers lying for safety in that Town, one of them complained to the other
who was in Bed with him, that he was very cold, the other Answered, he could
not believe it, in regard that his own Body was very hot and wet, entreating
him to touch and feel his side; which when he had done, finding his hands
exceeding wet, and as it were glued and congealed together, he suspected
something extraordinary, and looking on his hands by the light of the Moon, he
Judged them to be Bloody, and endeavoring to wash off the Blood from his side,
presently more Blood issued out; at length, after the space of an hour, it
ceased of it self. About three handfuls of Blond were taken out of the Sheets;
this, with the Relation of other Circumstances, they presented in the Morning
to the Commander, who enquired of him how he had felt himself that Night; the
Soldier Answered, That he had been extreme ill for some time, but was
afterward restored to his former Health; The two next years after this
Prodigy, this goodly Country of Hassia was miserably harassed by several
Armies, and the Inhabitants were Barbarously and Inhumanely treated by the
Emperors Army, and if the Prince or his Poor Subjects, did at any time
complain and Petition for Justice or Redress, they were only scorned and
rejected for their labors, so that they were forced to endure Quarterings,
Taxations, Burnings, Robberies and Sacking of their Towns and Villages, yea,
the Slaughter of Innumerable innocent Subjects of all sorts, without being able
to obtain any Pity, or Compassion from their Enemies; The same Year 1630, in
May, the Noremberg Carrier, and several Passengers in their Journey toward
Hamborough, passing by the Town of Coburg, at Night, they observed with great
Admiration, a Prodigious fire going in and out of the Town, and heard a mighty
noise like the Discharging of Canons; Two years after which General Wallestein
Assaulted this Town with Soldiers, and great Guns, but was so stoutly
entertained by those within, that after the loss of a great many of the
Imperialists, he was forced (tho he had besieged it above Twenty Months) to
break up his siege and depart. Surprising Mirac. of Nature, p. 108.

2. In King Henry the VIII's. Days, there was one Mr. Gresham, a Merchant of
London, setting Sail homewards from Palermo, where dwelt at that time one
Antonio, called the Rich, who had at one time, two Kingdoms Mortgaged to him by
the King of Spain; and being Crossed by contrary Winds, Mr. Gresham was
constrained to Anchor under the Lee of the Island off from Bulo, where was a
Burning Mountain. Now about the Midday, when for a certain space the Mountain
forbore to send forth Flames, Mr. Gresham, with eight of the Sailors; ascended
the Mountain, approaching as near the Vent as they durst, where amengst other
Noises they heard a Voice cry aloud, Dispatch, dispatch, the Rich Autonio is a
coming. Terrified herewith, they hasted their return, and the Mountain
presently broke out in a Flame: But from so dismal a place they made all the
haste they could, and desiring to know more of this matter, (the Winds still
thwarting their course) they returned to Palermo, and forthwith enquiring for
Antonio, they found that he was Dead about the very Instant, so near as they
could guess, when that Voice was heard by them. Mr. Gresham at his return to
London, reported this to the King, and the Mariners (being called before him)
confirmed the same; upon Mr. Gresham this wrought so deep an Impression, that
he gave over all his Merchandising, distributed his Estate, partly to his
Kinsfolk, and partly to good uses, retaining only a Competency for himself; and
so spent the rest of his days in Solitary Devotion. Sands Relat. 248.

3. Knockings, Extracted from the Miscellanies of John Aubrey, Esquire; Mr.
Baxter's Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits. A Gentleman formerly seeming
Pious, of late Years has fallen into the Sin of Drunkenness; and when he has
been Drunk, and slept himself Sober, something Knocks at his Beds-head, as if
one knocked on a Wainscot; when they remove the Bed, it follows him; besides
loud Noises on other parts where he is, that all the House hears. It poseth
me to think what Kind of Spirit this is, that has such a care of this Man's
Soul, (which makes me hope he will recover.) Do good Spirits dwell so near us?
Or, are they sent on such Messages? Or, is it his Guardian Angel? Or, is it the
Soul of some Dead Friend, that suffers, and yet retaining Love to him, as
Dives did to his Brethren, would have him Saved? God keeps yet such things
from us in the Dark. Three or four Days before my Father died, as I was in my
Bed, about Nine a Clock in the Morning, perfectly awake, I did hear three
distinct Knocks on the Beds-head, as if it had been with a Ruler or Ferula. Mr.
Hierome Banks. as he lay on his Death Bed in Bell-yard, said Three Days before
he died, that Mr. Jennings of the Inner Temple (his great Acquaintance, Dead a
Year or two before) gave Three Knocks, looked in, and said, Come away. He was
as far from believing such things as any man.

4. Mr. Brograve, near Puckridge in Hertford-shire, when he was a young man,
riding in a Lane in that Country, had a Blow given him on his Cheek (or Head):
He looked back, and saw that no body was near, behind him; anon, he had such
another Blow; I have forgot if a Third. He turned back and fell to the Study of
the Law; and was afterward a Judge. This Account I had from Sir John Penrudock
of Compton-Chamberlain (our Neighbor) whose Lady was Judge Brograve's Neice.

5. Newark has Knockings before Death. And there is a House near Covent Garden
that has Warnings.

6. At Berlin, when one shall Die out of the Electoral House of Brandenburgh, a
Woman Dressed in white Linen appears always to several, without speaking, or
doing any harm, for several Weeks before. This from Jasper Belshazer Cranmer, a
Saxon Gentleman. Thus far I am beholding to Mr. Aubrey's Collect.

CHAP. VII. Discovery of Things Secret or Future; by Prodigies, Comets, Lights,
Stars, etc.
HERE I propound only, to show how God Almighty, when he is doing, or going to
do any thing extraordinary in the World, to put Nature out of its usual Course,
and make some greater and more remarkable Steps in his Providence; He often
hangs out some Flag, makes some Flame of Fire his messenger, or so Ruffles the
Elements of the Visible World in such an unusual manner as is enough to startle
Men, not out of, but into their Wits, and make them serious and inquisitive
into the Counsels of Heaven; and their own Merits and Behavior toward God;
and so to Humble them into Sorrow and Penitence, when they see the Hand of God
thus lifted up, or concerned for them.

1. Before the Destruction of Jerusalem there was often seen in the Air Armies
of men in Battle-array, seeming to be ready to charge each other; the Brazen
Gate opened of it self, without being touched by any Body. Joseph. de Bell.
Jud. l. 7. Gaffarella, Part 2. c. 3.

2. A little before the time that Xerxes covered the Earth with his million of
men, there appeared horrible and dreadful Meteors, as Presages of the Evils
that afterward happened; as there did likewise in the time of Attila, who was
called Flagellum Dei, God's Scourge. Gaffarrel, unheard of Curios. Part 2. Ch 3.

3. When Ambrose was a Child, a Swarm of Bees settled on his Face in the
Cradle, and flew away without hurting of him; whereupon his Father said, Si
vixerit infantulus ille, aliquid magni erit; viz. If this Child live, he will
be some great man. Clark's Mart. of Eccl. Hist.

4. In the time of Gregory the Great, (A. C. 600, etc.) The River Tsber swelled
to such an unmeasurable height, that it ran over the Walls of Rome, and drowned
a great part of the City, and brake into many great Houses, overthrew diverse
ancient monuments and Gravaries belonging to the Church, carrying away many
thousand measures of Wheat: Presently after which Innundation came down the
River an innumerable Company of Serpents, with one monstrous great one, as big
as a Beam; which, when they had swam into the Sea, were there choked; and
their Carcasses being all cast upon the Shore, there rotted; which caused such
an Infection of the Air, that presently a great Plague followed at Rome; so
that many thousands died of it. Yea, Arrows were visibly seen to be shot from
Heaven; and whosoever was stricken with them, presently died; amongst whom
Pelagius was one, then Bishop of Rome. Ibid. p. 97. What the consequences of
those Prodigies were, I leave to the Consideration of the ingenious Reader, who
may easily find in Church History somewhat not obscurely pointed at by them.

5. Thales Milesius, by help of the Stars foretold an abundance of Olives, that
should be the Year following. Arist. Pol. l. 1. c. 7.

6. In the Reign of Theodosius, there appeared a Star, shooting forth Beams in
the shape of a Sword; and in the time of Sultan Scilim, an infinite Number of
Crosses appeared shining in the Air; which foreshewed the Loss he afterward
received by the Christians. Gaffarel. unheard of Curios. Part 2. Chapter 3. And who
knows not that the Emperor Pertinax was forewarned of his Death three Days
before by a certain Vision, that seemed to threaten him (in a Pond) with a
drawn Sword in his Hand. Idem ibid.

7. Appian has reckoned up what miraculous things were seen and heard, before
the breaking out of the Civil Wars, as fearful Voices, and strange running up
and down of Horses, which no Body could see. Pliny has likewise set down those
that were heard in the same manner, before the Cymbrian War; and among the
rest, diverse Voices that were heard from Heaven, and dreadful Alarms, sounded
by certain terrible Trumpets. Before the Lacedaemonians were overthrown at the
Battle of Leuctra, the Arms in the Temple were heard to make a Noise of their
own Accord; and about the same time, at Thebes, the Gates of the Temple of
Hercules opened of themselves, without any Man touching thee; and the Arms that
hung against the Wall were found cast on the Ground (as Cicero reports the
Story, lib. de Div.) not without the great Astonishment of the Beholders. At
the time that Milliades went against the Persians, diverse strange Sights
foreshew'd what the Event would be; and that I may trouble my self to reckon up
these Wonders no longer, you may have recourse to Livy; who for having been so
copious in his Stories of this Nature, is thought fit by some Authors, to be
styled a Tragedian, rather than an Historian. Gaffarel. unheard of Curios. par.
2. c. 3. Cicerone de Divin. Val. Max. l. 1. Ces. l. 1. de Bell. Civ. Malleal.
de Nob. c. 30. etc.

8. Constantine the Great marching toward Rome, with an Army of 9000 Foot, and
8000 Horse, against the Tyrant Maxentius; and musing with himself unto what God
he should address his Prayers for Success (for as yet he was not settled fully
in the Christian Faith) and considering withal, that his Predecessors, who had
worshipped many Gods, and put their Trust in them, had very often miscarried;
and that on the contrary, his Father, that had only worshipped one, and the
true God, had a happy Reign, and was still preserved from many Dangers, he
therefore resolved to adore that God only, which his Father had served; and
upon that prayed earnestly to God to reveal himself to him, and to prosper him
in his Journey; and whilst he was thus praying, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven,
about Noonday, he beheld the Sign of a Cross, lively figured in the Air, with
this Inscription, In hoc Vince, [by this Overcome] himself and all his Army
wondering at so strange a Prodigy; and being much troubled in his Mind, to know
the meaning of it, the next Night following Christ appeared to him in his
Sleep, commanding him to make the like Figure and Banner, and to carry it
against his Enemies: Whereupon the next day imparting the Vision to his
Friends, he sent for the best Goldsmiths and Lapidaries, to make the like Cross
with Gold and precious Stones, and resolved to worship that God only who thus
appeared to him. -- Afterward with great courage he went forwards, bearing
before him and his Victorious Army, instead of the Imperial Eagle, the form of
this Vision upon his Standard. Maxentius, as much depending upon his Sorcerers,
was no less confident of Victory, for the furtherance whereof, he framed a
deceitful Bridge over Tiber, to entrap Constantine; and sent out diverse Armies
to oppose him, before he should come near the City. But Constantine trusting
only in God, overthrew at the first Encounter, his first, second and third
Armies; and so marching through all Italy, he brought his Victorious Ensigns near
the Walls of Rome. Hereupon Maxentius led forth his Army above a mile from
Rome, and joined Battle with Constantine; but being overcharged with
Constantine's Vantguard, he with the rest of his Army fled; and either through
Haste or Forgetfulness, took over the Deceitful Bridge, which he had made to
entrap Constantine with; where they had no sooner entered, but it fell asunder,
and so they were all drowned. Clark in vit. Constantin. p. 4. and Centuria
Magdeburg ex Eusebi^.

9. In the Reign of Justinian there was such a prodigious Sight seen about the
Sun, that the like had not been seen or heard of before: The Sun, for the
greatest part of the Year, gave so little Light, that it was but equal to the
Light of the Moon; and yet at the same time the Sky was clear, without Clouds,
or any thing to obscure it; after which there followed a great Famine, and much
War and Bloodshed. Idem in vit. Justinian. Though the Centurians of Magdeburgh
are silent in the Case, and make no mention of it, notwithstanding they
undertake to record all the Prodigies and Wonders that happened in the Reigns
of the several Emperors; however I offer it only upon the Credit of my Author,
who lays it wholly at Evagrius his Door.

10. Gasper Cruciger, ^s he lay in his Bed in the Night, Nov. 6. A. C. 1548.
Seeing a Prodigy which then happened, viz. A great Chasm in the Heaven, and in
some places Fire falling to the Earth, and flying up again into the Air; much
bewailed the great Commotions and Dusipations in the Church, which he foresaw
by this Prodigy. Fuller Abel. Rediv. p. 145.

11. Mr John Lewis, a Learned Justice of Peace in Cardiganshire, speaking
concerning the strange and usual Appearance of Lights, [call'd in Welsh, Dead
Men's Candles] before Mortality has these Words: This is ordinary in most of
our Counties, that I never searce heard of any, Young or Old, but this is seen
before Death, and often observed to part from the Body of the Persons all along
the way, to the place of Burial, and infallibly Death will ensue. Now, Sir, It
is worth your Resolution, whether this may proceed from God or no; it is
commonly imputed to the Igneous Air of the Counties: But that evil Spirits can
come by so much Knowledge, as to be always so infallible, (though herein I
confess them very vast) and be so favorable and officious unto man, as to be
such seasonable monitors of his Dissolution, and to give so much Discovery of
Spiritual Essences, and the Immortality; I doubt whether they mean us so much
Good as this: Some Wiles I confess they may have by such Appearance, but it
carries the Benefits mentioned with it whereas their Disappearance makes more
for Infidelity and Atheism: But this I leave to your Judgment, begging Pardon
for this Boldness, in diverting you from your far better Thoughts; and seeing
it is my Happiness to have this little Invisible Acquaintance with you, I shall
omit no Opportunity of troubling you with such poor Thoughts as the Lord shall
give unto me of the best Things, humbly wishing (as for the making up the sad
Differences of Religion among us) the Lord would give those in Authority to
weigh thatPious and Wise Discourse you have proposed, as to those four great
Parties in the Dedication of your Saints Rest, with my unfeigned Prayers for
your Health and Happiness. Hist. Discourse of Apparitions. etc.

12. March 2. 1678. At Poins-town, in the County of Tepperary, in Ireland, were
seen diverse strange and prodigious Apparitions; whereof take the Account as
follows. On Sunday in the Evening several Gentlemen and others, after named,
walked forth in the Fields, and the Sun going down, and appearing somewhat
bigger than ordinary, they discoursed about it, directing their Eyes toward the
Place where the Sun fat; when one of the Company observed in the Air, near the
place where the Sun went down, an Arm of a Blackish Blue Color, with a ruddy
complection'd Hand at one end, and at the other end a Cross Piece, with a Ring
fastened to the middle of it, like one end of an Anchor, which stood still a
while, and then made Northwards, and so disappeared; next, there appeared at a
great Distance in the Air, from the same part of the Sky, somethings like a
Ship, coming toward them; and it came so near, that they could distinctly
perceive the Masts, Sails, Tacklings, and Men; she then seemed to tack about,
and sailed with the Stern foremost Northwards, upon a dark smooth Sea, which
stretched it self from South-west to North-west; having seemed thus to sail
some few Minutes, she sunk by degrees into the Sea, her Stern first; and as she
sunk, they perceived her Men plainly running up the Tacklings in the forepart
of the Ship, as it were to save themselves from drowning. Then appeared a Fort,
with somewhat like a Castle on the Top of it; out of the sides of which, by
reason of some Clouds of Smoke, and a flash of Fire suddenly issuing out, they
concluded some Shot to be made. The Fort then immediately was divided in two
Parts, which were in an instant transformed into two exact Ships, like the
other they had seen, with their Heads toward each other: That toward the
South seemed to chase the other with its Stem foremost, Northwards, till it
sunk with its Stem first, as the first Ship had done; the other Ship sailed
some time after, and then sunk with its Head first. It was observed, That Men
were running upon the Decks of these two Ships, but they did not see them climb
up, as in the last Ship, excepting one Man, whom they saw distinctly to get up
with much Haste upon the very top of the Bowsprit of the second Ship, as they
were sinking. They supposed the two last Ships were engaged, and sighting, for
they saw the likeness of Bullets rolling upon the Sea, while they were both
visible. -- Then there appeared a Chariot, drawn with two Horses, which turned
as the Ships had done Northward, and immediately after it, came a strange
frightful Creature, which they concluded to be some kind of Serpent, having a
Head like a Snake, and a knotted Bunch or Bulk at the other end, something
resembling a Snail's House. This Monster came swiftly behind the Chariot, and
gave it a sudden violent Blow, then out of the Chariot leaped a Bull and a Dog,
which followed him, and seemed to bait him: These also went Northwards, as the
former had done, the Bull first, holding his Head downwards; then the Dog, and
then the Chariot, till all sunk down one after another, about the same place,
and just in the same manner as the former. These Meteors being vanished, there
were several Appearances like Ships, and other things. The whole time of the
Vision lasted near an Hour, and it was a very clear and calm Evening, no Cloud
seen, no Mist, nor any Wind stiring. All the Phoenomena came out of the West,
or South-west, and all moved Northwards; they all sunk out of Sight, much about
the same place: Of the whole Company there was not any one but saw all these
things, as above-written, whose Names follow.

Mr. Allye, a Minister, living near the place. Lieutenant Dunslervile, and his
Son. Mr. Grace, his Son-in Law. Lieutenant Dwine. Mr. Dwine, his Brother. Mr.
Christopher Hewelson. Mr. Richard Foster. Mr. Adam Hewelson. Mr. Bates, a
Schoolmaster. Mr. Larkin. Mrs. Dunslervile. Her Daughter-in-Law. Her Maiden
Daughter. Mr. Dwine's Daughter. Mrs. Grace her Daughter.
13. Ostenta, or Portents. Extracted from the Miscellanies of John Aubrey, Esquire;
-- How it comes to pass, I know not; but by Ancient and modern Example it is
evident, that no great ^ccident befalls a City or Province, but it is presaged
by Divination, or Prodigy.

14. There was a strange Phenomenon seen at Broad-Chalk, in Wiltshire, on the
First Day of May, 1647. It continued from about Eleven a Clock (or before) till
Twelve. It was a very clear Day; but few did take notice of it, because it was
so near the Sunbeams. My Mother happened to espy it, going to see what a Clock
it was by an Horizontal Dial; and then all the Servants saw it. Upon the like
occasion Mr. Jo. Sloper, B.D. Vicar there, saw it, and all his Family; and the
Servants of Sir George Vaugham (then Fellow of Falston) who were Hunting on the
Downs, saw it. The next remarkable thing that followed, was, that on the Third
of June following, Cornet Joyce carried King Charles I. Prisoner from Holdenby
to the Isle of Wight. The Isle of Wight lies directly from Broad-Chalk, at the
X a Clock Point.

15. There was seen at Bishops Lamington, in Wiltshire, in Sept. 1688. Two
Balls of Light. They were about Eleven Degrees above the Horizon by the
Quadrant; observed by Mr. Robert Blea, one of the Earl of Abingdon's Gentlemen.

CHAP. VIII. Discovery of Things Secret or Future; by Dreams and Visions.
I Would not be so Superstitious or Phanatic, as to lay a Stress upon all
Dreams, as if they were significative; is (...); nor so Profane, as to range
all under the Notion of mere Natural, or Fortuitous. The Dreams of Joseph,
Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar; Joseph in the New Testament, Pilate's Wife, etc. had
certainly something of Divinity in them, and may be reasonably supposed to be
infused by good Angels. But are those all? Were men to see Visions, and dream
Dreams no longer, when life and Immortality were brought to light through the
Gospel? Let these instances which follow be well weighed; and let the Judicious
Reader judge as he please.

1. Polycarp having been at Prayer, three Days before his Apprehension, and
afterward fallen asleep, he saw in a Vision by Night the Pillow under his Head
set on fire, and suddenly consumed to Ashes; which when he awaked, he
interpreted it to be meant of his martyrdom. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Ireneus in his 2d. Book against Heresies, says, That some in his time had
the spirit of Prophecy, to foreknow things to come; they saw Divine Dreams and
Visions. Ibid.

3. Cyprian, in his 4th. Epistle, sets down this Vision, with a Respect to the
Persecution then raised by Aemilianus, President of Egypt, Paternus, etc. There
was [saith he] an aged Father sitting, at whose Right Hand was a young Man,
very Pensive and Sorrowful, with his Hand on his Breast; on the other Hand,
another Person with a Net in his Hand, as threatening to catch those Men that
were about him: Whilst Cyprian was wondering hereat, he seemed to hear a Voice,
saying unto him, The young man is sorrowful because his Precepts are not
observed, he on the Left Hand danceth, and is merry, for that hereby occasion
is given him from the Ancient Father to afflict Men. This was long before the
Persecution happened: Ibid.

Cyprian faith, he was by another Vision admonished to use a Spare Diet, and he
sparing in his Drink. Ibid.

4. Valens the Emperor fully purposing to drive Basil out of Cesarea, was
warned by his Wife to desist, for that she had been troubled with dreadful
Dreams about him, and their only Son Gallates was desperately ill at that time,
in the Judgment of the Physicians, and this she imputed to the ill Design of
the Emperor against Basil. Valens hereupon sent for Basil, saying thus to him,
If thy Faith be true, pray that my Son die not of this Disease. To whom Basil
answered, If you will believe as I do, and bring the Church into Unity and
Concord, your Child shall doubtless live. The Emperor not agreeing to this,
Basil departed, and the Child presently died. Ibid.

5. Antonius, Physician to Augustus, was admonished in a Dream by a Demon that
appeared to him in the form of the Goddess Pallas; that although Augustus was
sick, yet he should not fail to be present in the Battle, which was next day to
he given by Brutus and Cassius, and that he should there abide in his Tent;
which he would have done but by the Physicians deep Persuasions to the
contrary: For it came to pass, that the Enemy's Soldiers won the Tents, where
questionless they had slain Augustus if he had been present there: So upon this
Dream he prevented his Death, won the Day, and remained sole Monarch of the
Roman Empire; and under his Reign was born the Savior of the World. Mexico's
Treasury of Ancient and Modern Times, Book 5. C. 25.

6. Quintus Curtius declares in the Life of Alexander, That when he laid Siege
to the City of Tire, he being entreated for Succor of the Carthaginians, who
said they were descended of the Tyrians, concluded to raise his Siege, as
despairing of ever surprising it: But in a Dream a Satyr appeared to him, after
whom he followed, as he fled before him into a Chamber; his Interpreters told
him, that it was a sure Sign he should take the City, if he pursued and
continued the Siege, which fell out to be true. Idem ex Qu. Curtio.

7. Katherine de Medicis, Queen of France, and Wife to King Henry the II.
dreamed the day before the said King was wounded to Death, That she saw him
very sickly, holding down his Head as he walked along the Streets of Paris,
being followed by an infinite number of his People, that lamented for him.
Hereupon she most earnestly entreated him, with wringing Hands and bended
Knees, not to adventure in the Rank of Tilters on that Day. But he giving no
Credit to her words, the last Day of Feasting (for the Marriage of Madam
Margaret his Sister, to Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy) entered the Lists of
Honor, and running to break the Lance against a bold and worthy Knight (the
Count of Montgomery) happened to be wounded; of which wound the King died soon
after, Aged about 40. leaving his Kingdom sadly mourning for him. Ibid. l. 5.
c. 25.

8. His Son, King Henry the third, three days before he was murdered at St.
Clou, beheld in a Dream all his Royal Ornaments, viz. his Linen Vesture,
Sandals, Dalmatian Robe, Mantle of Azure Satin, Crowns, Scepter, and Hand of
Justice, Sword and gilt Spurs, all bloody, and soiled with the Feet of
Religious Men, and others, and that he was very angry with the Sexton of St.
Dennis. And though good Advice was given him to stand upon his Guard, yet so it
fell out, that he could not avoid the fatal Chance. Ibid.

9. Calphurnia, Wife to the Adopted Father of Caesar, having dreamed, That she
beheld Caesar slain and massacred, gave him notice thereof; but he in despite
of the Dream, went jocundly to the Senate next day, where he found the sad
Effect and Consequence of this Dream. Ibid. Mr. Chetwind, in his Hist.
Collections, gives us the Account more at large thus, viz. Caesar, in the fifty
sixth year of his Age was slain in the Senate, Seventy of the chief Senators
conspiring his Death; he having the Night before, when a Question was asked
What Death was best? answered, The sudden, and not propensed. His Wife dreamt
that Night, That he lay dead in her lap; and Spurina warned him to have heed to
the Ides of March; and a Note was given to him going to the Senate, discovering
the Conspiracy, which he began to read, but was interrupted, and died with it
in his hands.

10. Bradwarain, in his Preface to his Learned Book de Causa Dei, tells us of a
Dream he had in the Night, when he was about his Book in Confutation of
Pelagius; he thought he was caught up into the Air, and Pelagius came and took
hold of him, to cast him down headlong upon the Earth, but he prevailed
against him after much struggling, and cast down Pelagius, so that he brake his
Neck, and he lay dead upon the Earth. Whereby he faith, he was much comforted
and strengthened. Mr. Barkers Flores.

11. Thomas Wotton Esquire; of Bocton Malherb in Kent, Father to the Famous Sir H.
Wotton, a little before his death, dreamed, That the Vniversity-Treasury was
Robbed by Townsmen and poor Scholars, in number Five: and wrote this Dream the
next day by way of Postscript, in a Letter to his Son Henry (then of Queens
College.) The Letter dated 3 days before out of Kent, came to his Son's hands
the very Morning after the Robbery was committed: The Letter being Communicated
by Mr. Wotton, gave such Light to this Work of Darkness, that the Five guilty
Persons were presently discovered and apprehended. Dr. Plat's Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. c. 8. p. 47.

12. Astyages, last King of the Medes, saw in his Dream, a Vine springing forth
from the Womb of his only Daughter, and at last so Flourish and Spread out it
self, that it seemed to overspread all Asia. The Soothsayers being Consulted
about it, answered him, That of his Daughter should be born a Son, that should
seize on the Empire of Asia, and divest him of his. Tertified with this
Prediction, he bestowed his Daughter on Cambyses, an obscure Person, and a
Foreigner. When his Daughter drew near her time, he sent for her to himself,
with design to destroy what should be born of her. The Infant was delivered to
Harpagus to be slain, a Man of known Fidelity, and with whom he had
Communicated his greatest Secrets. But he fearing that, upon Astyages his
death, Maudane his Daughter would succeed in the Empire, the King having no
Issue Male, and that then he should be paid home for his Obedience, does not
kill the Royal Babe, but delivers it to the King's chief Herdsman, to be
exposed to the wide World. It fell out that the Wife of this Man was newly
brought to Bed, and having heard of the whole Affair, earnestly requests her
Husband to bring her the Child, that she might see him. He is overcome, goes to
the Wood, where he had left him, finds there a Bitch, that had kept the Birds
and Beasts off from the Babe, and suckled it her self. Affected with this
Miracle, he takes up the Child, carries it to his Wife, who saw it, loved it,
bred it up, till it grew up, first to be a Man, and then a King: He overcomes
Astyages his Grandfather, and Translates the Scepter from the Medes to the
Persians. Just. Hist. l. 1. p; 16. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 7. Wanley, l. 6. c. 1.

13. When Alexander, after the long and difficult Siege of Tire, lead his Army
with great Indignation against the Jews, devoting all to Slaughter and the
Spoil, Jaddas, the then High Priest, admonished by God in a Dream, in his
Priestly Attire, and with his Mitre on his Head, and upon that the Name of God,
with a Number of Priefts and People, goes to meet him. Alexander, with great
Submission, approaches him, Salutes and Adoves him; telling Parmeno, who was
displeased with it, That he worshipped not the Man, but GOD in him, who (as he
said) had appeared to him in that Form in Dio, a City of Macedonia, in his
Dream, encouraging him to a speedy Expedition against Asia, promising his
Divine Power for Assistance in the Conquest of it. Upon this he pardoned the
Jews, honored and enriched the City and Nation. Jos. l. 1. c. 8. Wanley, l. 6.
c. 1, etc.

14. Julius Caesar dreamed that he had carnal Knowledge of his Mother, which
the Soothsayers Interpreted, That the Earth, the common Mother of Mankind,
should be subjected to him. Sueton. in Jnl. p. 8. Wanley's Wonders of the
little World, l. 6. c. 1.

15. The Night before Polycrates King of Samos went thence, to go to Oretes the
Lieutenant of Cyru in Sardis, his Daughter dreamed, that she saw her Father
lifted up in the Air, where Jupiter washed him, and the Sun anointed him; which
came to pa^s: For as soon as he was in his Power, Oretes caused him to be
hanged upon a Gibbet, where his Body was washed with the Rain, and his Fat
melted with the Sun. Camerar. Oper. Subcisiv. Cent. 2. c. 57. ex Herodot. l. 3.

16 Antigonus dreamed that he Sowed a spacious Field with Gold, which sprang
up, flourished and ripened, was reaped presently, and nothing left but Stubble:
and then he seemed to hear a Voice -- That Mithridates was fled into the Euxine
Sea, carrying along with him all the Golden Harvest. This Mithridates was then
in the Retinue of Antigonus, (King of Macedonia) his own Country of Persia
being ruined, and therein his own Fortunes. The King awakes, and terrified with
this Dream, he resolves to cut off Mithridates, but being informed by
Demetrius, Antigonu^'s Son, of the danger he was in, he flies privately into
Cappadocia, where he Founded the Famous Kingdom of Pontus. Wanley's Wond. l. 6.
c. 1. Ex Lips. and Plutarch.

17. Qu. Catalus in his Dream, saw Jupiter delivering into the hand of a Child,
the Roman Ensign: The next Night the same Child hugged in Jove's Bosom; and
when Catalus offered to pluck him thence, Jupiter forbade him, telling him, He
was born jor the welfare of the Romans. The next Morning seeing O^tavianus
(afterward Angustus) in the Street, he ran to him, and cried out, This is He
whom the last Night I saw Jupiter h^g in his Bosom. Idem en Xiphil. August.
and Fulgos. l. 1.

18. Two Accadians of intimate Acquaintance, lodging at Megara, the one with a
Friend, the other at an Inn; he at his Friend's House, saw in his sleep, his
Companion begging of him to assist him, for he was circumvented by his Host:
The other awakening, leaps out of his Bed, with intention to go to the Inn, but
suspecting his Dream to have nothing in it, returned to his Bed and Sleep. The
same Person appears to him a second time, all bloody, requesting him earnestly
to revenge his Death, affirming, That he was killed by his Ho^, and that at his
very time he was carried out in a Cart toward the Gate, all covered with Dung.
The Man at last overcome with these Entreaties of his Friend, immediately runs
to the Gate, finds the Cart, seizes and searches it; where he found the Body
of his Friend, and thereupon dragged the Innkeeper to his deserved punishment.
Idem ex Val. Max. i. 1. c. 7. Dr. More Immort.(...) Soul, l. 2. c. 16, etc.

19. Alexander the Philosopher, the same Hour that his Mother died, saw in his
sleep the Solemnities of his Mother, though she was at that time a Day's
Journey distant from him. Wanley's Wonders of the little World, l. 6. c. 1.

20. Sionia, ^. 1523. dreamed, that falling into a River, he was in great
danger of drowning, and calling to one for Succor, was neglected: This Dream
he told to his Wife and Servants; the next Day going to help a Child that was
fallen into the River, near the Castle of P^s^a^^, he leaped in, and perished
in the Mud. Idem ex Heywood Hierarch. l. 4. and Jovio.

21. Galen being troubled with an Inflammation about the Diaphragma, dreamed,
that upon opening of a Vein between his Thumb and Fore-ringer, he should
recover his Health, which he did, and was restored. Idem ex Schot. Phys.
Curios. l. 3. c. 25. Col. Rhod. etc.

22. Celitts Rhodiginses says, When he was 22 Years of Age, being perplexed
with Ectrapali (a Greek Word in the Annotations upon Pliny, signifying those
who grow beyond the common Proportions of Nature assigned to their kind) in his
perplexity he laid him do^n to sleep, and in his Dream recalled to mind the
very Book, page, and place of the page of another Author, where he had formerly
read it. Col. Rhod. Am. lact. l. 27. c. 9.

23. A Citizen of Millain was demanded a Debt, as owing from his dead Father;
and when he was in some trouble about it, the Image of his dead Father appears
to him in his sleep, tells him the Debt was paid, and in such a place he should
find the Writing, with the Hand of his Creditor to it. Awaking from his Dream
and Sleep, he finds the Acquittance. Which Saint Austin says, himself saw with
his own Eyes. Wanley ex Fulgos. l. 1. c. 5. p. 130.

24. When S. Bernard's Mother was with Child of him, she dreamed that she had a
little white and barking Dog in her Womb: which a Religious Person Interpreted
thus; An excellent Dog indeed, for he shall be a Keeper of God's House, and
shall incessantly bark against the Advers^^ies of it; and as a famous Preacher,
shall cure many with his Medicinal Tongue. Idem ex Heidfeld, in Sphing. c. 37.

25. Francis Petrarch had a Friend so desperately ill, that he despaired of his
Life, wearied with Grief and Tears he fell into a slumber, and seemed to see
his sick Friend stand before him, and tell him that he could not now stay any
longer with him; for there was one at the Door would interrupt their Discourse,
to whom he desired, that he would recommend his weak Estate; and that it he
should undertake him, he should be restored. Presently a Physician enters
Petrarch's Chamber, who came from the sick, as having given him over for a dead
Man, to comfort him: Petrarch recounts his Dream to him with Tears, and
prevails with him to undertake his Friend, who thereupon in a short time
recovered. Idem ex Fulg. l. 1. c. 5.

26. Arlotte, Mother of William the Conqueror, when great with Child of him,
dreamed that her Bowels were extended over all Normandy and England. Bakers
Chron. p. 28.

27. Whilst I lived at Prague (says an English Gentleman) and one Night had
sat up very late a drinking at a Feast; early in the Morning, the Sunbeams
glancing on my Face, as I lay in my Bed, I dreamed that a shadow passing by,
told me, That my Father was dead. At which awaking. I rose, and wrote the Day
and Hour, and all Circumstances thereof, in a Paper-Book, which Book, with many
other things, I put into a Barrel, and sent it from Prague to Stood, thence to
be carried into England: And now being at Nuremberg, a Merchant of a Noble
Family, well Acquainted with me and my Relations, arrived there, who told me,
that my Father was dead about two Months ago. I list not to write any Lies, but
that which I write, is as true as strange. When I returned into England, some
Four Years after, I would not open the Barrel I sent from Prague, till I had
called my Sisters, and some other Friends to be Witnesses; where my self and
they were astonished to see my written Dream answer the very day of my Father's
Death. Morison's Itin. p. 1. c. 1. A.B. Annot. on Relig. Med. p. 294. Wanley's
Wonders of the Little World, l. 6. c. 1.

28. The same Gentleman says thus also; I may lawfully swear that which my
Kinsmen have heard witnessed by my Brother Henry whilst he lived, that in my
Youth at Cambridge I had the like Dream of my Mother's death, where my Brother
Henry lying by me, early in the Morning I dreamed, that my Mother passed by
with a sad Countenance, and told me, That she could not come to my Commencement
(I being within 5 Months to proceed Master of Arts, and she having promised at
that time to come to Cambridge:) when I related this Dream to my Brother, both
of us awaking together in a Sweat, he professed to me, That he had dreamed the
very same: and when we had not the least knowledge of our Mother's sickness,
neither in our youthful Affections were any whit affected with the strangeness
of this dream, yet the next Carrier brought us word of our Mother's death. I^id.

29. I cannot omit the Dream and Revelation of Joan d' Arc, a Virgin, who
dreamed, that she her self should be the only means to put Charles the 7th. in
possession of his Kingdom. After she had acquainted her Father and Mother with
her Dream, she is brought to the Lord Baudricate, and habited like a Man, is
presented to the King. The Matter seemed ridiculous to the King; he takes upon
himself the Habit of a Countryman; this Maid being brought into the Chamber,
goes to the King, and salutes him with a modest Countenance, and delivered to
him the Charge which she had received of the God of Heaven, and told him, That
she should be the means to place the Crown upon his head, and relieve Orleance,
that was Besieged by the English. The King was persuaded to give her a Troop of
100, and a good Horse. She puts her self into a Man's Habit, and like a
valourous Captain goes toward Orleance, and relieveth the Town with Victuals,
without resistance. After she was in Orleance, she sends a Letter to the King
of England and his Troops, and wishes them to depart, without shedding any
more innocent Blood. Joan d' Arc a second time relieveth Orleance, and brings
in fresh Provision; she makes choice of 1500 Men, and enters the Fort of Saint
Loope, the Virgin in the foremost of the Ranks, crying, Saint Denis; the next
Day they took two other Forts; on the third Day the English made the French
recoil, but the Virgin encouraging her Men, and marching courageously, was shot
in the Arm; Tush, says she, this is a favor: nothing amazed, she takes the
Arrow in one hand, and her Sword in the other, and enters the Fort. In these
three Days the English lost 8000 Men, and the French not one hundred; and as a
remembrance of their Victories, the Statues of Charles the Seventh, and Joan d'
Arc, are placed upon the Bridge of Orleance, kneeling before a Crucifix.

Charles the Seventh is Crowned at Rheins, all Champaigns yield unto him, and
the King that was in great danger of losing his Kingdom, is now an absolute
King. The Divine Dreamer, p. 15.

30. Cicero, among other Dreams, relates this; A certain Man dreamed that there
was an Egg hid under his Bed: The Sooth-sayer, to whom he applied himself for
the Interpretation of the Dream, told him, That in the same place where he
imagined to see the Egg, there was Trensure hid. Whereupon he caused the place
to be dug up, and there accordingly he found Silver, and in the midst of it
a good quantity of Gold; and to give the Interpreter some testimony of his
acknowledgment, he brought him some pieces of the Silver, which he had found;
but the Sooth-sayer hoping also to have some of the Gold, said, And will you
not give me some of the Yolk too? Amyrald. Dis. of Div. Dreams, p. 22.

31. Monsieur P^irese, Councellor of the Parliament of Provence, going from
Mohrpellier to Nismes, lay all Night in an Inn, which is the midway betwixt
these two places; he had in his Company one James Rainier, Citizen of Aix, who
in that Journey lodged in the same Chamber with him: As that great Man slept,
Rainier observed that he talked and muttered something in his Sleep, otherwise
than was usual with him, whereupon he wakened him, and asked what was the
matter? Oh! said he, you have made me lose a most excellent and pleasant Dream;
for I was dreaming, That I was at Nismes, and that a Goldsmith showed me a
Golden Medal of Julius Caesar, which he would sell me for four Crowns, and as I
was ready to give him them, both my Goldsmith and my Medal vanished away
together, by your awakening of me. Being arrived at Nismes, and having not
forgot his Dream, he went to walk in the City, till such time as Dinner was
ready, and passing up and down he went into a Goldsmith's Shop, to ask him
whether he had any Rarity to show him? whereupon the Goldsmith answered, That
he had a Julius Caesar of Gold: Monsieur de Peirese asked the Price of it, he
answered four Crowns; which thing did fill the mind of that great Person, both
with Joy and Admiration, as well for that he had found a Rarity, which he had
long very much fought for, as also for the surprising and strange manner
whereby it came to his hand. Ibid.

32. I have heard the late Monsieur Cameron, a Person whose memory will be ever
Blessed in our Churches, say, that he had from the mouth of Monsieur Calignen,
Chancellor of Navarre, a Man of singular Virtue, a memorable Passage that befell
him in Bearne: He went into a certain Town in the Country, either for
Diversion, or for some Reason relating to his Health; for he did not acquaint
me either with the place, or the occasion of the Journey; one Night as he was
asleep, he heard a Voice which called him by his Name, Calignon; hereupon
waking and hearing no more of it, he imagined that he had Dreamed, and fell
asleep again; a little after, he heard the same Voice, calling him in the same
manner, which made a greater Impression upon him, then before; So that being
awakened, he called his Wife, who lay with him, and told her what had happened,
so that they both lay a wake for some time, expecting whether they might hear
the Voice, and whether it would say any thing more to them; At last the Voice
awakened him the third time, calling him by his Name, and advised him to retire
presently out of the Town, and to remove his Family, for that the plague would
rage horribly in that place within few days; to which he added, that it was
very well that he followed this direction, for as much as within few days after
the Plague began in the Town, and destroyed a great Number of People. This was
certainly an Angel that spoke to him, who by the favorable and benign
Providence of God, drew him out of that danger, which otherwise had been
unavoidable. For whether the Plague came by the Infection of the Air, or by the
Communion of some Infectious Persons, or whether some Sorcerers and Witches (as
they say, they sometimes do) had resolved to diffuse their Infectious Poisons
in that place, it was that which did not exceed the Knowledge of an Angel. Now
if these Blessed Spirits, which are appointed as a Guard of Pious Men, in
obedience to Gods Command, do sometimes by speaking give them such
Advertisements, they also by the same command, may convey the same Notices to
them by Dreams. The History of the last Age, does so fully attest the Truth of
that, of Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, that we cannot reasonably doubt
thereof. A little before his Journey from Dreux, he Dreamed, that he had fought
three B^^els, successively one after another, wherein he had got the Victory,
and where his three great Enemies were Slain. But that at last, he also was
mortally wounded, and that after they were laid one upon another, he also was
laid upon their Dead Bodies, the event was Remarkable: For the Marshal, de St.
Andre was killed at Dreux, the Duke of Guise, Francis of Lorrain at Orleans,
the Constable of Montmorency at St. Dennis, and this was the Triumvirate, which
they say, had Sworn the ruin of those of the Religion, and the Destruction of
that Prince, at last, he himself was slain at Bassac, as if there had been a
Continuation of Deaths and Funerals. Ibid. p. 120.

33. Zuinglius, A.C. 1525, when the Mass was Abolished at Zurick, being
attached by a certain Scribe, or Notary, before the Bench of Senators, which
then consisted of 200, concerning the Real presence of the Sacrament; debated
the point with him, and one Engelhard a Popish Doctor, that day: But some of
the ruder sort repining, demanded some Example out of the Scripture to show
that those words; This is my Body, were not spoken Parabolically. Hereupon he
began to revolve all things, yet no Example came into his mind; but a few
Nights after Zuinglius Dreamed, that he contended again with the Scribe till he
was weary, and at last was so dumb that he could not speak; whereupon he was
exceedingly troubled: But after a while, a Moniter came to him from above, who
said, O thou sluggard, A^ise, Why do thou not Answer him, with that which is
Written in Exodus 12. This is the Lord's Passover? Immediately he awaked, and
leaping out of his Bed, examined the Text; and the next day disputed it before
the whole Assembly, which was entertained with such Approbation, that all were
satisfied: And (says he) the three next days we had the greatest Sacraments,
that ever I saw; and the Number of them that looked back to the Garlic and
Fleshpots of Egypt, was for less then Men thought they would have been.
Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 150. ex Zuingl.

34. Famous Salmsius, intending to see Rome, was Admonished in his Dream, that
if he went, he should not return alive; and had he gone, probably he had not,
as being one that had so much provoked the Papists by his Learned labors,
especially, in his care of Publishing and Polishing Nilus and Barlaam, two
eager Enemies of the Papal Monarchy. Vita Salmas. per Anton. Clem. Salmas.
Epist. praefixa.

35. Pope Innocent the fourth Dreamed, that Robert Grosthead, Bishop of
Lincoln, came to him, and with his stast struck him on the side, and said,
Surge miser, and veni ad Judicium: Rise wretch, and come to Judgment, after
which Dream within a few days the Pope ended his Life. Simps. Chapter Hist. cent.
13. p. 449.

36. Mr. Thomas Tilson, Minister of Aylesford in Kent, gives this strange
Relation in a Letter to Mr. Baxter. 1691.

Reverend Sir, Being informed that you are Writing about Witchcraft and
Apparitions, I take the Freedom, tho a stranger, to send you his following
Relation.

Mary, the Wife of John Goffe of Rochester, being afflicted with a long
illness, removed to her Fathers house at West-Mulling, which is about Nine
Miles distant from her own: There she died, June the 4th, this present Year,
1691.

The day before her departure, she grew very impatiently desirous to see her
two Children, whom she had lest at home, to the care of the Nurse. She prayed
her Husband to hire a Horse, for she must go home, and dye with her Children.
When they persuaded her to the contrary, telling her she was not able to sit on
Horseback, she entreated them however to try: If I cannot sit, said she, I will
lie all along upon the Horse, for I must go to see my poor Babes.

A Minister who lives in the Town was with her at Ten a Clock that Night, to
whom she expressed good hopes in the Mercies of God, and a Willingness to dye:
But, said she, It is my misery that I cannot see my Children.

Between one and two a Clock in the Morning, she fell into a Trance. One Widow
Tanner, who watched with her that Night, says, that her Eyes were open and
fixed, and her law fallen: She put her hand upon her Mouth and Nostrils, but
could perceive no Breath; she thought her to be in a Fit, and doubted whether
she were alive or dead.

The next day, this dying Woman told her Mother, that she had been at home with
her Children: That is impossible, said the Mother, for you have been here in
Bed all the while. Yes, replied the other, but I was with them last Night, when
I was asleep.

The Nurse at Rochester, Widow Alexander by Name, affirms, and says, she will
take her Oath on it before a Magistrate, and receive the Sacrament upon it, that
a little before two a Clock that Morning, she saw the likeness of the said Mary
Goffe come out of the next Chamber, (where the elder child lay in a Bed by it
self, the Door being left open, and stood by her Bedside for about a quarter
of an hour; the younger child was there lying by her; her Eyes moved, and her
Mouth went, but she said nothing, the Nurse moreover says, that she was
perfectly awake; it was then day light, being one of the longest Days in the
Year. She sat up in her Bed, and looked steadfastly upon the Apparition: In
that time, she heard the Bridge Clock strike two, and a while after said, In
the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, what art thou? Thereupon the
Apparition removed, and went away; she slipped on her Clothes and followed, but
what became on it she cannot tell. Then, and not before, she began to be
grievously affrighted, and went out of the Doors, and walked upon the Wharf
(the house is just by the River side) for some hours, only going in now and
then, to look to the Children. At five a Clock she went to a^ Neighbors house,
and knocked at the Door, but they would not rise: At six she went again, then
they arose and let her in. She related to them all that had passed: They would
persuade her she was mistaken, or Dreamt: But she confidently affirmed, If ever
I saw her in all my Life, I saw her this Night.

One of those to whom she made the Revelation ( Mary, the Wife of John Sweet)
had a Messenger came from M^lling that Forenoon, to let her know her Neighbor
Goffe was a Dying, and desired to speak with her; she went over the same day,
and found her just departing. The Mother, amongst other discourse, related to
her, how much her Daughter had longed to see the Children, and said she had
seen them. This brought to Mrs. Sweet's mind, what the Nurse had told her that
Morning, for till then she had not thought to mention it, but disguised it
rather as the Woman's disturbed Imagination.

The substance of this, I had related to me by John Corpenter, the Father of
the Deceased, next day after her Burial: July 2. I fully discoursed the matter
with the Nurse, and two Neighbors, to whose ^e use she went that Morning.

Two days after, I had it from the Mother, the Minister that was with her in
the Evening, and the Woman who sat up with her that last Night: They all agree
in the same Story, and every one helps to strengthen the others Testimony.

They appear to be Sober Intelligent Persons, far enough off from designing to
impose a Cheat upon the World, or to manage a lie, and what Temptation they
should lie under for so doing, I cannot conceive.

Sir, That God would Bless your Pious Endeavors, for the Conviction of
Atheists and Sadduces, and the promoting of true Religion and Goodness; and
that this Narrative may conduce somewhat toward the farthering of that great
work, is the hearty desire and Prayer of,

Your most faithful Friend, and Humble Servant, Tho. Tilson. Minister of
Aylesford, nigh Maidstone in Kent.

Aylesford, July 6. 1691.

37. One Mr. Samuel Lawrence, a Minister at Namptwick, in Cheshire, informs me
at the Writing hereof, of a Treasure of Gold found by occasion of a Dream; for
the further confirmation whereof, he refers me to one Mr. Chorlton of
Manchester; but supposing I shall get no part of the Treasure of it, I have
saved my self the Trouble of sending so far, to enquire any further after it.

38. A Gentleman being disquieted with the Thundering of Pieces, which his
Imagination told him was in the Air, and not upon Earth, looking toward the
Heavens, he did conceive that he saw a great Army ready to encounter with
another, and observing the Leaders, he perceived one to be a tall black Man,
ran with his Rapier against the same, and Transported thus with fury, he
stumbled and fell, and as he fell Diverse Arrows were shot, some out of the
North, some out of the South, some out of the West, some out of the East, as if
all the four quarters had blown no other Blasts; after this appeared diverse
like Ghosts, walking with Crosier Staffs, who seemed to harden and Encourage
the Soldiers, yet their Arguments could not win them to give Battle, these in
the twinkling of an Eye, lost their pure whiteness, and showed themselves in
black, with Miters falling from their Heads, next to these followed a Troop of
Shavelings, some carrying Crosses, others praying with Beads, but on the sudden
a Pillar of fire appeared, and they Vanished, and all the Heavens seemed to be
disturbed, looking downward he saw a grave Old Man sitting in a Chair of State,
upon the Top of a Mountain, having a Scepter in his hand, with a Tripple Crown
on his Head, having with him diverse habited in long Robes and Red Hats, that
seemed to hold the Chair; whilst his Eyes were busied in the view of them, a
Thunderbolt fell and cleft the Mountain, which swallowed them up; then he
seemed to pass through Pleasant Fields, and the first he met with, was a young
Cavalier, and the next he met withal was a poor Soldier; now thought the young
Gallant, that he should Learn what was the varience between these Troops, but
before the Gentleman could speak to him, the Soldier made toward him, and
like a bold Ruffian demanded his Purse, who was a little unwilling, yet having
no remedy to prevent the taking thereof, did deliver it, and in requital, the
Soldier said, I come to tell you News: In brief it is thus, our General being
Dead, our Armies were Disbanded; and having uttered the words, Vanished, and in
his Room entered a poor Country Man, who was very desirous to Learn whether he
met with any Soldiers that had driven away his Cattle; he pitied this poor
Man, but could give him no comfort, in regard his Money was taken away from
him: The Gentleman passing on, came to a great House that was fortified with
Bulwarks, Trenches, and well manned, and on the side of it was an Arm of the
Sea, but in regard he could not give the word, he was not admitted: As he
passed by, he perceived one that was looking under a Tree, to take the true
height of a Star: The Astronomer, to show the full Proportion of the Man, drew
forth a small glass out of a Box, took a small Ribbond of a skin Color; the
glass was of an oval form, set round with Diamonds and Rubies, the middle
thereof was made of Topaz, and so exactly cut, as it sufficiently expressed the
skill of the Lapidary. On one side of the Glass, he could perceive this Tall
Man habited like a Prince, on the other side like a Mourner, and by him an
Executioner, with this Inscription over his head in great Letters (worser ruled
not, Traitors head must off). Now Sir, said the Astronomer, cast up each Letter
of this Inscription, and you shall find out his Name and Title, the which he
presently and readily undertook; by Transplacing the Letters, and found it to
be Sir Thomas Wentworth, Lord Strafford: It was no small wonder to him, to see
that his Lordships Name and Title, should so truly Divine his Nature and
Fortune; no sooner had this Astronomer showed this Glass, but he Vanished, and
making a horrible noise at his Departue, the Gentleman awaked, and fell again
into a sweet slumber, and soon after gave this Revelation to Diverse. The Divine
Dreamer, p. 18.

36. I may self remember, says Sir Francis Bacon, that being in Paris, and my
Father dying in London, two or three days before my Father's Death, I had a
Dream which I told to Diverse English Gentlemen, that my Father's House in the
Country was Plaistered all over with black Mortar. Bacon's Not. Hist. cent.
10. p. 211.

37. Bradford, the Night before he was going to Newgate, Dreamed, that the
Chain for his burning was brought to the Compter Gate, and how the next day he
should be had to Newgate, and on the Monday after burnt in Smithfield; which
came to pass accordingly. Fox Martyrol.

38. Mr. Rough, Minister of the private Congregation in London (in Queen Mary's
Reign) dreamed, that himself was carried forcibly to the Bishop, and that the
Bishop plucked off his Beard: Which accordingly came to pass. Ibid.

39. Mr. Philpot, in Prison, thus reports to a Friend by Letter; -- In the
midst of my sweet Rest, I seemed to see a great Beautiful City, all of the
Color of Azure and white, apiece, in a Mavelous composition, in the
midst of the Sky; the sight whereof so inwardly comforted me, that I am not
able to express the inward consolation thereof; yea, the Remembrance thereof
causes as yet my heart to leap for Joy, etc. For which reason, I think, it
came not from the illusion of the senses. Ibid.

40. Bishop Jewel being in Germany, Dreamed one night that two of his Teeth
dropped out of his Mouth; told this Dream next Morning to Peter Martyr, who
interpreted it to signify the loss of some Dear Friends: Jewel put the time of
it in his Note-Book, and not long after had News by Letter, of the Burning of
Bishop Ridley, and Bishop Hooper: This was related to me by a Friend, out of
his Life, Writ at large: But having only the short Account of his Life in
English by me, and not finding it there; I insist no further upon it.

41. Dreams Extracted from the Miscellanies of John Aubrey Esquire; He that has a
mind to read of Dreams, may peruse Cicero de Divinatione, Hier. Cardani
Somniorum Synesiorum. Lib. IV. and Moldinarius de Insomniis, etc. I shall here
mention but little out of them, my purpose being chiefly to set down some
remarkable, and Divine Dreams of some that I have had the honor to be
intimately acquainted with, Persons worthy of belief.

42. In Queen Mary's time, there was only one Congregation of Protestants in
London, to the number of about three Hundred. One -- was the Deacon to them,
and kept the List of their Names: One -- of that Congregation did Dream, that a
Messenger [Queens Officer] had feized on this Deacon, and taken his List; the
Fright of the Dream awaked him: He fell asleep and dreamt the same perfect
Dream again. In the Morning before he went out of his Chamber, the Deacon came
to him and told him his Dream, and said, it was a warning from God; the Deacon
slighted his advice, and savouring of Superstition; but -- was so urgent with
him, that he prevailed with him to deposite the List in some other Hand, which
he did that Day. The next day the Queens Officer attacqued him, and searched
(in vain) for the List, which had it been found, would have brought them all to
the Flame. Fox's Martyrology.

43. When Doctor Harvey (one of the Physicians College in London, being a
young Man) went to Travel toward Padua, he went to Dover (with several others)
and showed his Pass, as the rest did, to the Governor there. The Governor
told him, That he must not go, but he must keep him Prisoner. The Doctor
desired to know for what reason, how he had transgrest? Well, it was his Will
to have it so. The Pacquet-Boat hoised Sail in the Evening (which was very
clear) and the Doctor's Companions in it. There ensued a terrible Storm, and
the Pacquet-Boat and all the Passengers were drowned: The next day the said
News was brought to Dover. The Doctor was unknown to the Governor, but by Name
and Face; but the Night before, the Governor had a perfect Vision in a Dream
of Doctor Harvey, who came to pass over to Calais; and that he had a warning to
stop him. This the Governor told to the Doctor the next Day. The Doctor was a
pious good Man, and has several times directed this Story to some of my
Acquaintance.

44. My Lady Seymer dreamr, That she found a Nest with nine Finches in it. And
so many Children she had by the Earl of Winchelsey, whose Name is Finch.

45. The Countess of Cork (now Burlington) being at Dublin, dreamt that her
Father (the Earl of Cumberland) who was then at York, was dead. He died at that
time.

46. It Is certain, that several had monitory Dreams of the Conflagration of
London.

47. When Sir Christopher Wren was at Paris, about 1671, he was ill and
Feverish, made but little Water, had a pain in his Reins. He sent for a
Physician, who advised him to be let Blood, thinking he had a Pleurisy: But
Bleeding much disagreeing with his Constitution, he would defer it a Day
longer: That Night he dreamt, That he was in a place where Palm Trees grew
(suppose Egypt) and that a Woman in a Romantic Habit, reached him Dates. The
next Day he sent for Dates, which cured him of the pain in his Reins.

48. Sir Roger L'Estrange was wont to divertise himself with Cocking in his
Father's (Sir Hammond L'Estrange's) Park; he dreamt, That there came to him in
such a place of the Park a Servant, who brought him News, that his Father (who
had been sick a good while) was departed. The next Day going to his usual
Recreation, he was resolved, for his Dream sake, to avoid that way; but his
Game led him to it, and in that very place, the Servant came and brought him
the ill News according to his Dream.

49. Mr. Edmund Halley, R. S. S. was carried on with a strong Impulse to take a
Voyage to St. Hellens, to make Observations of the Southern Constellations,
being then about Twenty Four Years old. Before he undertook this Voyage, he
dreamed that he was at Sea, Saili ng toward that place, and saw the Prospect
of it from the Ship in his Dream, which he declared in the Royal Society, that
it was the perfect Representation of that Island, even as he had it really when
he approached to it.

50. Anno 1690. One in Ireland dreamed of a Brother, or near Relation of his
(who lived at Amesbery in Wiltshire) that he saw him riding on the Downs, and
that two Thieves robbed him and Murdered him: The Dream awaked him; he fell
asleep again, and had the like Dream. He Writ to his Relation an account of it,
and described the Thieves Complexion, Stature and Clothes; and advised him to
take care of himself. Not long after he had received this Monitory Letter, he
Rode toward Salisbury, and was Robbed and Murdered: And the Murderers were
discovered by this Letter, and were Executed: They hang in Chains on the Road
to London.

51. A Gentlewoman of my acquaintance dreamed, That if she slept again, the
House would be in danger to be Robbed: She kept awake, and anon Thieves came to
break open the House; but were prevented.

52. In Mr. Walton's Life of Sir Hen. Wotton, there is a Remarkable Story of
the Discovery of Stolen Plate in Oxford, by a Dream which his Father had at
Borton Mulharb in Kent. See in Ath. and Fasti Oxon. Vol. 1. p. 351. Thus far
Mr. Aubrey.

CHAP. IX. Prediction, -- By Impulses, etc.
I Am no Favourer, as I said before, of Enthusiasm, or wild Fanatical Raptures
(the common distemper of giddy Brains, and distempered Minds;) but certainly
our Religion does not abandon all inward Motions for mere Fancies, but only
such as are rash, groundless, inconsistent with Sobriety, and Order, and
Orthodoxy. Let all these Properties meet together, and it will be hard to
censure Impulses, or any other zealous Expressions, though out of the common
Road, for vain and imprudent.

1: Justin Martyr Predicted of himself, That he should be betrayed by some one
of them called Philosophers, or knocked on the Head with a Club, by Cresceus,
no Philosopher indeed, said he, but a vain Boaster. Which came to pass
accordingly, for by the procurement of Cresceus he was Beheaded. A. D. 139.
Clark's Mar. of Eccl. History.

2. Athanasius, in the beginning of Julian's Reign, being falsely Accused by his
Adversaries, and threatened by the Emperor, said to some of his Friends, My
Friends, let us go aside for a Season, -- Nubecula est and cito transibit; i.
e. This is but a little Cloud, and will soon vanish away. And according taking
Ship, he fled into other parts of Egypt. Ibid.

3. Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine, and Chrysostom, upon a difference about the
Books of Origin, which Epiphanius would have had him to have Condemned, taking
their leave one of the other; says he to Chrysostom, I hope that thou will not
die a Bishop; to which Chrysostom replied, And I hope thou will never return
into thine own Country. Both which fell out accordingly: for Chrysostom was
cast out of his Bishopric, and Epiphanius died upon the Sea. Ibid.

4. Hither perhaps may not be improperly referred, that wonderful Presage of
the Destruction of Jerusalem, mentioned by Josephus. There as (says he) one
Jesus, Son of Ananias, a Country Man of mean Birth, four Years before the War
against the Jews, at a time when all was in deep Peace and Tranquillity, who
coming up to the Feast of Tabernacles, according to the custom, began on a
sudden to cry out; -- A Voice from the East, a Voice from the West, a Voice
from the four Winds, a Voice against Jerusalem and the Temple, a Voice against
Bridegrooms and Brides, a Voices against all the People. Thus he went about all
the narrow Lanes, crying Night and Day, and being apprehended and Scourged, he
still continued the same Language under the Blows, without any other word; and
they upon this, supposing that it was some Divine Motion, brought him to the
Roman Prefect; and by his appointment, being by Whips wounded, and Flesh torn
to his Bones, he neither entreated nor shed Tear, but to every blow, in a
lamentable and mournful Note, cried, Woe, woe, to Jerusalem. This he continued to
do till the time of the Siege, seven Years together; and at last, to his
ordinary Note, of Woe to the City, the People, the Temple, adding, Woe also to
me; a Stone from the Battlements fell down upon him, and killed him. Joseph. de
Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 12. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 8. Dr. Hammond's Notes on
Rev. 8, etc. Wanl. of the little World, l. 6. c. 2.

5. John Frith, of Westram, in Kent, being sent for out of Prison by the
Archbishop to Croydon, by one of his Gentlemen, and one of his Porters; when
these Messengers were upon the way, persuading him, (being a Learned Man) to
take pity upon himself, and not be stiff in his Opinion about the Sacrament;
after he had signified his great Confidence and Courage, he told them. -- This
I will say to you, That if you live but twenty Years more, whatsoever shall
become of me, you shall see this whole Realm of my Opinion, though happily some
particular Persons shall not be fully persuaded therein; and if this come not
to pass, then count me the vainest Man that ever spoke with a Tongue. Clark's
Eccl. Hist. p. 158.

6. Authony Walleus, being a long time unresolved what Course of Life to
follow; at last, one Night, lying with his Father on the Straw, he had a
sudden Instinct, that God had designed him for the Work of the Ministry; and
these Thoughts did so follow him Night and Day, wheresoever, and about
whatsoever he was, that he could not blot them out of his Memory; and
afterward he went to Leyden, and studied Divinity, and became very Eminent.
Ibid. p. 465.

7. Jerome, of Prague, at his Death, said to his Adversaries, I summon you all
100 Years hence to appear before God, and give an account of my innocent Blood.
These Words were variously commented upon; but many Protestants (not content
with the Exposition of others), would not have these Words an Arrow shot at
Rovers; but aiming at, and hitting a Mark, interpret them of Martin Luther, who
in Critical Computation at the end of that Century (as Heir to Jerome's
Opinions, and Executor of his Will) gave that deadly Wound to that Man of Sin,
which has brought him to an incurable Consumption, attended with an Hectic
Fever, the Infallible Forerunner of the speedy approaching of his final
Destruction. Fuller Abel, Rediv. p. 32.

8. John Knox to the Earl of Morton, who came to visit him in his Sickness,
said, my Lord, GOD has given you many Blessings, Wisdom, Honor, Nobility,
Riches, many good and great Friends, and he is now about to prefer you to the
Government of the Realm (the Earl of Mar, the late Regent, being newly dead)
in His Name I charge you, use these Blessings better than formerly you have
done; seeking first the Glory of God, the Furtherance of his Gospel, the
Maintenance of his Church and Ministry; and then be careful of the King, to
procure his Good, and the Welfare of the Realm; if you do thus, God will be
with you, and honor you; if otherwise, he will deprive you of all these
Benefits, and your end shall be Shame and Ignominy. These Speeches the Earl
called to mind about nine Years after, at the time of his Execution; saying,
That he had found John Knox to be a Prophet. Fuller Abel Rediv. p. 322.

9. The same Knox, a day or two before his Death, calling Mr. Lindsey and Mr.
Lawson to him (the two Preachers of the Church) said, There is one thing that
grieveth me exceedingly; you have some time seen the Courage and Constancy of
the Lord of Graing, in the cause of God; and now that unhapyy Man is casting
himself away; I pray you go to him from me, and tell him, that unless he
forsake that wicked Course that he is in, the Rock wherein he confides shall
not defend him, nor the Carnal Wisdom of the Man, which he counts half a God,
(which was young Leskington) shall yield him Help; but he shall be shamefully
pulled out of that Nest, and his Carcass hung before the Sun, (meaning the
Castle which he kept against the King's Authority) for his Soul is dear to me,
and if it were possible, I would fain have him saved. Accordingly they went to
him, conferred with him, but could by no means divert him from his course: But
as Knox had foretold, so the Year after, his Castle was taken, and his Body was
there publicly hanged before the Sun; yet he did at his Death express a
serious Repentance. Ibid. p. 323.

10. How Mr. Dod, by a secret Impulse of Spirit, went at an unseasonable time
to visit a Neighbor, whom he found with a Halter in his Pocket, going to hang
himself; and by such a seasonable Visit prevented his Death. See elsewhere in
this Book.

11. Dr. Bernard, in the Life of Archbishop Usher, tells us, That the Bishop
himself had confessed in his Hearing, that oftentimes in his Sermons he found
such warm Motions and Impulses upon his Mind, to utter some things, which he
had not before intended to deliver, or not to deliver with so much Briskness
and Peremptoriness, that he could not easily put them by, without present
Expression and Delivery. I remember not the Doctor's words; but of this nature
were those remarkable Predictions of his concerning the Massacre in Ireland,
and his own Poverty, etc. which (because I have not Bishop Usher's Life by me,
written by Dr. Bernard) take out of Mr. Clark. Upon the Suspension of the
Statute in Ireland, against the Toleration of Papists, Preaching before the
State at Dublin, making Application of that Text, Ezekiel. c. 4. v. 6. where the
Prophet, by lying on his Side, was to bear the Iniquity of Judah for 40 days; I
have appointed thee (says the Lord) each day for a year. This, says he, by
the Consent of Interpreters, signifies the time of 40 Years, to the Destruction
of Jerusalem, and of that Nation, for their Idolatry; and so, said he, will I
teckon from this Year the Sin of Ireland; and at the end of the time, those
whom you now embace shall be your Ruin, and you shall bear this Iniquity;
wherein he proved a Prophet. For this was delivered by him, A. C. 1601. and A.
C. 1641. was the Irish Massacre and Rebellion; and what a continued Expectation
he had of a great Judgment upon his Native Country, I, says Dr. Bernard, can
witness from the year 1624. Clark in his Life. Dr. Bernard, I remember, makes
this Remark upon that Sermon; that it was the last the Bishop wrote at length,
and it was dated with a particular Notion of the Day and Year. He foretold
likewise his own future Poverty, when he was in his greatest Prosperity, and
spoke before many Witnesses, 1624. repeated it often afterward, that he was
persuaded that the greatest Shake to the Reformed Churches was yet to come. In
short, as I said before, he often acknowledged, that sometimes in his Sermons
he was resolved to forbear speaking of some things, but it proved like
Jeremiah's Fire, shut up in his Bones; that when he came to it, he could not
forbear, unless he would have stood mute, and proceeded no further. Ibid.

12. Mr. Hugh Broughton, in one of his Sermons, 1588. when the Spanish Navy was
upon the Sea, and Men's Hearts were full of Fears of the Event: Now, says he,
the Papists Knees knock one against another, as the Knees of King Belshazzar
did, and News will come, that the Lord has scattered that Invincible Navy:
Fear ye not, nor be dismayed at these smoking Firebrands. In his Life, p. 2.

13. Bishop Jewel crossing the Thames, when on a sudden, at the rising of a
Tempest, all were astonished, looking for nothing but to be drowned, assured
Bishop Ridley, that the Boat carried a Bishop that must be burnt, and not
drowned. In Bishop Jewel's Life.

14. Mrs. Katherine Stubs, after she had Conceived with Child of a Daughter,
three or four Years after Marriage, said many times to her Husband and others,
That that Child would be her Death. She was delivered safely, within a
Fortnight, and was able to go abroad, but presently after fell sick of a
Burning Quotidian Ague, of which she died. See her Life.

15. Impulses, Extracted from the Miscellanies of John Aubrey, Esquire; -- Oliver
Cromwell had certainly this Afflatus. One that I knew, that was at the Battle
of Dunbar, told me, that Oliver was carried on with a Divine Impulse; he did
Laugh so excessively, as if he had been drunk; his Eyes sparkled with Spirits.
He obtained a great Victory; but the Action was said to be contrary to Humane
Prudence. The same fit of Laughter seized Oliver Cromwell, just before the
Battle of Naseby; as a Kinsman, of mine, and a great Favorite of his, Colonel
J. P. then present, testified.

16. King Charles the I. after he was Condemned, did tell Colonel Thomlinson,
that he believed, That the English Monarchy was at an end: About half an Hour
after he told the Colonel, That now he had an Assurance, by a strong Impulse
on his Spirit, that his Son should Reign after him. This Information I had from
Fabian Philips, Esquire; of the Inner Temple, who had good Authority for the Truth
of it: I have forgot who it was.

17. The Lord Roscomon, being a Boy of Ten Years of Age, at Caen in Normandy,
one day was (as it were) madly extravagant in Playing, Leaping, getting over
the Table-boards, etc. He was wont to be sober enough: They said, God grant
this bodes no ill Luck to him: In the heat of his extravagant Fit he cries out,
My Father is Dead. A Fortnight after, News came from Ireland, that his Father
was dead. This Account I had from Mr. Knolls, who was his Governor, and then
with him; since Secretary to the Earl of Strafford, and I have heard his
Lordship's Relations confirm the same.

Mr. J. N. a very understanding Gentleman, and not Superstitious, protested to
me, That when he has been over-perswaded by Friends to act contrary to a
strong Impulse, that he never succeeded. Thus far I Am beholding to Mr. Aubrey's
Collections.

CHAP. X. Of Divination, Southsaying, Witchcraft.
I Put all these together, because in Appearance there seems to be some
Affinity or Agreement amongst them. Nor do I take upon me here to discover how
many several ways of Divination Satan has invented, or his Agents (Men of a
dangerous Curiosity) have used. Among the Ancients we read of Augurium,
divining by Observation of Birds; Extispicium, by Inspection into the Entrails
of Beasts; Sortilagium, by Lottery; Hydromancy, by Water; Axinomancy, by an Ax
or Hatchet; Lecanomancy, by a Basin of Water; Geomancy, by the Earth;
Pyromancy, by Fire; Capnomancy, by Smoke; Capyromancy, by Looking-Glasses;
Aeremancy, by Brass; Physiognomy, by the Features and Parts of the Humane Body;
Chiromancy, by the Hands; Batanomancy, by Herbs; Gastromancy, by a
great-bellied Vessel; Caschinomancy, by a Sieve or Riddle, which is still used
(as are also several of the other kinds) by some superstitious People among us;
and I remember to have read a late Author, who declares that he had often made
Trial of it, and found it often true, to his Admiration; but he says, He
thought fit to leave it off, lest Satan should take Advantage upon him for his
over-bold Curiosity. But in latter Ages, and in Barbarous or Heathen Countries,
we find that Satan has set up other Methods, and some of them more gross than
the old Pagan way of giving Oracles; which I think not worthy to rehearse in
this place, otherwise than by giving a few Instances, that may seem strange to
the Reader.

1. Apollonius Tyaneus pretended to the foresight of Things future, and the
knowledge of Things past, to a Skill in all Languages, and an Inspection into
Men's Thoughts; and all this, Deo consultore, and dure Daemone, by the Counsel
of GOD, and the guidance of the Devil. He is reported to have told a Lascivious
Man, That he should, within three Days, be killed by a Gnat, and it came to
pass accordingly. See his Life, written by Volaterranus.

2. Albigerias, a Man of Carthage, was so Skillful in Divination, that upon the
Inspiration of his Demons, he would undertake to tell what any Man did or
thought: which Saint Augustine witnesses, and writes that himself was often
present at his Predictions. Text. Offic. p. 30.

3. Caelius writes of a Woman called Jacoba (in his own Country) who was
possessed with some (...), unclean Spirits, that spoke out of her Belly, and
amongst the rest one called Cincinnatulus, gave Responses to Admiration, about
things past and future; yet was oftener mistaken about things future. Ibid.

4. Mr. Teny, in the Relation of a Voyage into the East Indies, tells of a
Divining Ape, viz. as follows: -- A juggler of Bengala (a Kingdom famous for
Witches) brought an Ape before the Mogul; who being willing to please himself
with some Tricks, etc. gives the Ring off his Finger to a certain Boy, among
many, present to hide, the Ape going presently to the Boy that hid it. This,
with many more Feats, being done; at last this came strangely into the King's
Mind; There are, says he, many Disputes about the True Prophet. We are for
Mahomet, the Persians for Mortis Hale, the Hindoes for Breman, etc. The Persees
for Zortoost, the Jews for Moses, the Christians for Christ; adding more, to
the number of twelve, writing the Names on twelve several Scrolls, and putting
them together, the Ape put his Paw amongst them, and pulled out the Name of
Christ: This was done a second time, -- then Mahomet Chan, a great Noble Man of
that Court, calling it an Imposture of the Christians (though there was none
present) desiring to make a third Trial, put eleven of the Names together,
reserving the Name of Christ in his Hand: The Ape searching as before, pulled
forth his Paw empty, and so twice or thrice together. The King demanding a
reason for this, was answered, that happily the thing he looked for was not
there; he was bid to search for it; and then pulling out those eleven Names,
the Ape in a seeming Indignation rent them; then running to Mahomet Chan,
caught him by the Hand, where the Name of Christ was concealed, which delivered
to him, he opened the Scroll, and so held it up to the King, not tearing it as
the other: The Mogul took the Ape, gave his Keeper a Pension to look to him,
calling him the Divining Ape, Nothing else followed upon this wonder. The
Author believes this Story to be true, hearing it often confirmed to him by
diverse Persons, who knew not one another, and were of diverse Religions.

5. Dr. Burthogge, out of Sir W. Temple's Memoirs, p. 57. tells of a Divining
Parrot, in Sir William's own Words. With the Prince of Orange, says he,
returned most of the General Officers to the Hague, and among the rest, old
Prince Maurice of Nassau; who, as the Prince told me, had with the greatest
Industry that could be, sought all Occasions of dying fairly at the Battle of
Seneffe, without succeeding, which had given him great Regrets; and I did not
wonder at it, considering his Age of about 76, and his long Habits, both of
Gout and Stone. When he came to visit me upon his Return, and before he went to
his Government of Cleve, it came in my Head to ask him an idle Question,
because I thought it not very likely for me to see him again; and I had a mind
to know from his own Mouth the Account of a common, but much credited Story,
that I had heard so often from many others, of an old Parrot he had in Brasil,
during his Government there, that spoke, and asked, and answered common
Questions, like a reasonable Creature; so that those of his Train there
generaly concluded it to be Witchcraft or Possession; and one of the Chaplains,
who lived long afterward in Holland, would never from that time endure a
Parrot, but said, They all had a Devil in them. I had heard many Particulars of
this Story, and assevered by People hard to be discredited, which made me ask
Prince Maurice what there was of it? He said, with his usual Plainness and
Dryness of Talk, there was something true, but a great deal false, of what had
been reported. I desired to know of him what there was of the first; he told
me, short and coldly, that he had heard of such an old Parrot, when he came to
Brasil; and though he believed nothing of it, and it was a good way off, yet he
had so much Curiosity as to send for it; and that it was a very great, and a
very old one; and when it came first into the Room, where the Prince was with a
great many Dutchmen about him, it said presently, What a Company of white Men
are here? They askt^ it, what he thought that Man was? pointing at the Prince:
It answered, Some General or other. When they brought it close to him, he asked
it, Dou venez vous? (whence came you?) it answered, De Mariuuau (from
Mariuuau). The Prince -- A qui est es vous? (to whom do you belong?) The Parrot
-- a una Portuguez, (to a Portugueze). Prince -- Que fais tula? (What do you
there?) Parrot -- Je guard le poulles, [I look after the Chickens.] The Prince
laughed, and said, -- Vous guard le poulles, [You look after the Chickens?] The
Patrot answered, Ouy moy and Je scay bieu fair [Yes, I, and I know well enough
how to do it;] and then made a Chuck four or five times, that People use to
make, when they call the Chickens. I set down the Words of this worthy Dialogue
in French, just as Prince Maurice said them to me. I asked him in what,
Language the Parrot spoke; and he said, in Brasilian. I asked whether he
understood Brasilian, he said, No; but he had taken Care to have two
Interpreters by him; the one a Dutchman that spoke Brasilian, the other a
Brasilian that spoke Dutch; that he asked them separately and privately, and
both of them agreed, in telling him just the same thing that the Parrot said. I
could not (says Sir William) but tell this odd Story, because it is so much
out of the way, and from the first Hand, and what may pass for a good one. For
I dare say this Prince at least believed himself all that he told me, having
ever passsed for an honest and pious Man. I leave it to Naturalists to Reason,
and other Men to believe as they please upon it. Thus that excellent Person.
Dr. Burthogge's Essay upon Reason, etc. p. 19, 20, etc.

It may be this Story is not very properly asserted in this place; but I
Quaere, whether or no it may not give some Light to the solving of that
Aenigmatical Story of the Devil in the Serpent, and the speaking Ass, mentioned
by Moses?

6. Memorable is that famous Story in Wierus, of Magdalena Crucia, first a Nun,
and then an Abbatess of a Nunnery, in Corduba in Spain: Those things which were
Miraculous in her were these: That she could tell almost at any distance how
the Affairs of the World went; what Consultations or Transactions there were in
all the Nations of Christendom; from whence she got to her self the Reputation
of a very holy Woman, and a great Prophetess. But other things came to pass by
her, or for her sake, no less strange and miraculous: As that at the
Celebrating of the Holy Eucharist, the Priest should always want one of his
round Wafers, which was secretly conveyed to Magdalen, by the Administration of
Angels, as was supposed, and she receiving of it into her Mouth, eat it in the
view of the People, to their great Astonishment, and high Reverence of the
Saint. At the Elevation of the Host, Magdalen being near at hand, but yet a
Wall betwixt, that the Wall was conceived to open, and to exhibit Magdalen to
the view of them in the Chapel, and that thus she partaked of the Consecrated
Bread. When this Abbatess came into the Chapel her self, upon some special
Day, she would set off the Solemnity of the Day by some notable and conspicuous
Miracle; for she would sometimes be lifted up above the ground three or four
Cubits high; other sometimes, bearing the Image of Christ in her Arms, weeping
savourly, she would make her Hair to increase to that length and largeness,
that it would come to her Heels, and cover her all over, and the Image of
Christ in her Arms, which anon, notwithstanding, would shrink up again to its
usual size; with a many such specious, though unprofitable Miracles.

But you will say, That the Narrative of these things is not true, but they are
Feigned for the Advantage of the Roman Religion, and so it was profitable for
the Church to Forge them, and record them to posterity. A man that is unwilling
to admit of any thing supernatural, would please himself with this general
shuffle and put off. But when we come to the Catastrophe of the Story, he will
find it quite othewise; For this Saint at last, began to be suspected for a
Sorceress, as it is thought, and she being conscious, did of her own accord, to
save her self, make confession of her Wickedness to the Visitors of the Order,
as they are called, Viz. That for thirty years, she had been Married to the
Devil in the shape of an Ethiopian; that another Devil, Servant to this, when
his Master was at dalliance with her in her Cell, supplied her place amongst
the Nuns, at their public Devotions: That by virtue of this Contract she made
with this Spirit, she had done all those Miracles she did. Upon this Confession
she was Committed; and while she was in durance, yet she appeared in her devout
Postures, praying in the Chapel, as before, at their set Hours of Prayer,
which being told to the Visitors by the Nuns, there was a strict Watch over
her, that she should not stir out, never theless she appeared in the Chapel,
as before, tho she were really in the Prison.

Now what Credit or Advantage there can be to the Roman Religion by this story,
let any Man Judge; wherefore it is no sigment of the Priests, or Religious
Persons, nor Melancholy, nor any such Matter, [for how could so many Spectators
at once be deluded by melancholy?] but it ought to be deemed a real Truth: And
this Magdalena Crucia appearing in two several places at once, it is manifest
that there is such a thing as Apparitions of Spirits. More's Antid. against
Atheism. l. 3. c. 4.

7. It may not be impertinent here to relate a certain Story out of Sozomen,
concerning Athanasius, Patriarch of Alexandria: The Patriarch was upon a time
walking in the Streets of the City, and a Raven flying toward him, croaking, a
Heathen that stood by, observing it, began to deride and reproach him for it,
as if he had been a Praestigator, or Conjurer; and so making toward him, asked
in derision, What the Raven said to him? He modestly Smiling, answered, in
Latin, Cras, To Morrow: For he Dictates unto you, That to Morrow will be a
bitter Day. For to Morrow you shall receive the Emperor's Edict, That you shall
Celebrate no more your Heathenish Solemnities. And accordingly it came to pass;
for the next Day the Magistrates received Orders from the Roman Emperor, That
the Heathen Gods should be no more worshipped, but destroyed utterly, with all
their Idolatry and Superstition, in which they were bred. I have not the
Writings of Sozomen by men at present, and therefore put this Relation to my
Reader, only upon the Authority of Mr. Clogie, in his Vox Corvi, p. 81.

See the Chapter of Persons strangely Admonished. Sect. 4.

8. Anne Bodenham, a Witch near Salisbury, was famous for making Discovery of
Things lost, and Predicting Things to come; of whom we have occasion to speak
elsewhere in this Book.

9. Philippus Comineus Reports, That the Archbishop of Vienna said, after
Mass, to King Lewis the Eleventh of France, Sir, Your mortal Enemy is dead. At
which time Duke Charles of Burgundy, was Slain at the Battle of Granson against
the Switzers. Bacon's Not. Hist. Cent. 10. p. 211.

10. In Barbary are Wizards who do smear their Hands with some black Ointment,
and then do hold them up to the Sun, and in a short time you shall see
delineated in that black Stuff, the likeness of what you desire to have an
Answer of. It was desired to know, whether a Ship was in safety, or no? There
appeared in the Woman's hand, the perfect Lineaments of a Ship under Sail. This
Mr. W. Cl. a Merchant of London, who was Factor there several Years, protested
to me, that he did see. He is a Person worthy of belief.

11. The last Summer, on the Day of St. John Baptist, 1694. I accidentally was
walking in the Pasture behind Montague-House, it was Twelve a Clock; I saw
there about two or three and twenty young Women, most of them well Habited, on
their Knees, very busy, as if they had been Weeding. I culd not presently
learn what the Matter was; at last a young Man told me, that they were looking
for a Coal under the Root of a Plantain, to put under their Heads that Night,
and they should Dream who would be their Husbands: It was to be found that Day
and Hour.

12. The Women have several Magical Secrets handed down to them by Tradition,
for this purpose, as on St. Agnes Night, 21th. Day of January, Take a Row of
Pins, and pull out every one, one after another, saying a Pater Noster, or Our
Father, sticking a Pin in your Sleeve, and you will Dream of him or her you
shall Marry. Ben. Johnson, in one of his Masks, makes some mention of this.

And on sweet Saint Agnes Night
Please you with the promised sight,
Some of Husbands, some of Lovers,
Which an empty Dream discovers.
Another. To know whom one shall Marry.

You must lie in another County, and knit the left Garter about the Right
Legged Stocking (let the other Garter and Stocking alone) and as you rehearse
these following Verses, at every Comma, knit a Knot.

This not I knit,
To know the thing I know not yet.
That I may see
The Man that shall my Husband be,
How he goes, and what he wears,
And what he does all the Days.
Accordingly in your Dream you will see him, if a Musician, with a Lute, or
other Instrument; if a Scholar, with a Book, etc.

14. A Gentlewoman that I knew, confessed in my hearing, that she used this
method, and dreamt of her Husband whom she had never seen: About two or three
Years after, as she was one Sunday at Church, up pops a young Oxonian in the
Pulpit: She cries out presently to her Sister, This is the very Face of the Man
that I Saw in my Dream. Sir William Somes's Lady did the like; as also did Sir
T. Williams's Lady.

15. Another way is, to Charm the Moon thus: At the first appearance of the new
Moon, after New-Years-Day, go out in the Evening, and stand over the Sparrs of
a Gate or Style, looking on the Moon, and say, All hail to the Moon, all Hail
to thee.
I prithee good Moon reveal to me,
This Night who my Husband must be.


You must presently after go to Bed.

16. I knew two Gentlewomen that did thus when they were young Maids, and they
had Dreams of those that Married them. I don't think any stress is to be laid
upon such Practices, but finding 'em all Inserted in Mr. Aubrey's Collections,
I was willing to take Notice of them.

17. Dr. -- Pocock of Oxford, in his Commentary on Hosea, has a Learned
Discourse of the Vrim and Thummim; as also Dr. -- Spenser of Cambridge, That
the Priest had his Visions in the Stone of the Breast Plate.

18. The Prophets had their Seers, viz. Young Youths, who were to behold those
Visions, of whom Mr. Abraham Cowley writes thus; With hasty Wings, Time present
they out-fly,
And tread the doubtful Maze of Destiny;
There walk and sport among the Years to come,
And with quick Eye pierce every Causes Womb.


19. James Harrington, Author of Oceana, told me, That the Earl of Denbigh,
then Ambassador at Venice, did tell him, That one did show him there several
times in a Glass, things past, and to come.

20. When Sir Mermaduke Langdale was in Italy, he went to one of those Magi,
who did show him a Glass, where he saw himself kneeling before a Crucifix: He
was then a Protestant; afterward he became a Roman Catholic. He told Mr.
Thomas Henshaw, R. S. S. this himself.

21. A Clothier's Widow of Pembridge, in Herefordshire, desired Dr. Shirb^rn
(one of the Canons of the Church of Hereford; and Rector of Pembridge) to look
over her Husbands Writings after his Decease: among other things, he found a
Call for a Crystal. The Clothier had his Clothes oftentimes stolen from his
Racks; and at last obtained this Trick to discover the Thieves. So when he lost
his Clothes, he went out about Midnight with his Crystal and Call, and a little
Boy, or little Maid with his [for they say, it must be a pure Virgin] to look
in the Crystal, to see the likeness of the Person that committed the Theft. The
Doctor did burn the Call, 1671.

22. About the latter end of the Reign of King James the First, one -- a Tailor
in London, had several Visions, which he did describe to a Painter to paint,
and he writ the description himself in an ill, Taylor-like hand, in false
English; but legibly: It was (at least) a Quire of Paper. I remember one Vision
is of St. James's Park, where is the Picture of an Altar and Crucifix, Mr.
Butler of the Toy-shop by Ludgate [one of the Masters of Bridewel] had the Book
in Anno 1659; The then Earl of Northampton gave Five Pounds for a Copy of it.
Thus far Mr. Aubrey.

CHAP. XI. Of Astrology.
THO there be much Vanity and Uncertainty in Judicial Astrology, and therefore
it has been decried and run down with much Satyr and Tartness, even by Wise
and Good Men, as St. Augustine, Perkins, etc. And very strong Arguments brought
against it, S. Scriptures, the Writings of the Fathers, the Reason of Things;
yet whether or no there may not be a modest use made of it, I appeal to the
Writings of the Learned Melancthon, Alsted, and several others, who wrote in
defense of it; and so commit these following Relations, to the sober
consideration of an Intelligent Reader.

1. The Magi, or Wise Men of the East, were directed by a Star to the very
Country and Place where our Blessed Savior was Born, and this method God
seemed to take for their Conduct, rather then another; because they were
trained up (according to the custom of the Oriental Countries) in these
studies. See Doct. Gell's Sermon. in defense of Astrlogy.

2. Our Savior at his Crucifixion, to denote the horror of the Act, and the
Extinction of Light in the Jewish Church, gives notice to the whole World by a
dismal Eclipse of the Sun, what a Bloody Act that People were a doing at that
time, and what a Calamitous season was approaching that Nation. There was
Darkness upon the Face of the Earth, from the 6th to the 9th hour. This Eclipse
Dionisius is said to have seen in Egypt, and in Astonishment to cry out, Either
Nature, or the God of Nature suffers. And tho this be accounted not in the
Number of natural, but supernatural Eclipses, because (if there be any credit
to be given to the Writings of Dionysius) it was obsered by him, and the
Philosopher Apollophanes to happen, not at the time of the Conjunction of Sun
and Moon, but at their opposition, Viz. At full Moon; this does no hurt to my
cause at all: For I plead only for this point, that God is pleased to make
significations of his will, in the discovery of things not well known, in the
outward Face of the Heavens. Eusebius also tells us, that Phlegon made
observation of this Eclipse. Alsted Eucyel. l. 20. c. 10. Hist. Eclips.

3. A little before the Death of Charles the great, A. C. 814. There happened
another Famous Eclipse of the Sun; of which Eginardas in his Life (as he is
cited in fascical. tempt.) says thus, Many Signs preceeded the Death of the
Glorious and Holy Emperor Charles; for there was an unusual Eclipse of the Sun
and Moon, there appeared for seven days a spot of black color in the Sun. Ibid.

4. June 17th, 1415. When John Husse was tried at Constance, by the Cardinals
and Bishops in the Convent of the Franciscans, there fell out so great an
Eclipse, that the Sun was almost Darkened: After which John was Condemned, and
a dismal Persecution followed upon all his Disciples that breathed after a
Reformation. Clark's mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 123.

5. A Greek Astrologer, the same that had predicted the Dukedom of Tuscany to
Cosmo de medices, foretold also the Death of Alexander, and that with such
confidence, that he described the Murderer, to be one of this familiar
Acquaintance, of a slender Body, small Face, Swarthy Complexion, and of an
unsociable reserved temper; by which description he did as good as point out
with the Finger Lawrence Medices, who Murdered the same Alexander in his
Bedchamber. Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 394. Jovii Elog. p. 320.

6. Pope Paul the 3d wrote to Petrus Aloides, Farnesius his Son, that he should
take special care of himself upon the 10th of September; for the Stars did then
threaten him with some signal Misfortune: Upon which the Incredulous young Man
was slain by thirty Men who had joined in Conspiracy against him. Sleiden.
Comment. l. 19. Zuing. Theat. vol. 5. l. 3.

7. Basilius the Mathematician, predicted to Cosmo Medices, when as yet but a
private Man, that a mighty Rich Inheritance would fall to him; before the
Ascendant of his Nativity was Illustrated by a happy Conspiracy of Stars in
Capricorn, in such manner as had heretofore fallen out to Augustus^ Caesar, and
Charles the 5th, Emperor; and accordingly upon the 5th of the Ides of January,
he was advanced to the Dukedom of Florence. Dinoth. memorab. l. 6. p. 390.

8. The Famous Picus Mirandula, for his invective Writings against the
Astrologers of his time, called, Flagellum Astrologorum, or Astrologo-Mastix,
the Scourge of Astrologers, met at last with one Bellantius of Syena, who upon
a Scheme of his Nativity gave this Judgment upon him, that he should dye the
thirty fourth year of his Age: Which accordingly came to pass. Gaffarell.
Curios. c. 7. p. 252.

9. Guido Bontius, foretold to Guido Count of Monts-ferat, the day wherein he
might, if he would, sally out of Forolirium and attack his Enemies, and might
defeat them; but withal himself should be wounded in the Hip. Which accordingly
he did, and prospered, the Astrologer himself being in Company with him, and
providing a medicine for the wound beforehand; which the Count, as was
predicted, received at the same time. Wanley's Wonders of the little World, l.
6. c. 4. Fulges Ex. l. 8. c. 11.

10. Within three or four days after King Charles the Second died, I being then
Minister of Shipley, and considering with my self, of how great importance the
knowledge of such an Accident might be to the Nation, concluded, that if they
were any thing of moment in the Science of Astrology, sure some prediction
might be expected from our Prognosticators in this case: Upon which I went
straight to a Country Shop where Almanacks were sold, and enquired what old
ones lay upon their hands; they produced all, out of which I singled out so
many as pretended to Astrological Observations, and Prognostications, in one of
them (which I think was Gadbury's, I found to this purpose, That that year, by
the then Configurataions of the Heavens, should be much such another as was
that of 1660, which was so happy for the settlement of the late King in his
Throne; but now, as then, there would be a Party of Saturnine humors, that
would by their murmuring and discontents, be in danger of bringing Punishment
upon their own Heads. After I had read over this, I passed on to another, where
I found words of the like import: Upon which I returned home, pausing upon the
case, not knowing whether to resolve it into the Science of Astrology, or
something else: And so I leave it to the censure of my Reader.

For Comets, I declared, that I do not believe the Governor of the World puts
out such Flameaus, sets such Beacons on fire in the upper Regions, for no
purpose; Nature does not, says the Philosopher; and shall the Christian say,
the God of Nature does any thing in vain? Two and Fifty years ago, December.
1638. There was a Blazing Star seen, upon which followed the Irish Massacre,
and the late Civil Wars. In December and March 1664. There were two Comets
seen, which were followed by that sad and dreadful Plague, whereof died, that
were taken notice of, 98596, besides many others, which escaped the Bills of
Mortality; and that lamentable fire which in London destroyed so many Stately
Buildings and Parish Churches.

11. In Dec. and Jan. 168^. Another Great Comet appeared to the Amusement, or
Terror of all considering Spectatours, beginning in Sagittarius, or the latter
end of Scorpio, about the beginning of November, thence proceeding to
Capricorn, etc. Concerning which, said John Hill, a Physician and Astrologyer
(in his Alarm to Europe, Printed by H. Brugis, for W. Thackery at the Angel in
Duck-Lane). Let part of France, and part of Germany and Spain look to it; for
they either offensively, or defensively shall batter themselves, or some other
People; and in as much as it is gotten into Capricorn, I pray God keep the
Dominions of Great Britain in Peace, because under Capricorn is the North part
of Sotland; for it is much to be feared, the Scots may once more Rebel against
England, etc. And at last. -- I shall now conclude with this Astrological
prediction, that within this five years all Europe shall go near to be up in
Arms. Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo omnia. Thus far my Author too truly.

12. A Neighbor and Friend of mine in Shropshire, with whom I have had several
discourses about the Lawfulness and certainty of Astrology, always asserted the
Lawfulness of it, because he saw nothing but what was natural in it, but
confessed the uncertainty of it in many cases (as others have done before him)
not through default of the Art, but the Weakness and Unskilfulness of the
Artist: And he mentioned some particular Instances of his own Experiments,
wherein he had hit upon the Truth; as particularly, when one Captain C. near
Salop, had lost a Horse out of his Stable, he was sent for, and desired to cast
a Figure, which he accordingly did, and gave such a particular description of
the Man that had stole him, and the way he was gone; that by Virtue of his
Directions the Horse was presently found: His other Instances I remember not,
but he was reputed an honest Farmer, a good Neighbor, and a very facetious
Man: I suppose, he is still lliving.

13. Prophesies Extracted from the Miscellanies of John Aubrey Esquire; to pass by
the Prophesies of Holy-Writ, the Prophesies of Nostraedamus do foretell very
strangely; but not easily understood till they are fulfilled. The Book is now
common. In a Book of Mr. William Lilly's are Hieroglyphick Prophesies, Viz. Of
the great Plague of London, expressed by Graves and Dead Corpse; and a Scheme
with II ascending [the Sign of London] and no Planets in the XII Houses. Also
there is the Picture of London all on Fire, also Moles creeping, etc. Perhaps
Mr. Lilly might be contented to have People believe that this was from himself.
But Mr. Thomas Flatman (Poet) did affirm, that he had seen those Hieroglyphics
in an old Parchment Manuscript Writ in the time of the Monks.

14. There is a Prophecy of William Tyndal, poor Vicar of Welling in the County
of Hertford, made in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. I have seen it:
It is in English Verse, two Pages and an half in Folio. It foretold our late
Wars. I know one that read it Forty Years since.

15. Before the Civil-Wars there was much talk of the Lady Ann Davys's
Prophesies; for which she was kept Prisoner in the Tower of London. She was
Sister to the Earl of Castlehaven, and Wife to Sir John Davys, Lord Chief
Justice in Ireland; I have heard his Kinsman (Counselor Davys of Shraftsbury)
say, that she being in London (I think in the Tower) did tell the very time of
her Husbands Death in Ireland. Thus far Mr. Aubrey.

CHAP. XII. Of ORACLES.
ALL that I propound to my self under this Head, is to show, not what Illusions
and Impostures were used by the Priests, to Cheat the poor Votaries with, that
Addressed to them; much less to vindicate them from the Frauds of Ambiguity and
Vanity; but to evince this, That by them God Almighty permitted sometimes,
Things otherwise Secret and Future, to be made known; and this by the mediation
of invisible Spirits, as the Agents; that some Responses were given by Oracles,
which could not be imputed to the Artifice of a Mechanical Statue, nor yet to
the Wit of the Priest that officiated: As for Instance, among the Heathen
Oracles, for such only I mean this place.

1. The Oracle of Delphos, the most Famed of all other, being consulted for a
Resolution of this Question, Who was the most happy Man? The Answer was made,
Phedius, who died but a while before in the Service of his Country. The same
Question being sent a second time, by Gyges, one of the greatest Kings in those
days, of all the Earth, viz. Who was the happiest Man next to Phedius? The
Answer was made, Aglaus Sophidius. This Aglaus was a good honest Man, well
stricken in Years, dwelling in a very narrow Corner of Arcadia, where he had a
little House, and Land of his own, sufficient, with the yearly Profits thereof,
to maintain him plentifully with ease, out of which he never went, but employed
himself in the Tillage and Husbandry of it, to make the best benefit he could;
in such manner that (as it appeared by that course of Life) as he coveted
least, so he felt as little Trouble and Adversity while he lived. Plin. Not.
Hist. l. 7. c. 46.

2. Julian the Apostate ( Op. p. 181. Ep. 38.) makes frequent mention of
Oracles in his time, particularly in an Epistle to Maximus the Cynick,
concerning whose Trouble he had by another, though at a great distance,
Consulted the Oracle, and received an Apposite Answer. Doctor Tenison against
Hobbs. The Doctor adds also, that which is to my purpose, viz. I cannot prevail
upon my Mind to think, that the Priests had no Assistance from Demons.

3. Extracted from the Miscellanies of Mr. Aubrey. Hieronimus Cardanus, Lib.
III. Synesiorum Somniorum, Cap. XV. treats of this Subject, which see. Johannes
Scotus Erigena, when he was in Greece, did go to an Oracle to Enquire for a
Treatise of Aristotle, and found it, by the Response of the Oracle. This he
mentions in his Works, lately Printed at Oxford; and is quoted by Mr. Anthony a
Wood, in his Antiquities of Oxen, in his Life.

4. Concerning the Oracles of the Sybils, there has been much Controversy,
and many Discourses spent; but after all, we have little of their Writings to
rely upon, excepting only those of the Cumaean Prophetess, and those especially
which are Recorded by Virgil; yet that very same Year that Jerusalem was taken
by Pompey, it was noised abroad in the World, That Nature was with Child for
the People of Rome, of a King that should Reign over them. Whereupon, as
Suetonius writes in the Life of Augustus, the Senate being affrighted, made
Order, That none Born in that Year should be brought up: They who had Wives
great with Child, promising themselves some hopes thereupon, took care, lest
this Decree of the Senate should be carried to the Treasury. The same Year P.
Cornelius Lentulus was stirred up therewith, conceiving some hopes for himself,
as both Appian, Plutarch, Salustius, and Cicero (in his third Oration against
Cataline) testify, etc.

The Verses of the Sybils, which gave occasion to these Thoughts and Counsels,
were these; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
etc. Isaac V^s. de Sybil. Orac. p. 20.

The Sybils Oracles gave such Testimony to the Expectation of a Messiah, that
at last the reading of them was forbid to private Persons. Justin Martyr says,
It was a capital Crime for any one to read the Books of Hystaspes, Sybilla, and
the Prophets: as the same Vossius tells us (out of his Second Apology.) -- And
the Christians, whenever they were engaged in Disputation with the Gentiles,
always Appealed to the Sybils, and commended them to their Books, as is clear
from Justin M. Clements, Tertullian, Lactantius, and all. Ibid. p. 34.

5. Croesus, King of Lydia, having determined to War upon Cyrus, Consulted the
Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, touching the Success, whence he received this
Answer: Croesus Halyn penetrante, magnam disperdet opnmvim.
When Croesus has the Halys past,
A Sword of Treasure shall he wast.
He Interpreted this of the Riches of his Adversaries, but the Event showed
they were his own; for he lost his army, Kingdom, and Liberty, in that
Expedition. Herodot. l. 1. p. 20. Dinoth. memorab. p. 409.

6. There were some ancient Stories of the Sybils, in which was contained, That
Africa should again fall under the power of the Romans, Mundum cum prole sua
interiturum. This Prophecy of the Sybils affrighted very many, extremely
sollicitous, lest the Heavens and the Earth, together with all Mankind, should
then perish. But Africa being Reduced by the fortunate Virtue of Belisarius, it
then appeared, That the Death of Mundus, the then General, and of Mauritius his
Son, was Predicted by the Sybil, who in Battle against the Goths, were both
Slain at Salona, a City in Dalmatia. Dinoth. l. 6. p. 412.

7. Nero Caesar Consulted the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, touching his future
Fortune, and was thereby Advised, To beware of the Sixty and Third Year; he
concluded, that he should not only arrive to old Age, but also that all things
should be prosperous to him; and was so entirely possessed, that nothing could
be Fatal till that Year of his Age, that when he had lost diverse things of
great value by Ship-wreck, he doubted not to say amongst his Attendants, That
the Fishes would bring them back to him. But he was deceived in his
Expectation; for Galba, being in the Sixty third Year of his Age, was Saluted
Emperor by his Soldiers, and Nero being forced to death, was succeeded by him
in the Empire. Sueton. l. 6. c. 40. p. 259. Zuring. Theatr. vol. 1. l. 1. p. 78.

8. Alexander, King of Epirus, Consulted the Oracle of Jupiter at Dodona, a
City of Epire, about his Life; he was Answered, That he should shun the City of
Pandosia, and the River Acherusius, as fatal places: he knew there were such
places amongst the Thospoci: Warring therefore upon the Brutii, a warlike
People, he was by them overthrown and slain, near unto places amongst them
called by the same name. Alex. ab Alexand. dies Genial. l. 5. c. 2. Fitzherb.
of Relig. and Policy, Part 1. c. 36. p. 446. Just. l. 12. p. 134.

9. Croesus sent to Delphos, to know of the Oracle, if his Empire and
Government should be durable, or not; the Answer he received was, Regis apud
medos mulo jam sede potico
Lyde, fugam mollis, scruposum corripe ad Hermum
Neve mane, ignavus, posito sis Lyde pudore.
When the Verses came to Croesus, he took great pleasure therein, hoping it
would never come to pass, that amongst the Medes, a Mule instead of a Man
should Reign, and that therefore he and his Posterity should preserve their
Empire unabolished. But when, after he was overcome, he had got leave of Cyrus
to send to Delphos, to upbraid the Oracle with the Deceit, Apollo sent him
word, That by the Mule he meant Cyrus, because he was Born of Parents of two
different Nations, of a more noble Mother than Father; for she was a Mede, the
Daughter of Astyapes, King of the Medes; the Father a Persian, and Subject to
the Medes; and, though a very mean Person, had yet married Mandane the Daughter
of his King. Herod. l. 1. p. 21. and. 39.

10. In the last place, I recommend to the Consideration of the Ingenuous
Reader, these Verses out of Virgil, ascribed to Cumaea, one of the Sybils,
concerning Christ, as I find them Translated out of the Ancient Ecclesiastical
Histories of Eusebius, Socrates, and Evagrius, etc. by Dr. Hanmer, in
Constantines Oration to the Clergy, c. 20. p. 124.

Now a new Progeny is sent down from Heaven high,
Yea, Muses, with a lofty wing,
Let us of higher Matters sing:
This is the last Age, wherein
Cumaea shall her Verses sing.
The Integrity of Times shall new renew again,
And a Virgin shall bring back old Saturn's Reign.
The Birth of that most happy Child, in whom
The Iron Age shall end, and the Golden Age back (...).
Chaste Lucina favor!
He shall the powers of wickedness destroy,
And free the World from Fears and all A^^y.
He shall live with the Gods, and see again
The Gods and Heroes, and be seen of them.
And with his Fathers Virtues he shall Reign
Over the World, which shall Peace obtain.
The grateful Earth, sweet Child, shall be most willing
To bring forth Gifts for thee, without all Tilling
The winding Ivy, and the Ladies Gloves,
And also Saffron that the Meadow loves,
And is called Medow-Saffron, and with those,
That smiling Flower that is called, our Ladies Rose.
The Goats shall bring their Vdders home,
And the gentle Flocks great Lions shall not shun.
Thy Cradle fairest Flowers shall bring forth still,
Which shall have power the poisonous Herbs to kill.
The Serpent he shall to destruction bring,
Assyrian Amomum shall each-where spring.
He may at once know Virtue, and may read
His Father's Works, and what the Heroes did.
The Fields, when the soft Ears are ripe,
Shall, by degrees, even wax white;
And the red Grnpe shall not scorn
To grow on the undrest Thorn.
From the hard Oak there shall
Sweet Honey sweat forth and fall.
Yet some few Prints of wickedness shall remain,
So that Ships shall sail on Thetis Waves again;
Which shall make them to encompass their Towns round
With Walls, and to make Trenches on the ground.
Another Typhis and Argos there shall be
To convey the chosen Heroes; and besides, we
Shall have other wars again, us to destroy,
And great Achilles shall be sent to Troy.
When thou shall attain at length
To Years of Manhood, and firm strength;
The Sea shall then be quiet, no Ships shall range
Abroad, her Wares with others to exchange;
Then every Land, shall every thing produce,
And then to Plough the Earth they shall not use;
Vines by the Hook shall not be rectified,
Nor Wool with diverse colors shall be died,
Fair Fleeces voluntary shall proceed,
And cloth the Lambs while they do gently feed;
Jove's Off spring, and the Gods dear Progeny,
Come to those Honors which attend on thee.
See how the World does nod, though poised even,
Both Earth, the broad Sea, and the highest Heaven.
O might my Days be lengthned, so that I
Might sing of thy great deeds before I die.
See how all things do their Joy and Gladness show,
For that Age which is ready to ensue.
The Thracian Orpheus should not me overcome,
Nor Linus, though his Parents heard the Son;
If Pan, Arcadia Judging, strive with me,
Pan should, Arcadia Judging, Conquered be.
CHAP. XIII. Of Prophets.
WE have frequent mention made of Prophets, and Prophesying in the New, as well
as the Old Testament; by which Divines do generally understand Preachers and
Preaching; and I believe they are partly in the right. But I Query if or no the
common Notion be deep and extensive enough? For, with an humble Deference to my
Superiors and Betters, I am of Opinion, that Preachers cannot otherwise with
any Propriety of Speech be called Prophets, than as they are Authorized and
Enabled by God Almighty, to foretell their respective Flocks, and particular
Members of the Church they are concerned with, what is like to be their future
Doom, in this partly, but especially in the other World: And this from their
deep Contemplations of God's revealed Decrees; their Study of Sacred
Scriptures, and the Refinedness and Soundness of their Judgments, and withal
(if Men of a Sincere Piety and Devotion) from the especial Communications of
the Spirit of Grace. And if there be any Probability in this, it is no wonder,
if we find Prophesying not quite ceased amongst us.

1. Valentine the Emperor being slain in France, and Eugenius nominated Emperor
in his room; Theodosius the Elder being very sorry, and considering how
dangerous a War lay before him; yet thinking it a great Dishonor to suffer
such an Action to go unpunished, he mustered up his Army, and with all possible
Speed marched against the Conspirators; but as a good and holy Christian, he
first betook himself to Fasting and Prayer, seeking unto God, the Giver of
Victory, for Success in his Enterprise, requesting the Prayers of other Holy
Men also; whereof one o^ them sent him Word, that he should have the Victory,
but should die in Italy, and never return again to Constantinople. He obtained
the Victory, fixed himself afterward at Millain, where he lived for some
Years, and there died. Clark in his Life.

2. Anno Christi, 1279. there lived in Scotland one Thomas Lermouth, a Man,
very greatly admired for his foretelling of Things to come. He may justly be
wondered at for foretelling so many Ages before the Union of the Kingdom of
England and Scotland, in the Ninth Degree of Bruce's Blood, with the Succession
of Bruce himself to the Crown, being yet a Child, and many other things, which
the Event has made good. The day before the Death of King Alexander, he told
the Earl of March, that before the next Day at Noon such a Tempest should blow,
as Scotland had not felt many Years before. The next morning proving a clear
day, the Earl challenged Thomas as an Imposter; he replied, That Noon was not
yet past; about which time a Post came to inform the Earl of the King's sudden
Death; and then, said Thomas, This is the Tempest I foretold, and so it shall
prove to Scotland, as indeed it did. Spotwood's Hist. of Chapter of Scotland, l. 2.
p. 47. Clark's Mir. c. 101. p. 467.

3. Duncan, King of Scots, had two principal Men, whom he employed in all
Matters of Importance, Mackbeth and Banquho; these two traveling together
through a Forest, were met by three Witches (Weirds, as the Scots call them)
whereof the first making Obeisance unto Mackbeth, saluted him, Thane (that is
Earl) of Glammis; the second, Thane of Cander, and the third, King of Scotland.
This is unequal Dealing, said Banquho, to give my Friend all the Honor, and
none unto me; to which one of the Weirds made answer, That he indeed should not
be King, but out of his Loins should come a Race of Kings, that should for ever
rule the Scots: And having thus said, they all vanished. Upon their Arrival to
the Court, Mackbeth was immediately created Thane of Glammis, and not long
after, some new Service requiring new Recompense, he was honored with the
Title of Thane of Cander. Seeing then how happily the Prediction of the three
Weirds fell out in the two formea, he resolved not to be wanting to himself, in
fulfilling the third. He therefore first killed the King, and after, by reason
of his Command amongst the Soldiers, he succeeded in his Throne. Being scarce
warm in his Seat, he called to Mind the Prediction given to his Companion
Banquho, whom, hereupon suspecting as his Supplanter, he caused to be killed,
together with his whole Posterity, only Fleance, one of his Sons, escaping with
no small difficulty into Wales; freed, as he thought, of all Feat of Banquho
and his Issue, he built Dunsinan Castle, and made it his ordinary Seat;
afterward, on some new Fears, consulting with his Wizzards concerning his
future Estate, he was told by one of them, that he should never be overcome,
till Bernane-Wood, being some Miles distant, came to Dunsinan-Castle; and by
another, that he should never be slain by any Man, which was born of a Woman:
Secure then, as he thought, from all future Dangers, he omitted no kind of
Libidinous Cruelty for the space of eighteen Years; for so long he tyrannized
over Scotland. But having then made up the Measure of his Iniquities,
Mackduffe, the Governor of Fife, with some other good Patriots, privily met
one Evening at Bernane-Wood, and, taking every one a Bough in his Hand, the
better to keep them from Discovery, marched early in the Morning toward
Dunsinan-Castle, which they took by Storm. Mackbeth escaping, was pursued by
Mackduffe, who having overtaken him, urged him to the Combat, to whom the
Tyrant, half in Scorn, returned, That in vain he attempted to kill him, it
being his Destiny never to be slain by any that was born of a Woman. Now then,
said Mackduffe, is the fatal end drawn fast upon thee; for I was never born of
a Woman, but violently cut out of my Mother's Belly; which so daunted the
Tyrant (though otherwise a Valiant Man) that he was easily slain. In the mean
time Fleance so prosper'd in Wales, that he gained the Affection of the
Prince's Daughter of the Country, and by her had a Son, called Walter, who
flying Wales, returned into Scotland, where (his Descent known) he was restored
to the Honors and Lands of his House, and preferred to be Steward of the House
of Edgar (the Son of Malcoline the Third, surnamed Conmer) King of Scotland,
the name of Stewart growing hence hereditary unto his Posterity. From this
Walter descended that Robert Stewart, who succeeded David Bruce, in the Kingdom
of Scotland, the Progenitor of nine Kings of the Name of Stewart, which have
reigned successively in the Kingdom. Heylin's Cosmogr. page 336.

4. Walter Devereux, Earl of Essex, having wasted his Spirits with Grief, fell
into a Dysentery, whereof he died, after he had requested of such as stood by
him, that they would admonish his Son, who was then scarce ten Years of age,
that he should always propound and set before him the Thirty-sixth year of his
Life, as the utmost he should ever attain unto; which neither he nor his Father
had gone beyond, and his Son never reached unto; for Robert Devereux his Son,
and also Earl of Essex, was beheaded in the Thirty-fourth year of his age: So
that his dying Father seemed not in vain to have Admonished him as he did, but
to speak by Divine Inspiration and Suggestion. Cambd. Annal. rer. Angl. Part 2.
p. 277.

5. Philip de Mornay, L. du Plessis, was in Paris upon black St.
Bartholomew's-Day; when News was brought him, that the Admiral was slain, he
leaped out of his Bed; and whilst he was putting on his Clothes, he felt an
extraordinary Motion in himself, which caused him to say. God will deliver me
out of this danger, and I shall live to see it revenged. On the contrary,
Monsieur Rameny, (his Tutor) presently answered, And I shall die in it; both
which came to pass. Clark's Examples. Vol. 2. p. 552.

6. Mr. John Carter, sometimes Minister of Belstead, in Suffolk, having long
studied the Book of the Revelations, some of his Friends asked him what he
thought of the Future Estate of our Church, here in England? You shall not
(said he) need to fear Fire and Faggot any more; but such dreadful Divisions
will be amongst God's People, and Professors, as will equalize the greatest
Persecution. Herein we have found him a true Prophet. Ibid.

7. It may seem happily incredible to some, to relate how many Years agon, Dr.
Usher, L. Primate of Ireland, confidently foretold the Changes which since are
come to pass, both in Ireland, and in England, both in Church and State, and of
the Poverty which himself should fall into, which he often spoke of in his
greatest Prosperity. Some took much notice of the Text, on which he preached in
St. Mary's in Cambridge, Anno Christi 1625. Upon the late Coronation-Day, out
of 1 Samuel 12.25. If you still do wickedly, you shall be consumed, both you and
your King. Others, of the last Text he preached on at Court, immediately before
his Return into Ireland, on 1 Cor. 14.33. God is not the Author of Confusion,
but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. IN his application he spoke
of the Confusions and Divisions, which, he was confident, were then at the
Doors. Ibid.

8. A. C. 1624. He spoke before many Witnesses, and often repeated it afterward,
that he was persuaded, that the greatest stroke to the Reformed Churches was
yet to come. And that the time of the utter Ruin of the Roman Antichrist should
be when he thought himself most secure; according to that Text, Rev. 18.7. When
she shall say, I sit as a Queen, and shall see no Sorrow, etc. Ibid.

9. When in the Reign of Queen Mary, Dr. Sands was forced to fly out of
England, he was oonvey'd to the House of one Mower, a Master of a Ship, at
Milton-Shoar^; and and when the Wind served, he took his leave of his Landlord
and Landlady, who had been married eight Years, and had no Child; and when he
took his Leave of the Woman, he thanked her kindly for his Entertainment, and
gave her his Handkercheif, with an old Royal of Gold in it, saying, Be of good
Comfort, e're an Year be past, God will give you a Son; and it came to pass
according: For, when there lacked but one day of a Twelvemonth, she was brought
to Bed of a fair Son. Ibid.

10. A. C. 1601. Popery much increasing in Ireland, and there being too much
connivance at them, Dr. Usher, preaching before the State at Christ-Church, in
Dublin, gave them his Sense about that Toleration, boldly applying that Passage
in the Vision of Ezekiel. chapter 4.6. Where the Prophet, by lying on his Side, was to
bear the Iniquity of Judah Forty Days, each Day being appointed for a Year,
signifying the time of Forty Years to the Destruction of Jerusalem: whereupon
he added, From this Year will I reckon the Sin of Ireland, that those whom you
now embrace shall be your Ruin, and you shall bear this Iniquity: which
accordingly came to pass at the end of the Forty Years, viz. A. C. 1641. in the
late Rebellion and Massacre in Ireland, affected by those Papists that were
then connived at. See his Life in Dr. Bernard.

11. About the Year 1544. There was in Scotland, one Mr. George Wiseheart, a
Man of Admirable Graces, and singularly Learned, who first Preached in Ross,
then in Dundee, where, to the great Admiration of his hearers, he went over the
Epistle to the Romans, till, at the Instigation of the Cardinal, one Robert
Misle, a chief Man in that Town, inhibited him from Preaching, and required
that he should trouble their Town no more, for he would not suffer it: And this
was spoken in the Public Congregation. Whereupon, Mr. Whiseheart, musing a
space, with his Eyes lift up to Heaven; after a while, looking sorrowfully upon
the Speaker and People, he said, God is my Witness, that I minded never your
trouble but your comsort: Yea, your trouble is to me, more dolorous than it is
to your selves. But, I am assured, that to refuse Gods word, and to chase from
you his Messenger, shall not preserve you from trouble, but shall bring you
into it: For God shall send unto you Ministers, that shall neither fear
Burning, nor Banishment. I have offered you the Word of Salvation, with the
hazard of my Life. And now ye your selves refuse me, and I must leave mine
innocence to be declared by my God. If it be long prosperous with you, I am not
led by the Spirit of Truth; but if unlooked for troubles come upon you,
acknowledge the cause, and turn to God, who is Gracious and Merciful; and if
you turn not at the first warning, he will visit you with Fire and Sword: And
so he came down from the Pulpit, and went out of the Town. And whilst he was
Preaching up and down in the Countries, News was brought him, that the Plague
was broken out in Dundee, which begun in four days after he was prohibited
Preaching there, and raged so extremely, that it is almost beyond credit, how
many dyed in twenty four hours space, etc. The Cardinal very eagerly sought Mr.
Wisehearts Death, and for that end, caused a Letter to be sent unto him, as if
it had been from his familiar Friend, the Lord of Kinnur, desiring him with
all possible speed to come unto him, for that he was taken with a sudden
Sickness. In the mean time, he had provided Sixty Men Armed, to lie in wait by
the way to Murder him. The Letter being brought unto him by a Boy, who also
brought him an Horse to ride on, Accompanied with some honest Men, his Friends,
he set forwards on his Journey: But as he was riding, stopping on a sudden, and
musing a while, he turned back, and said to his Friends, I will not go: I am
forbidden of God. I am assured, there is a Treachery. Let some of you go to
yonder place, and tell me what you sind: They went accordingly, and discovering
the Ambush, they came back and told Mr. Wiseheart; whereupon he said, I know
that I shall end my Life by that Blood thirsty Man's hands; but it will not be
on this manner. At another time, as he was Preaching, among others that came to
hear him, there were two Gray Friars, who standing at the Church-Door,
whispered to such as came in; which Mr. Wiseheart taking notice of, said to the
People; I pray you make room for these two Men, it may be they come to Learn:
And turning his Speech to them, he said, Come near, for I assure you, you shall
hear the word of Truth, which this day shall Seal unto you either your
Salvation, or Damnation: And so he proceeded in his Sermon, supposing that they
would be quiet: But when he perceived, that they still continued to disturb the
People that were near them, he said unto them, the Second time, with an angry
Countenance; O Ministers of Satan, and Deceivers of the Souls of Men! Will you
neither hear Gods Truth your selves, nor suffer others to hear it? Depart, and
take this for your Portion: God shall shortly disclose and confound your
Hypocrisy within this Kingdom, you shall be Abominable unto Men, and your
Habitations shall be desolate. Which accordingly came to pass not long after.
Not long after, as he was Preaching at Haddington, seeing what a thing Auditory
he had, he said, O Lord, how long shall it be that thy Holy Word shall be
despised, and Men shall not regard their own Salvation? I have heard of thee, O
Haddington, that in thee, there used to be two or three Thousand Persons at a
vain and wicked Play; adn now to hear a Messenger of the Eternal God, of all
the Parish can scarce be Numbered one Hundred Persons present. Sore and Fearful
shall be the Plagues, which shall ensue upon this thy contempt; with Fire and
Sword shall thou be Plagued: Yea, thou Haddington in special, strangers shall
possess thee, and you the present Inhabitants, shall either in Bondage serve
your Enemies, or else ou shall be chased from your own Habitations, and that
because you have not known, nor will know the time of your Visitation. This
Prophecy was accomplished not long after, when the English took Haddington,
made it a Garrison, enforced many of the Inhabitants to fly, and oppressed
others. And after a while, a great Plague brake forth in the Town, whereof
Multitudes died, which forced the English to quit it, who at their departure,
burnt, and destroyed a great part of it: and presently after it was Seized upon
by the French, who came as Auxiliaries into Scotland, and but few of the
Ancient Inhabitants returned to it: So that Haddington, to this day, never
recovered its former Beauty and Populousness. Mr. Wiseheart, being Condemned by
the Cardinal of St. Andrews, and his Bishop, to be burnt; as he was at the
stake, he saw the Cardinal sitting in one of his Castle Windows, to see
Execution done upon him, whereupon he said: He who in such State, from that
high place, feeds his Eyes with my Torments, within a few days shall be hanged
out at the same Window, to be seen with as much Ignominy as he now Learns there
with Pride: Which accordingly came to pass. Clark's mirror.

See more in the next Chapters following but one, Viz. Premonitions of General
Changes, etc.

12. There was a Relation published, A. 1671. at London, by one Tho. Astree,
concerning his son, a Scholar at Christs-Hospital, who having a mind to go to
Sea, and being put off with delays by his Father, at last was told by one in
the habit of a Seaman, with his Clothes of sad-coloured silk watered, and over
them a sad-coloured cloth Coat with Gold Buttons, a plain Cravat, a Cane with a
Silver Head, and a Sword by his Side, that if he went to Sea, he should have a
Flux, that would cost him his Life; that all the rest of the Men should go
safe; and that he knew this very well; adding, my Son, before the Sun be down,
that shall be tied, that was never tied before, and before the morrow Sun be
down, that shall be loose that was never tied before: And afterward (on his
way home from the Bridge, where this was spoken) Do you believe what I have
said? (The Boy Answering, No.) Do you not remember that Zacharias was struck
Dumb, quoting Luke 1. I do remember, says the Boy, but that was because he did
not believe the Angel, etc. Ans. It may be so with you. Boy, are you an Angel?
No answer was made; the Man departed, the Boy goes home, leans upon the Table,
could not speak, with Tears trickling down his Cheeks, and Smiting on his
Breast, made Signs for a Pen and Ink, etc. Writes down, I cannot speak, speak
to me, and I shall understand. And so continued, for twenty four hours. At last
his Father reading to him, and citing, Ps. 56.3. He coughed three times, and
somewhat gave a jerk, like the breaking of a string, upon which his Tongue was
loosed, and he spoke, saying, Blessed be God, I can speak, etc.

CHAP. XIV. Of Vrim and Thummim, Teraphim, etc.
VRim and Thummim mentioned, Exodus 28.30. (According to Mr. Simpson) signify
Light and perfection from (...) and (...), and they are put in the plural
Number to signify the plenty and excellency of the Divine Graces. This was
meant, as some conceive, of the splendour and perfection of the precious Stones
of the Breast Plate, which were of most clear and perfect Beauty. But some
conceive, that these words were Writ, or Engraven upon some of the precious
Materials of the HIgh Priests Garments, or Ornaments; neither made nor placed
by the inspired Artificers, but, as some Learned Writers rather think, by God
himself. Exodus 39.10. compared with Lev. 8.8. Seem to make for this Opinion:
And so they were put by Moses into the Breast Plate. It was called, the
Breast Plate of Judgment, v. 15. and the Judgment of Vrim, Number. 27.21. Because
the High Priest put it on, when he consulted with God, and received from him
clear and determmate Answers in Cases of Doubt: Which Answers were made
sometimes by audible Voice, sometimes by secret Inspiration, which when he had
told it to the People, the Stones had Letters in the Breast Plate (as is
probably conceived, for there is nothing certain of it in the Scripture) might
have an extraordinary brightness on them, for the better assurance of the
People; that the Priest had spoken with the Lord, and received an Answer from
him: As by the shining of Moses's Face when he came from God, witht he Tables
of the Testimony in his hand. Exodus 34.29, 30. It was manifest that he had from
God, what he brought unto the People. And whereas, David being to consult with
the Lord, called for the Ephod, 1 Samuel 23.9. The reason was, because the
Breast Plate was fastened to the Ephod, v. 28. and the Ephod to the
Breast Plate, so that if he had one, he had both, Exodus 39.21. This Oraculous
consultation with the Breast Plate; i. e. by use of the Breast Plate, lasted no
longer, as is generally thought, then to the Captivity of Babylon. See, Ezra.
2.63. And after that time, We find not that the Jews had any use of that kind
of Revelation. Thus far Mr. Simpson in his Christian Dictionary. Who refers us
also to Moses and Aaron, l. 4. c. 8. and Alsted. Parat. Theol. p. 454, etc.

Mr. Wilson Interprets Vrim and Thummim, by the Light of the Knowledge of
Christ, by the Word, and perfection of Virtue and Holy Manners. But who made
the Vrim and Thummim, and what it was, etc. He thinks impossible to find out.
Certainly (says he) it is not reckoned among the things made by Art, but given
by God himself to Moses, to be put in the Pectoral, as Lev. 8.8. And Written of
Christ, Col. 2.3. Dan. 8.13. Wilson in his Christ. Dict. on the Word Urim, etc.

Dr. Lightfo^t, speaking concerning the Vrim and Thummim, has these words; how
did Phineas enquire? By Vrim and Thummim. So was Gods diection to them, Number.
28.21. As Joshua the chief Commander in his time, did enquire by Eleazer the
Father, so did the chief Commander now by Phineas the Son: And both by the
Judgment of Vrim and Thummim.

But how was that? There are so many Opinions about what Vrim and Thummim was,
and so great Obscurity made: How the Oracle was given by it, that it may seem
to require another Oracle to tell, how that Oracle was given. I shall not tire
you with Diversities of Opinions; I shall briefly lay down some Particulars
concerning this thing, upon which I my self am abundantly satisfied about it,
and upon which I suppose any that is not overcurious, may receive Satisfaction.

None but know the Dress of the High Priest, Exodus 28. and particularly the
Breast Plate; the twelve Tribes engraven upon them. And then it is said at Ver.
20. Thou shall put in the Breast Plate of Judgment, the Vrime and Thummim. By
the Breast Plate there is meant, as in Verse the 15th and 16th. That piece of
imbroidered Work four square, in which the twelve precious Stones were to be
set. And by the Vrim and Thummim is meant the twelve precious Stone themselves,
which are called Vrim, or Lights, or Brightness, because of their shining
Luster; and Thummim, or Perfections, because with most exact and perfect
compacture they were all set and fixed in a Plate and Border of Gold in that
embroidered Piece, or that piece of Cloth of Gold.

The Inquiry by Vrim and Thummim was not upon any private Occasion, nor by a
private Man; but by the Prince or Commander in chief, and that in some Matter
which concerned the whole Nation. This might be largely cleared, but needs
not; only this I cannot but observe, That till Solomon's time there is Mention
and Example of this enquiring by Vrim, by Joshua in this place, by Saul, by
David; but after Solomon's time, no such mention: Not because the Oracle then
failed, but because till David had done the Work, the whole Land, in the full
extent God had promised, namely to Euphrates, was not conquered. And therefore
in those times this Oracle was stirring for the direction of the Prince, or
chief Commander, in that Expedition or Employment.

There was no enquiring of any Priest by Vrim, who was not inspired by the
Spirit of Prophecy. And hence it is that the Jews well observed, after the
first Generation, after the Return out of Captivity, the Oracle by Vrim and
Thummim was not under the second Temple at all: Because thence forward there
was not any High Priest, that had the Spirit of Prophecy, or Divine
Inspiration. The Case of Caiphas was singular, and it was but once, Jo. 11.15.
being High Priest that Year, he prophesied. The Emphasis and main Reason lies
in that year: That year, when Vision and Prophecy should be sealed; that year,
when the Spirit should be poured down in so abundant measure as it was, Acts 2.
He being High Priest that year, had one drop of that Shower of Divine
Inspiration that fell that year, and he prophesied. But before him had there
been no High Priest, that was endued with the Spirit of Prophecy, from the time
of Nehemiah, chap. 7.65. and accordingly, not the Oracle of Vrim and Thummim.
That Oracle was not given therefore by any audible Voice from off the Ark, or
by rising of the Letters of the Names of the Tribes in the precious Stones,
that should spell out the Answer; for two or three Letters of the Alphabet were
wanting in those Names. Nor was it by change of Color in the Letters or
Stones, as is conceived by some, but the manner of enquiring and receiving;
Answer was thus. The High Priest, with all his Habiliments on, particularly the
Breast Plate, with the twelve precious Stones in it upon his Breast; the names
of the twelve Tribes engraven in the Stones, stood before the Ark, only the
Veil between, and so he presented the Names, and represented the Persons of the
twelve Tribes before God. He proposed the thing that was enquired; as Phineas
here in the name of the People; shall I go up against my Brethren? and the Lord
presently inspired him with immediate Revelation, discevering to him what was
his Mind in that case, and so he told it the People; as here, Go up against
Benjamin now again, and you shall prevail. Dr. Lightfoot in his Sermon. on Judge.
c. 20. v. 27, 28.

CHAP. XV. Premonitions of general Changes, or Revolutions.
THE Governor of the World, though he does whatever he pleases, both in
Heaven and Earth, and with great Wisdom too, and in such a manner, that His
Judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out: yet oftentimes, for
the Conviction of Sinners, and the benefit of his Children, when he is upon any
great Design of turning back the Course of his common Providence, and changing
the present Scene of Affairs, he does by some unusual Token or other, give
notice to the World, that People may not complain of a Surprisal. Thus he did
when he had a design to drown the World; and thus he did when he intended to
burn Sodom; and thus when he was in motion to bring the Posterity of Abraham
into Egypt first, and then to Canaan; and thus before the Captivity, before the
Incarnation of our Savior, before the Destruction of Jerusalem. But this he
does, commonly, by way of an especial and favorable Communication to those
that are nearest to his Bosom, and most in his Affections. Shall I hide from
Abraham, that which I intend to do? But sometimes likewise to the Generality of
People, and the whole Society concerned in the Change.

1. John Husse Suffering Martyrdom at the Council of Constance, A. C. 1415.
told them at his Death, That out of the Ashes of the Goose (for so Husse in the
Bohemian Language signifies) an Hundred Years after, God would raise up a Swan
in Germany, whose Singing would affright all those Vultures. Which was exactly
fulfilled in Luther, just an hundred Years after. Clarks Marrow of Ecclesiast.
History, p. 119. Fuller Abel Rediv. p. 30.

2. Luther speaks thus of the Covetousness of Germany, and the Dearth there. We
fear Famine, and we shall suffer it, and find no Remedy for it. And whereas we
are without Necessity, we are sollicitous to prevent Famine, like Wicked and
Incredulous Heathens, and neglect the Word of God and his Work; He will permit
shortly a dismal Day to come upon us, which will bring with it whole Wain-loads
of Cares, which we shall neither have Power or Means to escape. And likewise he
foretold the combustion which arose in Germany, saying, I am very much afraid,
that if the Princes give ear to Duke George's ill Counsel, there will arise
some Tumult, which will destroy all the Princes and Magistrates in all Germany,
and engage in it all the Clergy. Fuller Abel Rediv. p. 49.

3. In May, 1631. at Hull, in Saxony, the Water was turned into Blood, and
about the middle of this Month, this Town was taken by Tilly, and afterward
retaken from him by their natural Lord, and presently again repossessed by
Tilly's Forces; and he himself, after the Battle of Leipsick, made his Escape
thither that Night, and had his Wounds dressed by the Town-Barber; whilst
Tilly's Army lay in the Twon, one of his chief Officers saw Blood prodigiously
dropping from the House wherein he lay; whereupon he said, What? Must we bleed?
Will the King of Sweden bleat us? That is impossible. But it happened
otherwise; for Hull was not above Seven Dutch Miles distant from the place of
Battle, wherein the Imperial Army was utterly routed, and miserably destroyed
in the Chase; and if the King had had but three Hours more of Daylight, it was
judged, that hardly a Thousand of the Enemy had escaped, one of their own
Relations affirming, that there were Fifteen Thousand of the Imperialists slain
upon the place, in the Pursuit that Night, and the next day following it is
said, Tilly's courageous Heart could not refrain from Tears, when he perceived
such woeful Destructions among his brave old Soldiers, his Army consisting of
Forty-four Thousand stout Men, being usually termed Invincible. The next day
the King besieged Hull, which was yielded to him, and soon after, the Castle:
But a while after, Papenheim and the Imperialists again retook this City,
exercising all manner of Barbarism upon the Inhabitants. This Year likewise, in
the time of the Siege of Magdeburgs, a City Captain's Wife dying in Childbed,
desired to be ripped open; which being done, they found a Boy, almost as big as
one of 3 Years old, who had an Headpiece, and an Iron Breast Plate on his
Body, great Boots of the French Fashion, and a Bag on his Side, with two things
therein, like Musket Bullets: This horrible Prodigy, no doubt, portended the
deplorable Desruction of the City, which happened May 10. 1631. when a general
Assault was made upon the Town by the Imperialists, the Walls were mounted in
an instant, the Town entered, and the Soldiers fell to killing: At the same
instant a Fire, none knew how, broke out; and it being a windy day, on a sudden
all became one mighty Flame, the whole Town being in Twelve Hours time turned
to Cinders (except some few Fisher-Houses). Six goodly Churches were burnt; the
Cathedral by the Diligence of the Monks and Soldiers being preserved: There
were at least Twenty Thousand People killed, besides Six Thousand drowned in
the River Elbe. Two days after Tilly came into the Town; and finding some
Hundreds of Women and Children in the great Church, he gives them their Lives,
and some Bread to maintain them. Surprising Mirac. of Nature, p. 109.

4. About the Year 1679, or 1680, there was a noise like the shooting off, or
the bursting Crack of a Gun, heard, I believe, all over England: I heard it my
self as I lay in Bed, near the Town of Shrewsbury, about Seven or Eight a Clock
in the Morning; it was all over that Country, and several other adjacent
Counties; at London, in Sussex, and the North of England; and did strangely
amuse People wherever it was heard; but this I wonder at, that in some places
it was heard in the Afternoon about One, say some, others about Three a Clock,
etc. Surely it was significative, the rather because the great Comet succeeded
it, and the Mutations in England. But I leave it to the Consideration and
Judgment of the Ingenious Reader.

5. October. 5. 1682. There was born at Exeter a Monster, having two perfect
Heads; one standing right as it should, the other being in the Right Shoulder;
it lived not long, but was buried, and taken up again the tenth Instant; many
hundreds resorting to see it. I propound it here for an Aenigma, to exercise my
Reader's Judgment.

6, Days Lucky and Unlucky, Extracted from the Miscellanies of John Aubrey,
Esquire; -- Is this thy Day, Luke 19.42. That there be Good and Evil Times, not
only the Sacred Scriptures, but Profane Authors mention. See 1 Samuel 25.8.
Esth. 8.17. and 2.19, 22. Ecclus 14.14. The Fourteenth day of the First Month
was a Memorable and Blessed Day amongst the Children of Israel. See Exodus
12.18, 40, 41, 42, 51. As to Evil Days and Times; see Amos 5.13. and 6.3.
Eccles. 9.12. Psalm. 37.19. Obad. 12. Jer. 46.21. And Job hints it, in cursing
his Birthday. Cap. 3. v. 1, 10, 11.

7. The Romans counted Feb. 13. an Unlucky Day, and therefore then never
attempted any Business of Importance.

8. The Jews accounted August 10. an unfortunate day; for on that day the
Temple was destroyed by Titus, the Son of Vespasian.

9. And not only among the Romans and Jews, but also amongst Christians, a like
Custom of observing such Days is used, especially Childermas-day or
Innocents-day. Cominus tells us, that Lewis XI. used not to debate any Matter,
but accounted it a sign of Misfortune toward him, if any Man communed with him
of his Affairs; and would be very angry with those about him, if they troubled
him with any Matter whatsoever upon that day. But I will descend to more
particular Instances upon Lucky and Unlucky Days.

10. Upon the Sixth of April, Alexander the Great was born. Upon the same Day
he conquered Darius, won a great Victory at Sea, and died the same day.

11. Upon the Thirtieth of September, Pompey the Great was born: Upon that day
he Triumphed for his Asian Conquest; and on that day he died. If Solomon counts
The day of ones Death better than the day of ones Birth, there can be no
Objection why that also may not be reckoned amongst ones Remarkable and Happy
Days.

12. Sir Kenelm Digby, that Renowned Knight, great Linguist, and Magazeen of
Arts, was Born and Died on the Eleventh of June, and also fought fortunately at
Scanderoon the same day. Hear his Epitaph, composed by Mr. Farrar, and recited
in the aforesaid Memoirs.

Under this Stone the Matchless Digby lies,
Digby the Great, the Valiant, and the Wise:
This Age's Wonder, for his Noble Parts;
Skilled in six Tongues, and Learned in all the Arts.
Born on the day he died, the Eleventh of June,
On which he bravely fought at Scanderoon.
It Is rare, that one and self-same Day should be
His Day of Birth, of Death, of Victory.
13. I had a Maternal Uncle, that died the Third of March last 1678. which was
the Anniversary day of his Birth; and (which is a Truth exceeding strange) many
Years ago he foretold the day of his death to be that of his Birth; and he also
averred the same but about the Week before his departure.

14. Of the Family of the Trevours, six successive principal Branches have been
born the Sixth of July. Same Memoirs.

15. Meekren in his Medico Chirurgical Observations, gives an Account of a Man
that had a Septenary-Fever; and Pliny, if we may believe him, tells us of one
Antipater, a Sidonian, that also had a Fever (or as some call it an Ague) every
Year upon his Birthday: As for the Nature of such Fevers or Agues, they are as
unaccountable as the Revolution of Sevens, a Year in which it is observed, a
great part of the World (that get out of Childhood) die in, and we read of one
Family that never escapes it. Whether an Anniversary Ague is curable, I dare
not pretend, since we want Examples, perhaps from the Fewness of 'em.

16. In the Family of the Hastings, Earls of Pembrooke, it is memorable that
for many Generations together no Son ever saw the Father. The Father being
always dead before the Son was born. Chetwind's Historical Collections.

I shall take particular Notice here of the Third of November; both because
it is my own Birthday, and also for that I have observed some remarkable
Accidents to have happened thereupon. I had an Estate left me in Kent; of
which, between thirty and forty Acres was Marsh-Land, very conveniently
flanking its Up-land; and in those Days this Marsh Land was usually lot for
Four Nobles an Acre. My Father died 1643. Within a Year and half after his
Decease, such Charges and Water-scots came upon this Marsh-land, by the
Influence of the Sea, that it was never worth one Farthing to me, but very
often eat into the Rents of the Up-land: So that I often think, this Day being
my Birthday, has the same evil Influence upon me, that it had 580 Years since
upon Earl Godwin, and others concerned in Low Lands.

18. The Parliament, so fatal to Rome's Concerns here, in Henry VIII's time,
began the Third of November (26th. of his Reign); in which the Pope, with his
Authority, was clean banished the Realm. See Stow's Annals, and Weaver, p. 80.

19. The Third of November, 1640. began that Parliament so direfully fatal to
England, in its Peace, its Wealth, its Religion, its Gentry, Nobility; nay, its
King.

20. The Third of September was a remarkable Day to the English Attila, Oliver.
1650. He obtained a memorable Victory at Dunbar; another at Worcester, 1651.
And that day he died, 1658.

21. The Third of September was Dismal and Unhappy to the City of London, and
consequently to the whole Kingdom. I come now to the Days of the Week.

22. I. Tuesday (Dies Martis) was a most remarkable Day with Thomas Becket,
Archbishop of Canterbury, as Weaver, 201, observes from Mat. Paris: Upon a
Tuesday he suffered; upon a Tuesday he was Translated; upon Tuesday the Peers
of the Land sat against him at Northampton; upon Tuesday he was Banished; upon
Tuesday the Lord appeared to him at Pontiniac, saying, Thomas, Thomas, my
Church shall be glorified in thy Blood. Upon Tuesday he returned from Exile;
upon Tuesday he got the Palm, or Reward of Martyrdom; upon Tuesday 1220. his
Venerable Body received the Glory and Renown of Translation, fifty Years after
his Passion. Thus my Author.

22. II. Wednesday is said to have been the fortunate day of Sixtus Quintus,
that Pope of Renowned Merit, that did so great and excellent Things in the time
of his Government. See The just Weight of the Scarlet Robe, (p. 101. his
desired Praises.) On a Wednesday he was born; on that Day he was made Monk; on
the same he was made General of his Order; on that also, was he successively
created Cardinal, elected Pope, and also Inaugurated. See Heylin, speaking of
the Temple of Jerusalem.

23. III. Thursday was a fatal Day to Henry VIII. (as Stow, 812.) and so also
to his Posterity. He died on Thursday, Jan. 28. King Edward VI. on Thursday,
July 6. Queen Mary on Thursday, November 17. Queen Elizabeth, on Thursday,
March 24.

24. IV. Friday was observed to be very fortunate to the Great Renowned Capt.
Gonsalvo, he having on that day given the French many Memorable Defeats.

25. V. Saturday was a Lucky Day to Henry VII. Upon that Day he achieved the
Victory upon Richard III. being August 22. 1485. On that day he entered the
City, being August 29. (Correct Stow, who mistakes the Day) and he himself
always acknowledged he had experienced it fortunate. See Bacon in his Life.

26. At Feltwell, in Norfolk, (which lies East and West) a Fire happened to
break out at the West end, which the West Wind blew, and burned all the Street.
On that Day Twenty Years another Fire happened there, which began at the East
end; and burned it to the Ground again. This I had from a Reverend Divine.

27. Colonel Hugh Grove, of Wiltshire, was beheaded at Exeter (together with
Coll* John Penrudock) on the Ninth day of May, 1655. On that very day Three
Years his Son and Heir died at London of a Malignant Fever, and about the same
Hour of the Day.

28. A very good Friend of mine, and old Acquaintance, was born on the 15th of
November: his eldest Son was born on the 15th of November, and his Second Son's
First Son on the 15th of November. Thus far I Am beholding to Mr. Aubrey's
Collections.

CHAP. XVI. Premonitions of particular Changes, or Accidents of Life.
FOR God to take notice of, and concern himself with Particulars, was an
Article of Religion, which Epicurus could not allow of; because it seemed
Inconsistent with the Majesty of the Supreme Being, to interrupt his own Peace
and Quiet, with so many little Punctilioes. But for us Christians to doubt of
it, were very unreasonable; since we find in Sacred Scripture, that He was
concerned about the Sin of Adam, the Murder of Abel, the Punishment of Cain,
the preservation of Noah, the Production of Isaac, the Correction of David, the
safety of Daniel, and the Three Children, (and to pass over many more
Instances) the Death of his Son, and St. Peter, his Apostle.

1. Sir Henry Wooton, speaking of the Duke of Buckingham's Death, takes notice
of these Ominous Presagements before his end; being to take his Leave of my
Lord's Grace of Canterbury, the only Bishop of London, whom he knew well
planted in the King's unchangeable Affection, by his own great Abilities, after
Courtesies of Courage had passed between them: My Lord, says the Duke, I know
your Lordship has very worthily good Accesses unto the King our Sovereign, let
me pray you to put His Majesty in Mind to be good, as I no way distrust, to my
poor Wife and Children; at which Words, or at his Countenance in the Delivery,
or at both, my Lord Bishop being somewhat troubled, took the freedom to ask him
whether he had never any secret Abodement in his Mind? No, (replied the Duke)
but I think some Adventure way kill me as well as another Man.

The very day before he was slain, feeling some indisposition of Body, the King
was pleased to give him the Honor of a visit, and found him in his Bed; where,
and after much serious and private Discourse, the Duke at his Majesty's
departing, embraced him in a very unusual and passionate Manner, and in like
sort to his Friend, the Earl of Holland, as if his Soul divined he should see
them no more; which infusions toward fatal End, had been observed by some
Authors of no Light Authority.

On the very day of his Death, the Countess of Denbigh received a Letter from
him; whereupon all the while she was writing her Answer, she bedewed the Paper
with her Tears: And after a most bitter Passion (whereof she could yield no
Reason; but, that her dearest Brother was to be gone) she fell down in a Swoon.
Her said Letter ends thus: I will pray for your happy Return, which I look at
with a great Cloud over my Head, too heavy for my poor Heart to bear without
torment; but I hope the great God of Heaven will bless you.

The day following the Bishop of Ely, her devoted Friend, who was thought the
fittest Preparer of her Mind, to receive such a doleful Accident, came to visit
her; but hearing she was at rest, he attended till she should awake of her
self, which she did with the Affrightments of a Dream, her Brother seeming to
pass thorough a Field with her in her Coach; where, hearing of a sudden Shout
of the People, and asking the reason, it was answered to have been for Joy that
the Duke of Buckingham was sick. Which natural Impression she source had
related unto her Gentlewoman, before the Bishop was entered into her Bedchamber
for a chosen Messenger of the Duke's Death.

This is all I dare present of that Nature, or any of Judgment, not unwillingly
omitting certain Prognostic Anagrams, and such strains of Fancy. Sir Henry
Wooton 's Short View of the Life and Death of George Villiers, Duke of
Buckingham, p. 25, 26.

2. When Alexander went by Water to Babylon; a sudden Wind arising, blew off
the Regal Ornament of his Head, and the Diadem fixed to it: This was looked upon
as a Presage of Alexander's Death, which happened soon after.

3. In the year of Christ, 1185. the last and most fatal end of Andronicus
Commenus being at Hand, the Statute of St. Paul, which the Emperor had caused
to be set up in the great Church of Constantinople, abundantly wept: Nor were
these Tears in vain, which the Emperor washed off with his own Blood.

4. Barbara, Princess of Bavaria, having shut her self up in a Nunnery, among
other things allowed her for her peculiar Recreation, she had a Marjoram-Tree,
of an extraordinary bigness, a small Aviary, and a Gold Chain, which she wore
about her Neck: But 14 Days before she died, the Marjoram-Tree dried up; the
Birds the next Night were all found dead; and after that, the Chain broke in
two in the middle. Then Barbara calling for the Abbess, told her that all those
Warnings were for her, and in a few Days after died, in the Seventeenth year of
her Age: After her Death above twenty other Virgins died out of the same
Nunnery. Several other Presages there are that foretold the death of Princes
and great Men: As the unwonted Howlings of Dogs; the unseasonable Noise of
Bells; the Roaring of Lions, etc.

Concerning Dead Men's Lights, seen often in Wales, take this following Story.

5. A Man and his Family being all in Bed, about Midnight, and awake, he could
perceive a Light entering a little Room, where he lay, and one after another, of
some Dozen, in the shape of Men, and two or three Women, with small Children in
their Arms, entering in, and they seemed to dance, and the Room to be far wider
and lighter than formerly; they did seem to eat Bread and Cheese all about a
kind of a Stick, upon the Ground; they offered him Meat, and would smile upon
him; he could perceive no Voice; but he once calling upon God to bless him, he
could perceive the Whisper of a Voice in Welsh, bidding him hold his Peace;
being about four Hours thus, he did what he could to awake his Wife, and could
not; they went out into another Room, and after some dancing, departed, and
then he arose; yet being but a very small Room, he could not find the Door, nor
the way to Bed, until crying out, his Wife and Family awaked. Being within
about two Miles of me, I sent for the Man, who is an honest poor Husbandman,
and of good Report: And I made him believe I would put him to his Oath for the
Truth of this Relation, who was ready to take it. Attested by Mr. John Lewis, a
learned Justice of Peace in Cardigan-shire. Hist. Discourse of Appar. and
Witches, p. 130.

6. Mr. Flavel (in his Treatise of the Soul) says, I have with good Assurance
this Account of a Minister, who being alone in a Journey, and willing to make
the best Improvement he could of the Days Solitude, set himself upon a close
Examination of the State of his Soul, and then of the Life to come, and the
manner of its being and living in Heaven, in the Views of all those things,
which are now pure Objects of Faith and Hope; after a while he perceived his
Thoughts, begin to fix, and come closer to these great astonishing things, than
was usual; and as his Mind settled upon them, his Affections began to rise with
answerable Liveliness and Vigor. He therefore (whilst he was yet Master of his
own Thoughts) lift up his Heart to God in a short Ejaculation, that God would
so order it in his Providence, that he might meet with no Interruption from
Company, or any other Accident in that Journey, which was granted him: For in
all the Days Journey he neither met, overtook, or was overtaken by any. Thus
going on his way; his Thoughts began to rise and swell higher and higher, like
the Waters in Ezekiel's vision, till at last, they became an overflowing Flood.
Such was the Intention of his Mind; such the ravishing Tastes of Heavenly Joys,
and such the full Assurance of his Interest therein, that he utterly lost the
Sight and Sense of this World, and all the concerns thereof, and for some hours
knew no more where he was, than if he had been in a deep sleep upon his Bed. At
last, he began to perceive himself very faint, and almost choked with Blood,
which running in abundance from his Nose, had discolored his Clothes, and his
Horse, from the Shoulder to the Hoof. He found himself almost spent, and nature
to faint under the pressure of Joy unspeakable, and unsupportable, and at last
perceiving a Spring of Water in his way, he with some difficulty, alighted to
cleanse and cool his Face and Hands, which were drenched in Blood, Tears, and
Sweat. By that Spring he sat down, and washed; earnestly desiring, if it were
the pleasure of God, that might be his parting place from this World: He said,
Death had the most aimable Face in his Eye, that ever he beheld, except the
Face of Jesus Christ, which made it so; and that he could not remember (tho he
believed he should die there, that he had one thought of his Dear Wife or
Children, or any other Earthly concernment. But having drank of that Spring,
his Spirits revived, the Blood stenched, and he Mounted his Horse again, and on
he went in the same Fame of Spirit, till he had finished a Journey of near
Thirty Miles, and came at Night to his Inn. Where being come, he greatly
admired how he came thither, and that he fell not all that day, which past not
without several Trances of considerable continuance. Being alighted, the
Innkeeper came to him, with some astonishment (being acquainted with him
formerly) O Sir, said he, what is the matter with you? You look like a Dead
Man. Friend, replied he, I was never better in my Life. Show me my Chamber,
cause my Cloak to be cleansed, burn me a little Wine, and that is all I desire
of you for the present. Accordingly it was done, and a Supper sent up, which he
could not touch, but requested of the People, they would not trouble or disturb
him for that Night. All this Night passed without one wink of sleep, tho he
never had a sweetr Nights rest in all his Life, still, still, the joy of the
Lord over-flowed him, and he seemed to be an Inhabitant of the other World. The
next Morning being come, he was early on Horseback again, fearing the
Divertisements in the Inn might bereave him of his joy, for he said it was now
with him, as with a Man that carries a Rich Treasure about him, who suspects
every Passenger to be a Theif; but within a few hours he was sensible of the
ebbing of the Tides, and before Night, tho there was an Heavenly Serenity, and
sweet Peace upon his Spirit, which continued long with him, yet the Transports
of Joy were over, and the fine edge of his delight blunted. He many years after
called that day, one of the Days of Heaven, and professed he understood more of
the Life of Heaven by it, than by all the Books he ever Read, or Discourses he
ever entertained about it.

7. Thus Mr. Knox predicted the very place and manner of the Lord of Grange.
You have sometimes seen the courage and constancy of the Lord of Grange, in
the cause of God, and now that unhappy Man is casting himself away. I pray yopu
go to him from me (said Mr. Knox) and tell him, unless he forsake the Wicked
course he is in, the Rock wherein he confideth, shall not defend him, nor the
Carnal Wisdom of that Man (meaning the young Leshington,) whom he counts half
a God, shall help him: But he shall be shamefully pulled out of the Nest, and
his Carcass hung before the Sun. And even so it fell out the following year,
when the Castle was taken, and his Body hanged out before the Sun. Thus God
exactly fulfilled the prediction of his Death. Clark's Lives, p. 277.

8. The same Mr. Knox, in the Year 1566. Being in the Pulpit a Edinburgh, upon
the Lords Day, a Paper was given up to him, among many others, wherein these
words were scoffingly Written concerning the Earl of Murray, who was slain
before, Take up the Man, whom ye accounted another God. At the end of the
Sermon, Mr. Knox bewailed the loss that the Church and State had by the Death
of the Virtuous Man, and then added, There is one in this company that makes
this horrible Muther the subject of his mirth, for which all good Men should be
sorry; but I tell him, he shall die where there shall be none to lament him.
The Man that wrote the Paper, was one Thomas Metellan, a young Gentleman, who
shortly after in his Travels, Died in Italy, having none to assist, or lament
him.

9. Sir Anthony Wingfield, who was slain at Breast, Anno. 1594. At his
undertaking of that expedition, he was strongly persuaded it would be his
Death; and therefore so settled and disposed of his Estate, as one that never
reckoned to return again. And the day before he died, he took order for the
Payment of his Debts; as one that strongly presaged the time was now at hand,
which accordingly fell out the next day. Sir Jophn Norris his Expedition, p. 46.

10. The Learned and Judicious Amiraldus, gives us this well attested Relation
of Lewis of Bourbon, That a little before his Journey from Dreux, he Dreamed
that he had fought three successful Battles, wherein his three great Enemies
were slain, but that at last, he himself was mortally wounded, and that after
they were laid one upon another, he also was laid upon the Dead Bodies. The
event was Remarkable, for the Marshall of St. Andree was killed at Dreux, the
Duke of Guise at Orleans, the Constable of Montmorency at St. Denis. And this
was the Triumvirate which had Sworn the ruin of those of the Protestant
Religion, and the Destruction of that Prince. At last, he himself was slain at
Basack, as if there had been a continuation of Deaths and Funerals. Amiraldus
of Divne Dreams, p. 122, 123.

11. Suetonius in the Life of Julius Caesar, tells us, that the Night before he
was slain, he had Diverse Premonitions thereof, for that Night all the Doors and
Windows of his Chamber flew open, his Wife also Dreamed that Caesar was slain,
and that she had him in her Arms. The next day he was slain in Pompey's Court,
having received three and twenty wounds in his Body.

12. Pamelius in the Life of Cyprian, tells us, for a most certain and well
attested truth, that upon his first entrance into Carubis (the place of his
Banishment) it was revealed to him in a Dream, or Vision, that upon that very
day Twelvemonth, he should be consummate: Which accordingly fell out; for a
little before the time prefixed, there came suddenly two Apparators to bring
him before the New Proconsul, Galeius, by whom he was Condemned, as having been
a Standard Bearer of his Sect, and an Enemy of the Gods. Whereupon he was
Condemned to be Beheaded, a Multitude of Christians following him, crying, Let
us die together with him.

13. And as Remarkable is that recorded by the Learned and Ingenious Doctor
Stern, of Mr. Usher of Ireland, a Man says he, of great Integrity, Dear to
others by his Merits, and my Kinsman in Blood: Who upon the Eighth day of July,
1657. went from this to a better World; about four of the Clock, the day before
he Died, a Matron, who Died a little before, and whilst living was Dear to Mr.
Usher, appeared to him in his sleep; and invited him to Sup with her the next
Night He at first denied her, but she more vehemently pressing her request on
him, at last he consented, and that very Night he Died. Dr. Stern's Dissertatio
de morte, p. 163.

14. I have also the fullest assurance that can be, of the Truth of this
following Narrative. A Person yet living, was greatly concerned about the
welfare of his Dear Father and Mother, who were both shut up in London, in the
time of the great Contagion in 1665. Many Letters he sent to them, and many
hearty Prayers to Heaven for them. But about a fortnight before they were
infected, he fell about break of day into this Dream, that he was in a great
Inn which was full of company, and being very desirous to find a private Room,
where he might seek God for his Parents Life, he went from Room to Room, but
found company in them all; at last casting his Eye into a little Chamber which
was empty, he went into it, locked the Door, kneeled down by the outside of the
Bed; and whilst he was vehemently begging of God the Life of his Friends,
fixing his Eyes upon the Plastered Wall within side the Bed, there appeared
upon the Plaster of the Wall before him, the Sun and Moon, shining in their
full strength. The sight at first amazed and discomposed him so far, that he
could not continue his Prayer, but kept his Eye fixed upon the Body of the Sun;
at last a small line, or ring of black, no bigger than that of a Text Pen,
circled the Sun, which increasing sensibly, eclipsed in a little time the whole
body of it, and turned it into a blackish color; which done, the Figure of the
Sun was immediately changed into a perfect Death's head, and after a little
while Vanished quite away. The Moon still continued shining as before, but
whilst he intently beheld it, it also darkened in like manner, and turned also
into another Death's head, and Vanished. This made so great an Impression upon
the beholder's mind, that he immediately awaked in confusion and perplexity of
thoughts about his Dream; and awakning his Wife, related the particulars to her
with much emotion and concernment; but how to apply it he could not presently
tell, only he was satisfied that the Dream was of an extraordinary Nature. At
last, Joseph's Dream came into his thoughts with the like Emblems, and their
Interpretation, which fully satisfied him, that God had warned and prepared him
thereby for a sudden parting with his Dear Relations, which answerably fell out
in the same order, his Father dying that day fortnight following, and his
Mother just a Month afterward. These Eight Relations the Transcribed out of
Mr. Flavel's Treatise of the Soul.

15. The Lady Rich gives this Relation of Mr. Tyro, Minister; from his own
Mouth. About seven weeks before his Death, when there was hope of recovery, he
told me, he had something to tell me, that he had not imparted to any body, and
expressed it thus; When I was one Evening returning to my Lodging, then at
Vngar, from this House, being then in a good Degree of Health, and in a serious
frame, meditating by the way, I heard a Voice say, You shall dye, and not pass
your five and thirtieth year of Age. Which Voice Astonished me greatly, and
looking round about me, seeing no body, put me into great Consternation and
Sweat all over me, such as I never felt (tho I dare not compare it to drops of
Blood) yet I cannot express how dreadful it was: You know, Madam, my
Principles, and that I am no Enthusiast, and how cautious I am as to
Revelations. But I am sure, this was no Melancholy Fancy; But an Articulate
Voice. After I had a little recovered my self; I begged of God to discover to
me, if this were from him, or a Delusion from Satan; but still the Impression
remained, t ho I sought God by Prayer most part of that Night; and you may
remember, in my next Visit, I told you, I should dye shortly; but I did not
tell you of the Voice I heard. And then he added, This is my Five and Thirtieth
year of my Age; in July next I shall be so old. And many other Expressions he
added, which is too much for a Letter; but he Died in January 1630. Hist. Disc.
Appar. Witches, p. 199.

16. The Lady Ware's Chaplain dreamt, that such a day he should dye; but having
forgot it almost, till the Evening before Supper, there being thirteen at
Table, according to a fond conceit, that one of these must soon dye: One of the
young Ladies pointed to him, as the person. He remembering the Dream, fell into
some disorder; but being reproved for his superstition, he said, he was
confident he was to dye before Morning. It was Saturday Night, and he was to
Preach next day, he went to his Chamber in perfect health, sat up late,
prepared his Notes for his Sermon, and the next Morning was found Dead. See Mr.
Parson's Sermon at the Earl of Rochester's Funeral.

17. Sir Matthew Hale, had some secreet presage of his Death, saying, that if
he did not dye such a day, he should live a Month longer; and he died that very
day Month. Nov. 25. See his Life by Dr. Burnet.

18. It was observed, that several Omens preceeded the Death of Archbishop
Laud, as the falling down of his Picture in his Parlour, the Arms of his See,
the sinking of the Lambeth Ferry-Boat, with the Archbishop's Coach-Horses and
Coach-Men, to the bottom of the Thames. Dr. Heylin in his Life, and the Author
of the Breviate of the Life of Archbishop Laud, p. 35.

19. One James Oxenham of Sale-Monachroum, in the County of Devon, a Gentleman
of good worth and quality, who had many Children, one whereof was called John
Oxenham, a young Man, in the Vigor, Beauty and Flower of his Age, about twenty
two, six Foot and a half high, pious and well qualified; this young Man falling
Sick, two days before his departure, there appeared the likeness of a Bird,
with a white Breast, hovering over him. Attested by Robert Woodley and Humphrey
King, who justified it to the Minister of the Parish, being examined by him, at
the appointment of Joseph Laud, Bishop of Exeter, this Person died, Sep. 5.
1635.

He was no sooner Dead in this Manner, but the same Apparition did again show
it self to Thomazine, the Wife of James Oxenham, the younger, a Woman of
unspotted Life, about eleven a Clock at Night: And she died to the comfort of
all about her, Sep. 7. 1635. Attested by Elizabeth Frost, and Joan Tooker, who
were examined by the same Minister.

Not long after, Rebeccah, Sister of the aforesaid Thomazine, Aged about eight
years, about eleven a Clock at Night was presented with the Apparition of the
same Bird, which hovered over her, and a very docible Girl, and of gentle
Behavior, who died in a peaceable manner, Sep. 9. 1635. Attested by Elizabeth
Avery, and Mary Stephens.

She was no sooner Dead, but Thomazine a little child of the aforesaid James
Oxenham, and Thomazine his Wife, being in the Cradle, fell Sick, over whom did
presently appear the said Bird, in form as aforesaid, and so she Died, Sep. 15.
1635. Witnesses hereunto the aforenamed Eliz. Avery and Mary Stephens.

Add to all these, that the said Bird had appeared formerly to Grace, the
Grandmother of the said John, over her Deathbed, a Virtuous Woman, who Died,
A. C. 1618.

And to make it yet more remarkable, There were four more of the same Family
and Kindred Sick, and Recovered, who did never see any such Apparition. See the
Relation it self, Printed at London by J. O. for Rich. Clutterbuck at the Gun
in little Britain, A. 1641.

20. Being lately at Sir John Brisco's Huse, a Baronet, now living at Amley
Castle in Sussex; His Sister then a Guest at his House, and Married to an
East India Merchant, a Gentlewoman of good parts, told me, that living at
New-Salisbury, and designing to make some Provision for her Husbands Return,
and speaking of it in the House, she was often discouraged by a Nurse, that she
kept in the House with her; who advised her still, to stay till she saw him
return: At last, Tidings came, that he was Dead in the Indies. Upon which the
Nurse told her, that she being in Bed one Night with her Mistress, and sitting
up to give the child Suck, by Moonshine, a Person in the form of her Husband
(whom she never had seen, but only guessed at, by the representation given of
him by others,) appeared to her, standing at the Bedside, and looking
steadfastly upon her, and after some short space departed: And for this reason,
she suspected his Death, and consequently gave the advice aforesaid. And upon
computation and comparing the Story of the Nurse, and the Contents of the
Letter together, it was found that the Apparition was made at the very time of
his Death. This the Lady assured me with great Confidence, with some other
particular Circumstances, which have slipped my memory.

21. A Scotch Minister, removed lately upon the Turn of the times out of
Scotland into England, and here placed near Oswestree in Shropshire, having
lost his Wife by Death, was earnestly desirous to know what was become of her;
at last, as he lay in Bed, one Night she appeared to him by his Bedside, told
him, she was well, and where she was, he should be e're long; and so Vanished
away. Afterward, he fell Sick, and about Christmas after Died A. 1694. This
was reported to me, by a very Learned and Pious Divine, Mr. Henry, who had it
from Mr. James Own of Oswestree aforesaid, who was with him in his Sickness.

22. Mr. Cartwright, the Lord's day before he Died, which was the last Sermon
that he made, Preached upon Eccl. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the
Earth, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it. Mr. Clark, in his Life.

23. James Faber of Picardy, flying in a time of Persecution, for security, to
the Queen of Navarr then residing at Albert in Gascoign. The Queen one day
having a design to Dine with him, and for that end having invited some Learned
Men, whose conference she took much delight in: At Dinner Mr. Faber became
exceeding sad, and brake out into bitter Weeping. The Queen asking why he wept,
when she came to be Merry with him? He Answered, Most Serene Queen, how can I
be glad, or make others so, who am as Wicked a Man as the Earth bears! What is
that Wickedness (said she) you complain of so, who are known from your youth to
have lived so Holily? He Answered, I am now a Hundred years Old, free from the
touch of any Woman, and Remember not that I have done any thing to Burden my
Conscience, etc. Except one Sin, for which yet I am assured there is a
Propitation. And as she pressed him to declare what it was; he could scarce
speak for abundance of Tears; and said, How can I appear before the Throne of
God, who having taught others in purity and sincerity, the H. Gospel, many of
which having followed by Doctrine, have constantly suffered 1000 Torments, and
Death it self; whereas I, like an unconstant Doctor, did cowardly fly, etc. The
Queen endeavored to comfort him with the Examples of other Holy Men, so did
the rest of the Company, with other Considerations. And thereupon he said,
There remains now nothing, but that I go to my God; and having made my Will, I
have an Impression, that I must delay no longer, knowing that the Lord calls
for me. And so fixing his Eyes upon the Queen, he said, Madam, I make you my
Heir; and to your Preacher, Monsieur Gerard, I leave my Books; and to the Poor
I give my Clothes, and what else I have. The Queen, smiling, said, What then,
Mr. Faber, shall I have? The Care, Madam, said he, to see this distributed to
the Poor? It is well, said she, and I solemnly profess, that thie Legacy is
more acceptable to me, than if the King, my Brother, had named me his Heir.
After this he was more joyful, but at last said, I have need of some Rest; be
you merry and joyful, and in the mean time, Adieu. Upon which he laid himself
down upon a Bed, that was near; where, to their great Admiration, when they
went about to awake him, they found him fallen asleep in the Lord, dead in good
earnest, without the least sign of any previous Indisposition.

The Narrative the Queen of Navar did relate her self to Frederick the 2d.
Prince, Elector Palatine, when he lay sick at Paris; and it was communicated by
Mr. Hubertus Thomas, Counselor to the said Frederick, and present at the
Relation, to Dr. Rivet, who has set it down in his Epistle to his Brother.

24. Bishop Jewel, long before his Sickness, told the Approaching, and in his
Sickness, the precise day of his Death, in a Letter to the Bishop of Norwich,
A. 1570. he writes -- Flux, Flux, i. e. in the German Tongue, Quick, Quick, --
If you make any Delay, I shall prevent you; And in another, -- You shall yet in
this Life sing (...). In his Life.

25. Mr. Herbert Jones, of Monmouth, when he was a little Boy, was used to eat
his Milk in a Garden in the Morning, and was no sooner there, but a large Snake
always came, and eat out of the Dish with him, and did so for a considerable
time, till one Morning, he striking the Snake on the Head, it hissed at him.
Upon which he told his Mother that the Baby (for so he called it) cried Hiss at
him. His Mother had it killed, which occasioned him a great Fit of Sickness,
and 'twas thought woul'd have died, but did recover.

26. Extracted from Mr. Aubrey 's Miscellanies -- I cannot pass by an Instance
I have from a very honest Man in the next Parish, who told me it himself. That
his Wife being big with Child, near her Delivery he buys half a Dozen of
Boards, to make her a Bed against the time she lay in. The Boards lying at the
Door of his House, there comes an old Fisher-woman, yet alive, and asked him,
whose were those Boards? He told her they were his own. She asked him again,
For what use he had them? He replied, For a Bed; She again said, Intend them
for what you please, she saw a dead Corpse lying on them, and that they would be
a Coffin; which struck the honest Man to the Heart, fearing the death of his
Wife. But when the old Woman went off, he calls presently for a Carpenter to
make the Bed, which was accordingly done; but shortly after the honest Man had
a Child died, whose Coffin was made of the ends of those Boards.

27. I shall tell you what I have had from one of the Masters of our College
here, (a North-Country-man, both by Birth and Education, in his younger Years)
who made a Journey, in the Harvest-time, into the Shire of Ross, and at my
Desire made some Enquiry there, concerning the Second-sight. He reports, That
there they told him many Instances of this Knowledge, which he had forgotten,
except two. The first, one of his Sisters, a young Gentlewoman, staying with a
Friend at some 30 Miles distance from her Father's House, and the ordinary
place of her Residence: One, who had the Second-sight in the Family where she
was, saw a young Man attending her as she went up and down the House, and this
was about Three Months before her Marriage. The second is a Woman in that
Country, who is reputed to have the Second-sight, and declared, that eight Days
before the Death of a Gentleman there, she saw a Bier, or Coffin, covered with
a Cloth she knew, carried as it were to the place of Burial, and attended with
a great Company; one of which told her it was the Corpse of such a Person,
naming that Gentleman, who died Eight Days after. Those that have this Faculty
of the Second-sight, see only things to come, which are to happen shortly
thereafter, and sometimes foretell things which fall out Three or Four Years
after. For instance,

28. One told his Master, that he saw an Arrow in such a Man, thorough his
Body, and yet no Blood came out: His Master told him, that it was impossible an
Arrow should stick in a Man's body, and no blood come out; and if that came to
pass, he would be deemed an Impostor. But about five or six Years after the Man
died; and being brought to his Burial-place, there arose a Debate anent his
Grave, and it came to such a height, that they drew Arms, and bended their
Bows, and one letting off an Arrow, shot through the dead Body upon the
Bier-trees, and so no Blood could issue out at a dead Man's Wound.

Part of a Letter, written to Mr. Aubrey, by a Gentleman's Son in Straths-pey,
being a Student in Divinity. -- Sir, I am more willing than able to satisfy
your Desire: As for Instances, I could furnish many. I shall only insert some
few, attested by several of good Credit, yet alive.

29. And first, Andrew Mackpherson, of Clunie, in Badenoch, being in suit of
the Lord of Gareloch's Daughter, as he was upon a day going to Garloch, the
Lady Garloch was going somewhere from her House within kenning to the Road
which Clunie was coming; the Lady perceiving him, said to her Attendants, that
yonder was Clunie, going to see his Mistress: One in her Company replied, and
said, If you be he, unless he marry within six Months, he will never marry. The
Lady asked, how did he know that? He said, very well; for I see him, says he,
all enclosed in his Winding Sheet, except his Nostrils and his Mouth, which
will also close up within Six Months; which happened even as he foretold;
within the said space he died, and his Brother Duncan Mackpherson, this present
Clunic, succeeded. I have heard of a Gentleman, whose Son had gone abroad; and
being Anxious to know how he was, he went to consult one, who told him, that
that same day, 5 a Clock in the Afternoon, his Son had married a Woman in
France, with whom he had got so many Thousand Crowns, and within Two Years he
should come to see Eather and Friends, leaving his Wife with Child, of a
Daughter, and a Son of six Months of Age, behind him; which accordingly was
true. About the same time two Years he came home, and verified all that was
soretold.

30. One Archibald Mackeanyers, alias Mackdonald, living in Ardinmurch, within
10 or 20 Miles, or thereby, of Glencoe, and I was present my self, where he
foretold something, which accordingly fell out. In 1683, this Man being in
Strathspey, in John Mackdonald, of Glencoe, his Company, told in Balachastell,
before the Lord of Grant, his Lady, and several others, and also in my
Father's House; that Argyle, (few or none knew then where he was, or at least
there was no word of him then here;) should within two Twelvemonths thereafter,
come to the West-Highlands, and raie a Rebellious Faction, wh ich would be
divided among themselves, and disperse, and he unfortunately be taken, and
Beheaded at Edinburgh, and his Head set upon the Talbooth, where his Father's
Head was before him: Which proved as true, as he foretold it, in 1685.
thereafter.

31. There as a young Lady, of great Birth, whom a Rich Knight fancied, and
came in suit of the Lady, but she could not endure to fancy him, being a harsh
and unpleasant Man: But her Friends importuning her daily, she turned
melancholy and lean, Fasting and Weeping continually. A common Fellow about the
House meeting her one Day in the Fields, asked her, saying, Mrs. Kate, What is
that that troubles you, and makes you look so ill? She replied, That the Cause
is known to many, for my Friends, would have me marry such a Man by Name, but I
cannot fancy him. Nay, (says the Fellow) give over these Niceties, for he will
be your first Husband, and will not live long, and besure he will leave you a
rich Dowry, which will procure you a great Match; for I see a Lord upon each
Shoulder of you: All which came to pass in every Circumstance, as Eye and Ear
can witness,

32. Near 40 Years ago Macklend and his Lady, Sister to my Lord Seaforth, were
walking about their own House, and in their Return, both came into the Nurses
Chamber, where their young Child as on the Breast: At their coming in, the
Nurse falls a weeping; they asked the cause, dreading the Child was sick, or
that she was scarce of Milk: The Nurse replied, the Child was well, and she had
abundance of Milk; yet she still wept; and being pressed to tell what ailed
her, she at last said, Macklend would die, and the Lady would shortly marry
another Man. Being enquired how she knew that Event, she told them plainly,
that as they came both into the Room, she saw a Man with a Scarlet Cloak, and a
white Hat, betwixt them, giving the Lady a Kiss over the Shoulder; and this was
the Cause of her weeping. All which came to pass, after Macklend's Death; the
Tutor of Lovat married the Lady in the same Habit the Woman saw him.

33. One Instance I had from a Gentleman here, of a Highland Gentleman, of the
Mackdonalds; who having a Brother, that came to visit him, saw him coming in,
wanting a Head, yet told not his Brother he saw any such thing; but within 24
Hours thereafter, his Brother was taken, (being a Murderer) and his Head cut
off, and sent to Edinburgh. Many such Instances might be given.

34. Diembrooke, in his Book de Pete, gives us a Story of Dimmerus de Raet;
that being at Delft, where the Plague then raged, sent then his Wife Thirty
Miles off. And when the Doctor went to see the Gentleman of the House, as soon
as he came in, the old Chairwoman, that washed the Clothes, fell a weeping: He
asked her, Why? said she, My Mistress is now dead; I saw her Apparition but
just now, without a Head; and that it was usual with her, when a Friend of hers
died, to see their Apparitions in that manner, though never so far off. His Wife
died at that time.

35. Th. May, in his History, Lib. 8. writes, That an old Man (like an Hermit)
Second-sighted, took his Leave of King James the First when he came into
England: He took little notice of Prince Henry, but addressing himself to the
Duke of York (since King Charles I.) fell a weeping, to think what Misfortunes
he should undergo; and that he should be one of the miserablest unhappy Princes
that ever was.

36. A Scotch Noble Man sent for one of these Second-sighted Men out of the
Highlands, to give his Judgment of the then great Favorite, George Villers,
Duke of Buckingham; as soon as ever he saw him, Pish, (said he) he will come to
nothing; I see a dagger in his Breast; and he was stabbed in the Breast by
Capt. Felton. Thus far I am beholding to Mr. Aubrey's Collections.

37. Before the Battle at Philippi began, two Eagles sought in the Air, between
the two Armies: Both the Armies stood still, and beheld them, and the Army was
beaten that was under the vanquished Eagle. See Appian's Hist. Part 2. Lib. 4.
Sect. 2.

38. It Is commonly reported, That before an Heir of the Cliftons of Clifton, in
Nottinghamshire, dies, that a Sturgeon is taken in the River Trent, by that
place.

39. Thomas Fludd, of Kent, Esquire; told me, That it is an old Observation, which
was pressed earnestly to King James I. that he should not remove the Queen of
Scots Body from Northamptonshire, where she was Beheaded, and Interred. For
that it always bodes ill to the Family, when Bodies are removed from their
Graves. For some of the Family will die shortly after, as did Prince Henry,
and, I think, Queen Anne.

40. A little before the Death of Oliver, Protector, a Whale came into the
River Thomas, and was taken at Greenwich -- Foot long. It Is said, Oliver was
troubled at it.

41. When I was a Freshman at Oxford, 1642. I was wont to go to Christ-Church
to see King Charles I. at Supper; where I once heard him say, That as he was
Hawking in Scotland, he rode into the Quarry, and found the Covey of Partridges
falling upon the Hawk; and I do remember this Expression farther, viz. And I
will swear upon the Book it is true. When I came to my Chamber, I told this
Story to my Tutor; said he, That Covey was London.

42. The Day that the Long Parliament began, 1641. the Scepter fell out of the
Figure of King Charles in Wood, in Sir -- Trenchard's Hall, at Wullich, in
Dorset, as they were at Dinner in the Parlour: Justice Hunt then dined there.

43. When the High Court of Justice was voted in the Parliament House, as
Berken-head (the Mace-bearer) took up the Mace to carry it before the Speaker,
the top of the Mace fell off. This was avowed to me by an Eyewitness then in
the House.

44. The Head of King Charles I.'s Staff did fall off at his Trial; that is
commonly known.

45. King Charles II. went by long Sea to Portsmouth, or Plymouth, or both; an
extraordinary Storm arose, which carried him almost to France. Sir Jonas Moor
(who was then with his Majesty) gave me this Account, and said, that when they
came to Portsmouth, to refresh themselves, they had not been there above half
an Hour, but the Weather was Calm, and the Sun shone: His Majesty put to Sea
agian, and in a little time they had the like Tempestuous Weather as before.

46. The Gloucester-Frigot cast away at the Lemanere, and most of the Men in
it, the Duke of York escaping in a Cockboat, An. 1682. May the fifth, on a
Friday.

47. When King James II. was Crowned (according to the ancient Custom, the
Peers go to the Throne, and kiss the King) the Crown was almost kissed off his
Head. An Earl did set it upright: And as he came from the Abbey to
Westminster Hall, the Crown tottered extremely.

48. Mr. Hill, at Shellen, in Herefordshire, in 1648. after saying, God bless
our Gracious Sovereign, he puts the Cup to his Lady, to drink; at which a
Swallow flew in at the Window, and pitched on the Brim of the Earthern Cup (not
half a Pint) and sipt, and so flew out again. -- This was in the Presence of
Parson Still, Major Gwillim, and two or three more that I knew very well: The
Cup is preserved here still as a Rarity. See Mr. Aubrey 's Mscellanies for a
larger Account.

49. When King James II. was at Salisbury, Anno 1688. the Iron Crown upon the
Turret of the Councel-House was blown off.

50. I did see Mr. Chr. Love beheaded on Tower Hill, in a delicate clear day:
About half an Hour after his Head was struck off, the Clouds gathered blacker
and blacker; and such terrible Claps of Thunder came, that I never heard
greater. It Is reported that the like happened after the Execution of Alderman
Cornish in Cheapside, October. 23. 1685.

51. Anno 1643. as Major John Morgan, of Wells, was marching with the King's
Army into the West, fell sick of a Malignant Fever at Salisbury, and was
brought dangerously ill to my Father's at Broad-Chalk, where he was lodged,
secretly, in a Garret, there came a Sparrow to the Chamber-Window, which peck'd
the Lead of a certain Panel only, and only one side of the Lead of the
Lozenge, and made one small hole in it. He continued this pecking and biting of
the Lead, during the whole time of his Sickness, (which was not less than a
Month) when the Major went away, the Sparrow desisted, and came thither no more.

52. Sir Walter Long's Widow (of Dorset, in Wilts) did make a solemn Promise to
him on his Deathbed, that she would not marry after his Decease. But not long
after, one Sir -- Fox, a very beautiful young Gentleman, did win her Love; so
that notwithstanding her Promise aforesaid, she married him: She married at
South-wrax-hall, where the Picture of Sir Walter hung over the Parlour-door, as
it does now at Dracot. As Sir -- Fox led his Bride by the Hand from the Church
(which is near to the House) into the Parlour, the string of the Picture brake,
and the Picture fell on her Shoulder, and cracked in the Fall.

53. The Night before the Fight in Glinsuly, in Ireland, a Woman, of uncommon
Stature, all in white, appearing to the Bishop of Clogher, admonished him not
to cross the River first to assault the Enemy, but suffer them to do it,
whereby he should obtain the Victory. That if the Irish took the Water first,
to move toward the English, they should be put to a total Rout, which came to
pass. Ocahan, and Sir Henry O Neal, who were both killed there, saw severally
the Apparition, and dissuaded the Bishop from giving the first Onset, but could
not prevail upon him.

54. Near the same place a Party of the Protestents had been surpised
sleeping, by the Popish Irish, were it not for several Wrens that just wakned
them, by dancing and pecking on the Drums as the Enemy were approaching. For
this reason the wild Irish mortally hate these Birds to this day.

55. When King James II. first entered Dublin, after his Arrival from France,
1689. one of the Gentlemen that bore the Mace before him stumbled without any
rub in his way, or other visible occasion. The Mace fell out of his Hands, and
the little Cross upon the Crown thereof stuck fast between two Stones in the
Street. Thus far I Am beholding to Mr. Aubrey's Collections.

56. Of Fatalities of Families and Places, Extracted from the Miscellanies of
John Aubrey, Esquire; -- The L. Chancellor Bacon says; As for Nobility in
particular Persons, It is a reverend thing to see an ancient Castle or
Building, not in Decay; or to see a fair Timber Tree sound and perfect; how
much more to behold an ancient Noble Family, which ha^h stood against the
Waves and VVeathers of Time? For new Nobility is but the Act of Power; but
ancient Nobility is the Act of Time. But Omnium rerum est vicissitudo: Families
and Places have their Fatalities, according to that of Ovid,

Fors sua cuique loco est. -- 57. Sturton (the Seat of the Lord Sturton) was
belonging to his Family before the Conquest. They say, that after the Victory
at Battle, William the Conqueror came in Person into the West, to receive
their Rendition; that the Lord Abbot of Glastenbury, and the rest of the Lords
and Grandees of the Western Parts waited upon the Conqueror at Stourton-House,
where the Family continues to this Day.

58. Sir William Batton, of Tockenham, Baronet, (the Father) told me, that his
Ancestors had the Lease of Alton-Farm (400 l. per Annum) in Wilts (which
anciently belonged to Hyde-Abby juxta Winton) four Hundred Years. Sir William's
Lease expired about 1652. and so fell into the Hands of the Earl of Pembrooke.

59. Clavel of -- in the Isle of Purbec, in the County of Dorset, was in that
place before the Conquest, as appears by Doomsday Book. The like is said of
Hamden, of Hamden, in Bucks: Their Pedigree says, that one of that Family had
the Conduct of that County in two Invasions of the Danes. Also Pen, of Pen, in
that County, was before the Conquest, as by Doomsday Book.

60. Contrariwise, there are several places unlucky to their Possessors, e. g.
Charter House, on Mindip, in Somersetshire, never passed, yet, to the Third
Generation. The Manner of Butleigh, near Gla^enbury, never went, yet, to the
Third Generation.

61. Bletchington, in Oxfordshire, continued in the Family of the Pauures, for
about 300 Years.

62. Fatality of proper Names of Princes, e. g. John has been an unfortunate
Name to Kings. All the Second Kings since the Conquest have been unfortunate.

63. Londonderry was the first Town in Ireland that declared for the
Parliament against King Charles I. and for the Prince of Orange against King
James II. It was closely besieged both times without effect. The King's Party
were once Masters of all the Kingdom, except Londonderry and Dublin, and King
James had all in his Power but Londonderry, and Iniskilling. It Is certain,
that there are some Houses unlucky to their Inhabitants, which the Reverend and
Pious Dr. Nepier could acknowledge.

64. The Fleece-Tavern in Covent Garden, in York-street, was very unfortunate
for Homicides; there have been several killed; three in my time. It is now
(1696) a private House.

65. A handsome Brick-House on the South side of Clerken-well Churchyard, has
been so unlucky for at least Forty Years, that it was seldom Tenanted; and at
last, no body would adventure to take it. Also a handsome House in Holbourn,
that looked toward the Fields; the Tenants of it did not prosper, several,
about six.

66. Periodical Small-Poxes. The Smallpox is usually in all great Towns: But
it is observed at Taunton, in Somersetshire, and at Shirbourne, in
Dorsetshire, that at one of them at every Seventh Year, and at the other at
every Ninth Year comes a Smallpox, which the Physicians cannot master. This
Account I had from Mr. Tho. Ax.

It were to be wished that more such Observations were made in o there great
Towns. Platerus makes the like Observations in the second Book of his Practice,
P. 323. He practiced at Basil 56 Years, and did observe, that every Tenth year
they died of the Plague there. See Capt. J. Graunts Observations of the Bills
of Mortality at London, (indeed written by sir William Petty, which in a late
Transaction he confessed) for the Periodical Plagues at London; which (as I
remember) are every Twenty-fifth year. Thus far I am beholding to Mr. Aubrey's
Collections.

67. Corpse Candles in Wales: Part of a Letter to Mr. Baxter.

Sir, I am to give you the best satisfaction I can, touching those Apparitions
(Corpse Candles) which do, as it were, mark out the way for Corpses to their
(...), and sometimes before the Parties themselves fall sick, and sometimes in
their Sickness. I could never hear in England of these; they are common in
these three Counties, viz. Cardigan, Carmarthen, and Pembrooke, and, as I hear,
in some other Parts of Wales.

These (...) in our Language we call Canhwyllan Cyrph, i. e. Corps-Candles; and
Candles we call them, not that we see any thing besides the Light; but because
that Light does as much resemble a material Candlelight, as Eggs do Eggs,
saying, that in their Journey these Candles be modo apparantes, modo
disparantes, especially, when one comes near them; and if one come in the way
against them, unto whom they vanish; but presently appear behind, and hold on
their Course. If it be a little Candle, pale or bluish, then follows the Corpse
either of an Abortive, or some Infant; if a big one them the Corpse of some one
come to Age: If there be seen two or three, or more, some big, some small
together, then so many, and such Corpses together. If two Candles come from
diverse places, and be seen to meet, the Corpses will the like; if any of these
Candles are seen to turn sometimes a little out of the way, or path, that
leads to the Church, the following Corpse will be forced to turn in that very
place, for the avoiding some dirty Lane or plash, etc. Now let us fall to
evidence. Being about the Age of Fifteen, dwelling at Lanylar, late at Night,
some Neighbors saw one of these Candles hovering up and down along the
River-Bank, until they were weary in beholding it, at last they left it so, and
went to Bed. A few Weeks after came a proper Damsel from Montgomery-shire, to
see her Friends, who dwelt on the other side of that River Istwith, and thought
to Ford the River at that very place where the Light was seen; being dissuaded
by some Lookers on (some it is most likely of those that saw the Light) to
adventure on the Water, which was high, by reason of a Flood: She walked up and
down along the River-Bank, even where, and even as the aforesaid Candle did,
waiting for the falling of the Water; which at last she took, but too soon for
her, for she was drowned therein. Of late, my Sexton's Wife, an aged
understanding Woman, saw from her Bed a little bluish Candle on her Tables end;
within two or three Days after came a Fellow, enquiring for her Husband; and
taking something from under his Cloak, clapped it down upon the Tables-end; it
was a dead-born Child.

Another time, the same Woman saw such another Candle upon the end of the
selfsame Table; within a few Days after a weak Child newly Christend by me, was
brought to the Sexton's House, where presently it died: 'And when the Sexton's
Wife, who was then abroad, came home, she found the Child, on the other end of
the Table, where she had seen the Candle. Some thirty or forty Years since, my
Wife's Sister, being Nurse to Baronet Rudd's three eldest Children, and (the
Lady Mistress being dead) the Lady Comptroller of the House going late into the
Chamber where the Maidservants lay, saw no less than Five of those Lights
together. It happened a while after, that the Chamber being newly Plastered,
and a Grate of Coal-fire therein kindled, to hasten the drying of the Praister,
that five of the Maidservants went to Bed as they were wont (but as it fell
out) too soon; for in the Morning they were all dead, being Soffocated in their
Sleep with the steem of the new-temper'd Lime and Coal. This was at Langathen,
in Carmarthenshire. -- Jo. Davis. See more --

Generglyn, March 1656.

To this Account of Mr. Davis, I will subjoyn what my worthy Friend and
Neighbor Randal Caldicot, D. D. has affirmed to me many Years since, viz,
When any Christian is drowned in the River Dee, there will appear over the
Water where the Corpse is, a Light, by which means they do find the Body. Thus
far Mr. Aubrey.

Ominous Presages, taken notice of, as relating to the Troubles and Death of
King Charles I. in a Printed Relation, 1655.

68. When he was in Spain, treating, and prosecuting the Match with the
Infanta, Jun. 30. 1623. a great Clap of Thunder struck away the Flag and
Flag-staff from the Main-top-mast-head of a Ship, then riding at Black-wall,
and bound for Spain, with Provision of fresh Victuals, to fetch the Prince
home; it also split the Main-top-mast, and threw one part on one side, and the
other part on the other side of the Ship, and raized the Mainmast down to the
Ship; it killed two Men, and one Woman at Croydon. This was two Days after the
Prince wrote to the Pope.

Thursday next there were many great Claps of Thunder, abundance of Rain, and
so great a Pillar of Fire from Heaven out of the South, that it reached from
the Heavens to the Farth, not as a Flash of Lightning, gone in the very sight,
but a very firm Pillar of Fire. The Crown and Vane, from the top of the
Gate House of St. James, whereon the Clock stood, was struck down; a piece of
the Bell, where the Priuce kept his Court, melted; a Gardener, near
Westminster, killed and his Wife hurt; another at Croyden, killed, etc.

Old Tho. Earl of Arundel, having sent for the King's Statue out of Italy,
viewing it at Greenwich, where it was landed, and commending the Workmanship;
whilst they were discoursing of it, there fell three drops of Blood on the top
of it, no Man knowing how they should come there.

A. 1623. A Buckinghamshire Tailor came from Alisbury, aged 41, and a sober
Man, went along London Streets, pronouncing, Woe to Rome, Woe to the Pope, Woe
to all Papists, and all that did adhere to Popery, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
etc. This three or four Days in the Week, praying earnestly at White-Hall-Gate,
for the Continuance of the Gospel, in England, till he was sent to the
New-Bridewell, near Clerken-well, where he continued three Weeks. After which
he proceeded again to the same Execrations.

One of the Crowns and Vanes of the Tower was turned over the Top of the
Spindle, with a very small Gale of Wind, and so hung for three quarters of a
Year, or more; the Crown and Vane weighed 100 weight.

His Hand and Scepter broke off from his Statue at the Exchange, and fell down
to the Ground, even at Change-time, to the admiration of all Beholders; and the
next day it was set up again.

One Mrs. Carry, of Bristol, a Woollen-Draper's Widow, on the Back of the Town,
having seen many strange Apparitions of the late King at several times; as his
Crown all bloody, himself in Black, and his Head off; by means of the Earl of
Dorset, was admitted to the King, who dismissed her, with only this Reflection,
Take her away; she is a merry Woman. The Woman returns home to Bristol, where
the like Visions appeared to her again, she could not contain, but away she
makes for London a second time; and the King gone to York, by the help of a
Lady at Court she follows in a Coach thither, and with much Importunity of
Speech beseeches him to consider what she had seen, and said, but was not
credited.

At Caussam, near Reading, the King playing at Chess with White Men, the Head
of the White King fell off.

When the Lord Fairfax was at St. Albans, and the General Council of the Army
drawing up the grand Rdmonstrance against the King, the Sign of the King's Head,
beneath the Hill from the Cross, that part of the Board between the Head and
Shoulders was broken out of the Sign, so that the Head and Shoulders seemed
parted.

When the King was at the High Court of Justice (as it was then called) on his
Trial, the Head of his Cane fell off; he stooped to take it up himself, looked
upon it as an ominous Presage.

69. William Writtle, condemned at Maidston Assizes, for a double Murder
(mentioned hereafter) told a Minister that was with him after he was condemned,
that his Mother told him, that when he was a Child, there crept always to him a
Snake, wherever she laid him: Sometimes she would convey him up Stairs, and
leave him never so little, she should besure to find a Snake in the Cradle with
him, but never perceived it did him any harm. See the Narrative, published 1675.

70. Hither may be referred that Remarkable Accident, which happened to the
Statue of King James II. in the Exchange, which is to be seen to this day; the
Statue (I think) fell to one side, and the Scepter fell out of his Hand: But by
reason of the defect of my Memory, I refer my Reader to a sight of the thing it
self, being not able to speak positively on the point at this time. Also it is
credibly reported, That in his March to Salisbury, when he went down to oppose
the then Prince of Orange, his Nose fell a bleeding. Oh! the Depth of the
Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his Judgments and his ways
past finding out!

CHAP. XVII. Promises fulfilled.
TO insist here upon Promises made by God to all the particular Graces,
recommended in the Christian Religion, would be a Task too laborious and
voluminous. It shall suffice at present, to take notice of the exact
Performance of those general, or more notable Ones, mentioned in Sacred
Scripture, and made by the God of Heaven, either to the World, or Church in
general, or to some very Remarkable People, or Persons in particular; as,

1. The Promise of a Messiah, which was made with such a particular Notation of
Christ's Nature to Adam, that he should be of the Seed of the Woman; to
Abraham, of what Nation, viz. to his Posterity; to Jacob, at what time; when
the Scepter should depart from Judah; to David, of what Family in that Tribe,
viz. his own; to Isaiah, of what Person in that Family, viz. a Virgin; to
Micah, in what place, viz. in Bethlehem: and to Daniel, in what time, viz.
toward the Expiration of the 70 Weeks: And this Promise so circumstantiated,
was by the Jews so strongly and earnestly expected, that many of them hit upon
the right time, and were big with Hopes and Expectations in that very Season,
when our Savior came; as appears evidently by the concurrent Testimonies of
all the Evangelists and Apostles: And this Promise was withal so exactly
performed, that the Old and New Testaments kiss one another, and give a mutual
Suffrage one to another, insomuch, that for all the Material Passages of our
Savior's Life, the Evangelists refer us to Moses, and the Prophets. Bishop
Joseph Hall, and some other Divines, have reckoned up the several Texts of the
Old Testament, we are either by our Savior, or his Sacred VVriters,
recommended to for Confirmation. The Turks and Persians acknowledge this in
great part, and the Jews themselves scarce know what to say to it; and who
could do this, but God Almighty?

2. The Promise made to Abraham, of the Land of Canaan, is so far of the same
Nature, that it was as particularly made, and as perfectly fulfilled. The
Scripture gives a full Account of the Promise, and all the World almost is
satisfied in the Performance: It will pose an Atheist to invalidate the
Scripture Testimony in one Respect, or run down the Convictive Evidence of
History in the other.

3. The Promise of breaking down the Pale of the Jewish Church, to make way for
the Reception of the Gentiles, as it was faithfully exhibited in the VVritings
of the Old Testament, so it is fully accomplished in the New.

4. The Promise made to the Apostles by our Savior, that He would be with them
to the end of the World, was considerable in several Respects; as first, that
he should Assist a little Company of mean Persons, and Obnoxious to Contempt
and Injuries, from all the Despite and Malicious Designs of their Adversaries;
and secondly, in the Prosecution of a Business, the Preaching of a Doctrine, so
contrary to the Humors and Secular Interests of almost all the World; and
lastly, that Twelve such mean Apostles, employed upon such an Errand, should
prevail so far, with so little Learning, so little humane Policy, without any
ill Arts or Arms, against both Jews and Gentiles, Princes and Potentates,
Rabbis and Philosophers; as to plant a Doctrine, so ungrateful to Flesh and
Blood, in several parts of the World, so remote and far distant from one
another, that it could not be extinguished, either with Arts and Stratagems, or
Arms and Bloodshed, and all the Engines of Cruelty and Torture, opposed and
made use of against it to this Day.

5. The Promise, or rather Threatening or Prediction of our Savior, mentioned
in Mat. 24. Mark 13. Luke 21. Concerning the first Glorious and Typical Advent
of the same Jesus (whom the Jews were then treating so despitefully, and going
to Crucify) as Judge and Avenger, to ruin the Temple, and destroy or disperse
the Jewish Nation, was so circumstantially delivered, and so punctually put in
Execution; that the Account which Josephus gives of it is enough to Astonish
all the World into Amazement, and put to silence the Tongues of Gainsayers. And
the present Dispersion of the Jews, and their frequent Disappointments, when
they have endeavored to return, and repossess, and rebuild their Ruinated
Jerusalem, which they were so fond of; and these Disappointments so remarkably
strange sometimes, that they are an astonishing Confirmation of the Truth
thereof.

6. I Know of no uninspired Author that has done better, as to a proof of Jesus
Christ being the Messiah, says a late Writer, this Convert being better read
and acquainted than most of our Divines, in the Jewish Talmud, and Objections;
himself having been once a Teacher amongst them; and we are inclined to hope,
that the Promise of God for the calling home his Ancient People the Jews, is
now in the Embrio; for it is impossible for any one amongst 'em, that pretends
either to Scripture or Reason, after the reading of Theodore John his Book, to
expect the coming of another Messiah, all the Prophesies being so evidently
fulfilled in Jesus Christ, that relate to the Messiah: But as for the Proof of
a Trinity, and with such a happy Success, We have never yet met with any Author
that pretended to do it, further than in Promise, till this Convert, (who being
a Jew, and a Teacher amongst them, and thereby extremely well acquainted with
the Old Testament, and the Opinions of the Rabbis) has done it with that
Evidence and Perspicuity, as (We think) the most Skeptical Person, that is not
prejudiced to Sacred Writ, can find no Objections against. This Book we
seriously recommend to all Christians to confirm 'em in this Truth, That it is
no Fiction nor Device of Cunning or Politic Men, to believe that all the
Prophecies are fulfilled, concerning the Coming and Office of the Messiah, and
that Jesus Christ, whom we worship, is the true Messiah. As for the Jews, as we
said before, we hope this will be such a powerful and full Conviction, that
that Promise of an Universal Call will be speedily fulfilled; for since the
Gospel is now planted in America, the fullness of the Gentiles is almost
perfected, perhaps wholly, since it can hardly be showed where the Gospel has
not now been preached in the whole Gentile World; We mean by Gentile, one that
is not a Jew, the whole World being distinguished into Jew and Gentile, by the
Apostles, and downward.

7. It will much help you in Prayer at this day (says the Ingenious Mr. Hurst,
in his Sermon, in the last Morning Exercise) if you will look into the several
Menaces, ptonounced in the Book of the Revelations, against Babylon, and
observe which of them are in part Executed, which are now Executing; which of
the Trumpets we are under, and which of the three Woes are now Executing, etc.
By this we might conclude the sounding of the Seventh Trumpet near, and the
Kingdoms of the World e're long are like to be the Kingdoms of Christ. -- Look,
says this Author, to Promises made to the Church for her Deliverance, when you
hear of, or enquire after any great News among the States, and Kingdoms of the
World, among which the Churches of Christ sojourn, and among which the Saints
of God have, and still do suffer. It needs not a particular proof that there
are many express Promises, that the Church shall be delivered, that there is a
fixed time for the Beginning, Progress, and full Accomplishment of these
Promises, that their Accomplishments shall be gradual, and such as will clear
it self; and though we cannot say when the full accomplishment to a Day, or a
Month, or a Year, yet by comparing Transactions and Occurrences with Promises,
we may without doubt discover somewhat of the Promise made good to the Church,
for which we ought to praise the Lord, and all the rest of the Promises shall
be fulfilled, and for this we should earnestly pray to the Lord. He further
adds -- Compare the great News in the present Revolutions, with the Times God
has been pleased to make known to us in his Word. By this you may discern what
Encouragement, and awakening Considerations are given to us to pray and praise
our God for what is already done, and for what is doing, and what e're long is
to be finished. Here is work for learned Men, for Ministers, for Understanding
Saints. There are in the Revelations two distinct Numbers mentioned, which,
were they clearly unfolded, would enable us, as very wise Christians, to
receive, seek, and improve the great News that is abroad in the World.

The first Period is that, Rev. 9.15. They, i.e. the four Angels bound at
Euphrates, i.e. the Turkish power, were prepared for an Hour, and a Day, and a
Month, and a Year, i.e. for Three Hundred Ninety Six Years, and a very little
more. Now from One Thousand Three Hundred, in which Osman, or Ottoman, was
Elected King of the Turks, they have been the Destruction of the Christians,
and were to be until Three Hundred Ninety Years were expired, till One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety Six, which will in likelihood end their Empire, and how
great Hope of this now? This calls us to pray for their Ruin.

The second great Period is of the Forty Two Months, i.e. One Thousand Two
Hundred and Sixty Years; the time the Beast was to prosecute the Church, and
then the Beast was to perish, i.e. the Papal Kingdom shall be destroyed. Now
these One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty Years in likelihood began about Four
Hundred Seventy five, or somewhat sooner, and by this Account you may suppose
the News you still hear of both Turk and Papacy, will encourage you to hope for
a speedy Deliverance of the Church from both.

It will be worth your while to read those excellent pieces of Mr. Joseph Mede,
who wrote his Key of the Revelation above Threescore years ago, in Latin; I
cannot say whether it be Translated into English, having always kept my self to
the Latin Copy; but it is a thousand pities it should be confined to Latin; a
Book fit to be published in all Lauguages.

Of Mr. Jurieu's Accomplishment of Prophesies, translated out of French into
English.

Of a Nameless Author newly Written in French, and Translated into English,
Printed lately under the Title of A New System of the Apocalypse, etc.

I commend to you, who would know the Importance of public News, how to pray
and praise God; on hearing it, How to wait for Deliverances, to read diligently
those Books in which are greater and better News than any Pacquets, then all
Gazzetts, or Coffee-Houses can yet afford to you, when you have read these
Books then Long for One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six, or One Thousand Seven
Hundred; and hope, if you live to that day, to hear Mahometanism in the Turkish
Empire destroyed, with that Empire. Wish for One Thousand Seven Hundred Thirty
Five, or One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty; and remember I do not pretend to
Prophecy, but I do dismiss with a conjecture that between this time and that,
you will see great Deliverances to the Churches of Christ, and as great
Distresses and Judgments executed on the Antichristian Kingdom, it may be the
total Ruin of that Kingdom, which was to last but One Thousand Two Hundred and
Sixty Years, and I think will have out-lasted that Period before One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Forty. Thus far Mr. Hurst.

CHAP. XVIII. Strange Convictions, or Conversions.
THE methods which God takes for the Conviction, or Conversion of Sinners, are
so various, and sometimes so surprising; that one would wonder, what it is,
that is so poinant upon the Minds and Consciences of Men; that does so
effectually prick the hearts of some, whilst others remain in their old
Ordinary Temper, unshaken and obstinate. And it is certain, it is somewhat like a
Flash of Lightning, or some ray of the Divine Power, Darted by the Spirit of
God into the Souls of Men, an Arrow of the Almighty, a Beam of special Grace
directed to a Particular object by the Wisdom of Heaven. And it is worth our
Notice, that Archbishop Tillotson tells us, in his Sermon upon Luke 15. v. 7.
That they who are reclaimed from a Wicked cause, are many times more Thoroughly
and Zealously good afterward: Their trouble and remorse for their Sins, does
quicken and spur them on in the ways of Virtue and Goodness, and a lively sense
of their past Errors, is apt to make them more careful and conscientious of
their Duty, more tender and fearful of offending God, and desirous, if it were
possible, to redeem their former Miscarriages by their Good Behavior for the
future. Their Love to God is usually more Vehement, and burns with a brighter
Flame, for to whomsoever much is forgiven, they will Love much. And they are
commonly more Zealous for the Conversion of others, as being more sensible of
the danger Sinners are in, and more apt to commiserate their case, remembering
that it was once their own condition; and with what difficulty they were
rescued from so great a danger. And for the most part, great Penitents are more
free from Pride and Contempt of others, the consideration of what themselves
once were, being enough to keep them humble all their days. -- So that
Penitents are many times more thoroughly and perfectly good, and after their
recovery, do in several respects outstrip and excel those who were never
engaged in a vicious course of Life: As a broken Bone that is well set, is
sometimes stronger than it was before. Thus far Archbishop Tillotson. -- I now
proceed to give Instances of several strange Convictions and Conversions.

1. Upon St. Paul's Sermon Preached upon occasion of the Altar inscribed, (...)
at Athens, Dionysius the Areopagite, with Damaris his Wife, was converted.

2. Justin Martyr was converted by beholding the Constancy, Courage and
Patience of the Christians in their Torments and Persecutions, and the
Instructions of an Old grave Man, that met casually with him afterward, and
advised him to quit the Philosophers, and Study the Prophets: Which he
presently did, tho he had been formerly under the Tutorage of Stoic,
Peripatetic, Pythagorean and Platonist, successively. Clark's Mar. of Eccl.
Hist.

3. Tertullian was converted by Reading the Scriptures and Writings of other
Learned and Holy Men; Quicquid agitur (says he, speaking of Scripture)
Prenunciabatur. Ibid.

4. Ambrose was converted by Origin, Cyprian by the Ministry of Cecilius,
Presbyter of Carthage (whose Name he afterward bore) upon occasion of a Sermon
he Preached on the History of the Prophet Jonas. Ibid.

5. S. Augustine was converted by occasion of a Story related by Pontitian a
Lawyer, about the Retirement and Devotion of S. Antony the Hermit, which so
moved his Passions, that he presently withdrew into the Garden, broke forth
into Tears, and Cried out to his Dear Companion Alipius, who followed him close
at the Heels, What is this? What do we hear! Unlearned People rise and take
Heaven by Violence, whilst we with all our Learning wallow in Flesh and Blood?
Is it, because we are ashamed to follow them! Rather should we not be ashamed
that they go before us! And with this, throwing himself upon the ground, at a
convenient distance from Alipius, he seemed to hear a Voice as of some little
child, crying. Toll, Lege, Take up and Read; concluding it to be a Voice from
Heaven, he opens the Book of St. Paul's Epistles, which he had with him, and
hitting immediately upon that Text, Romans 13.12, 13, 14. Not in Rioting and
Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, etc. He concluded it to be a
very proper Lesson, to spend his thoughts at that time upon: Showed it to
Alipius, who reading forward, concluded the subsequent Verse to be as proper
for him. Aug. Conf. l. 8. c. 7.9.

S. Augustine, on a time, forgetting the Argument he was upon, made a
digression to a point of Difference between the Orthodox and Manichees; at
which time one Firmus a Rich Merchant, and a Manichee, being present, was so
convinced, that he came to him afterward with Tears, and on his Knees
confessed his Errors, and promised reformation. Also one Felix a Manichee,
coming to Hippo to spread his Heresy, in a Disputation with Augustine, after
the third time, was so convinced, that he recanted his Errors, and was joined
to the Church. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. Here it may not be impertinent, to
remember that Austine going one time, out of Curiosity, to hear S. Ambrose, was
so lectured by an occasional Argument delivered in the Assembly by that Holy
Man, which touched his copyhold, that he thought verily Ambrose designed it for
a particular reproof: Tho himself tells us, in his Book of Confessions, that he
did afterward believe S. Ambrose had no such purpose.

6. Fulgentius, being made the King's Collector, and obliged to a Rigorous
Exaction of Taxes, and Impositions, at last was wearied with the Burden and
Variety of secular cares, and dissatisfied with the vain felicity of the
World; and in his Affections aspired after a more Spiritual Life, and so began
to pray and read the Scriptures, and often resorted to the Monasteries; where,
tho he perceived they had no VVorldly Solace, yet neither had they any
weariness in their present condition; whereupon he brake out in these words
with himself, Why Travel I in the World? It can yield me no future, or durable
Reward answerable to my Pains. Tho it be better to VVeep well, then Rejoice
ill; yet if to rejoice be our desire, how much more excellent is their Joy, who
have a good Conscience before God, who dread nothing but Sin; Study to do
nothing, but to accomplish the Precepts of Christ? Now therefore let me change
my Trade, and, as before I endeavored amongst my Noble Friends to prove more
Noble, so now let my Care and Employment be amongst the Humble and Poor
Servants of the Highest, to become more Poor and Humble then they, and like S.
Matthew, let me turn from a Publican to a Disciple. Upon this he broke off his
Old Acquaintance and Conversation, and by degrees addicted himself to Fasting
and Retirement, Reading and Prayer; and reading S. Augustine upon p. 36.
without any further delay, he put himself into a Monastery under Faustus, where
he became one of his Disciples. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 90, 91.

7. Luther, at the Age of One and Twenty, was so affrighted at the violent
Death of a Dear and Faithful Companion of his, whom he mightily Loved, that he
betook himself into the Augustine Monks College at Erford; and Writ to his
Parents the occasion of his thus changing his course of Life; and this was a
good step to a serious Disposition and Religious Temper of Mind. Afterward, by
Sickness, reading of S. Augustin's Works, and observing how at Rome they said
Mass in such a careless detestable manner, that at the Communion Table he
heard the Curtezans laugh and boast of their Wickedness, etc. others say, Bread
thou art, and Bread thou shall remain, etc. And at last, being startled with
the profuseness of Indulgences sent from the Pope by John Tecelius into
Germany, with so large a Commission, that tho a Man had defloured the Blessed
Virgin, yet for Money he could pardon his Sin; Luther's Zeal took fire, and set
up for the Reformation. Hear him giving an Account of himself: Speaking of his
own Works, he thus Writes, Above all things I now request the Pious Reader, and
beseech him for the Lord Jesus Christ's fake, that he reads my Books with
Judgment, yea, with much pity; and let him remember, that I was sometime a
Friaer and a Mad Papist, and when I first undertcok this cause, so Drunken and
Drowned in Popish Doctrines, that I was ready, if I could, to have killed all
Men, or to have assisted others in doing of it, who withdrew their obedience
from the Pope but in one Syllable: Such a Soul was I, as there are many at this
day; neither was I so cold and frigid in defending the Pope as Eccius, and some
like him are; who seem to me to defend the Papacy, rather for their bellies
sake, then in good earnest: Yea, like Epicures, they seem to me to deride the
Pope, whereas I was serious in his cause, as one that trembled at the Thoughts
of the day of Judgment, and from my very heart desired to be saved. Ibid. p.
146. vid. Sleid. Comment. etc.

8. Lambertus, disputing with Zuinglius about the Intercession of Saints, and
the Sacrifice of the Mass, and being non-plus'd, left his Error, and gave
Praise to God. Ibid. p. 149.

9. Mr. Rastal (Sir Thomas Moor's Son in Law) was converted likewise by the
clear and strenuous Arguments of John Frith, which he used in some Disputations
that were managed by way of Letter, between Sir Thomas and Him. Ibid. p. 157.

10. In Mr. Baxters Narrative of his Life, p. 3. He gives this Remarkable
Account of his Conversion, Being, says he, under some more Conviction for my
Sin; a poor Day-Labourer in the Town had an old torn Book, which he lent my
Father, which was called, Bunny's Resolution; I had before heard some Sermons,
and read a Book or two, which made me more Love and Honor Godliness in the
General. -- He further adds, in the reading of this Book (when I was about
Fifteen Years of Age) it pleased God to awaken my Soul, and show me the Folly
of Sinning, and the misery of the Wicked, and the unexpressible weight of
things Eternal, and the necessity of resolving on a Holy Life, more than I was
ever acquainted with before. The same things which I knew before, came now in
another manner, with light and sense, and seriousness to my heart. -- About
that time, it pleased God that a poor Pedlar came to the Door that had Ballads,
and some good Books: And my Father bought of him, Dr. Sibbs bruised Reed. This
also I read; and found it suited to my State, and seasonably sent me, which
opened more the Love of God to me, and gave me a Livelier apprehension of the
Mystery of Redemption; and how much I was beholden to Jesus Christ. After this,
we had a Servant that had a little piece of Mr. Perkins's Works ( of
Repentance, and the right Art of Living and Dying well, and the Government of
the Tongue) and the reading of that did further inform me, and confirm me. And
thus (without any means but Books) was God pleased to resolve me for himself.
Thus far Mr. Baxter.

11. Mr. Thomas Bilney, Martyr, was thus converted; Having heard the Speech of
Jesus, says he, even then when the New Testament was Translated by Erasmus,
understanding it to be eloquently done, I bought it, being allured thereto
rather by the Elegancy of the Latin, then the Word of God (for at that time, I
knew not what it meant) and looking into it, by God's special Providence, I met
with those words of the Apostle S. Paul, This is a True saying, and worthy of
all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, of whom
I am chief. Oh! most sweet and comfortable sentence to my Soul! This one
sentence, through Gods instruction and inward working, did so exhilerate my
heart, which before was wounded through the guilt of my Sins, and being almost
in despair, that immediately I sound Mavelous comfort and quietness in my
Soul, so that my bruised Bones did leap for Joy. After this, the Scripture
began to be more sweet unto me, then Honey and the Honeycomb, etc. Ibid. p.
162.

12. John Picus Mirandula, being of a ductile Nature, and an aimable
Countenance and Disposition, was for some time so inveigled with the
Blandishments of an Effeminate Society; that he gave himself over to unlawful
pleasures with them; but it pleased God by the Malice of his Adversaries, and
the troubles which he met with by their means, to awaken him from his sensual
delights, and to stir him up to shake off and avoid all these Provocations and
Incentives to Wickedness, and to choose Celestial instead of fleshy Pleasures.
And laying aside his hunting after vain Glory, to devote himself wholly to the
Glory of God and the good of the Church. Idem in ejus vita.

13. George Prince of Anhalt, when the Controversies about Religions waxed hot,
and Luther's Books came abroad, fell to reading of them, and suspecting his own
Injudiciousness, would often pray with Tears to God, to incline his heart to
the Truth, saying, Deal with thy Servant according to thy Mercy, and Instruct
me in thy Righteousness; He was frequent in reading the Scriptures,
Ecclesiastical Histories, Augustine, Hierom and Lombard; studied also Greek and
Hebrew; and discoursed with Learned Men about the Controversies: And after all,
upon mature deliberation embraced the reformed Religion, and reformed the
Churches, with the counsel of his Brethren, within his own Jurisdiction, Fuller
Abel Rediv. p. 165.

14. Vergerius having been the Popes Legate in Germany, after his return to
Rome, the Pope intended to bestow a Cardinals Cap upon him; but some about him
suggested, that he had been so long in Germany, that he smelled of a Lutheran.
This made the Pope to alter his purpose; which, when Vergerius heard, was
wonderfully Astonished; and that he might purge himself from that Imputation,
he retired into his own Country, purposing to Write a Book under this Title:
Against the Apostate Germans. But it pleased God, that whilst he read over his
Adversaries Books, to confute them, himself was converted by them. Hereupon,
casting off all desires of a Cardinalship, he went to his Brother, John
Baptista, Bishop of Pola, and Communicated his thoughts unto him, and asked his
advice. His Brother at first was much perplexed, and bewailed his condition;
But, after a while, was persuaded by Vergerius to read and study the
Scriptures, especially in the point of Justification by Faith; whereby it
pleased God that he also saw the Popish Doctrines to be false; and so they both
became Zealous Preachers of the Truth to the People. Clark's Exampl. Vol. 2. p.
117. Sleidan. Commentar. p. 475.

15. Whilst Francis Junius was a Student in Lions, there came a Man to him,
using the words of the Epicure, Nihil curare Deum, nec sui, nec alieni: That
God cares for nothing, And he Corroborated this with such subtle Arguments,
that Junius sucked in that damnable Principle, and thereupon gave up himself to
vile Pleasures for somewhat more than a year. But the Lord suffered him not to
continue longer in so dangerous a condition. For first, in a tumult at Lions,
the Lord wonderfully delivered him from imminent Death; which Signal
Deliverance compelled him to acknowledge a Divine Providence: And his Father
hearing of the dangerous courses that he took, sent for him home, requiring him
to read over the New Testament; Concerning which himself thus Writes: Novum
Testamentum aperis, exhibet se mihi, ad spectu primo, Augustissimum illud
Caput; in Principio erat Verbum, etc. When I had opened the New Testament, the
first place I cast mine Eyes upon, was that Famous Text, John 1.1. In the
Beginning was the Word, etc. I read part of the Chapter, and was suddenly
convinced, that the Divinity of the Argument, and Majesty and Author of the
Writing, did exceedingly go beyond the Eloquence of all humane Writings. My
Body trembled, my Mind was Astonished, and I was so affected all that day, that
I knew not where I was, or what I did. Thou wast mindful of me, O my God,
according to the Multitude of thy mercies; and called^st home thy lost sheep
into thy Fold. Ibid. p. 117.

16. The Lord was pleased, sweetly to unlock Mr John Januways ^art, by the
exemplary Life, and Heavenly and Powerful discourse of a young Man in the
College, whose heart God had inflamed with Love to his Soul; he quickly made
an attempt upon this hopeful Young Man, and the Spirit of God did set home his
Counsels with such Power, that they proved effectual for his awakening; being
accompanied with the Preaching of these two Famous Worthies, Dr. Hill, and Dr.
Arrowsmith, together with the reading of several parts of Mr. Baxter's Saints
Everlasting Rest. Now a mighty alteration might easily be discerned in him, he
quickly looks quite another Man: He is now so much taken up with things above
the Moon and Stars, that he had little leisure to think of these things only as
they pointed higher. See his Life.

17. Whilst Mr. Robert Bolton was a Student in Oxford, he had familiar
Acquaintance with one Mr. Anderton, a good Scholar, but a Papist; yea, a
Priest. He taking notice of Mr. Boltons Excellent parts, and outward wants,
took the advantage to persuade him to go over with him to the English Seminary
in Rome; where he should be furnished with all necessaries, and have Gold
enough. This motion Mr. Bolton accepted of, and a day and place was appointed,
where, in Lancashire (their County) they should take Shipping, and be gone.
Thither Mr. Bolton repaired at the time appointed; but Anderton came not. Mr.
Bolton, having escaped the Snare, returned to Oxford, where he fell into the
Acquaintance of Holy Mr. Peacock; by whose means it pleased God to bring him to
a sight of his Sins, and to unfeigned Repentance for the same, but by such a
way as God seldom uses: For he ran upon him as if a Giant had taken him by the
Neck, and shaken him to pieces; laying before him the dreadful Prospect of his
Sins, which lay so heavy upon him, that he reared for anguish of heart; and often
rose out of his Bed in the Night, through the disquietness of his Spirit: Was
assaulted with great and foul Temptations (horribilia de Deo Terribilia de
fide,) the Buffetings of Satan; and thus continued for many Months; till at
last, his grievous pangs in his New Birth produced two admirable effects in
him; First, an invinceable courage in the cause of God: Secondly, a singular
dexterity in comforting the afflicted Consciences. Ibid.

18. Galiacious being a Noble Spaniard, however of Noble Birth, and Living in
Naples, was persuaded by his Kinsman John Francis Caeserte, to hear Peter
Martyr, then a public Preacher in the City of Naples, was content for once to
do it; more out of Curiosity then a desire to Learn. Peter Martyr at that time,
was showing out of 1 Cor. 2.14. The Weakness and Deceitfulness of the Judgment
of Man's Reason in Spiritual things; and the Power and Efficacy of Gods Word in
those Persons, in whom the Lord works by his Holy Spirit, which he illustrated
by this Comparison.

If a Man (said he) should see Men and Women Dancing together a far off, and
hear no Instrument, he would Judge them Mad, or Foolish: But if he come near
and hear the Music, and marks their measures and motions answerable thereunto;
he will then not only delight to see them, but feel a desire in himself to bear
them Company: Even so, many Men, when they behold in others, a sudden and great
change of their Look, Apparel, Behavior, and whole course of Life, at first
they will impute it to Melancholy, or some Foolish humor: But if they look
nearer; and begin to hear, and perceive the sweet harmony and consort of Gods
Spirit and Word in them; then they change their Opinions, and begin, first to
like them, and that Alteration in them; and afterward feel in themselves a
desire to imitate, and to be of the Number of such Men; who, forsaking the
Worlds Vanities; walk according to the Rule of the Gospel, that they may come
to true and sound sanctification. This comparison by the Grace of God wrote
wonderfully upon Galiacious, insomuch as from that hour he resolved to forsake
his former Pleasures and Practices, and wholly set himself to seek out true
happiness. Ibid.

19. In the Reign of Queen Mary, whilst Dr. Sands (afterward Archbishop of
York) and Mr. Bradford, were Prisoners in the Tower, there was one Bowler a
perverse Papist, that was their Keeper, who used them very Churlishly; but by
their loving and astable Carriage and Conversation, he at last began to mislike
Popery, and to favor the Gospel; yea, he was so far at last wrought upon, that
on a Sabbath Day, when others went to Mass, he carried up a Service Book, a
Manchet, and some Wine; at which time Dr. Sands Administered the Sacrament to
Mr. Bradford and him: And so Bowler became their Son, begotten in their Bonds.
See the Life of Dr. Sands, at the end of my Martyrol. Ibid.

20. Matthias Vessinbechius, a Lawyer, Student at Lovain, coverted by seeing
the sufferings of a Poor Godly Man of that place. Ex. Melch. Ad.

21. The Father of a Prodigal, left as his Death-Bed-Charge to his only Son,
to spend a quarter of an hour every day in retired thinking. His Son did so,
and at last began to think of Religion: When this once seized upon his
thoughts, his meditations increased, so he became sleepless, that Night,
afterward restless, and at last Religious. See a larger Account of this in Dr.
Anneslys Sermon of Conscience, Published in the Morning exercise at Cripple-gate.

22. About the Year 1556. In the Town of Weissenstein in Germany, a Jew, for
Theft that he had committed, was Condemned in this cruel manner to be Executed.
He was hanged by the Feet with his Head downwards betwixt two Dogs, which
constantly snatched, and bit at him: The strangeness of the Torment moved
Jacobus Andreas (a Grave, and Learned Divine) to go to behold it: Coming
thither, he found the poor wretch as he hung, repeating Verses out of the
Hebrew Psalms, wherein he cried out to God for Mercy: Andreas hereupon took
occasion to counsel him, to trust in Jesus Christ the true Savior of Mankind:
The Jew embracing the Christian Faith, requested but this one thing, that he
might be taken down, and be Baptized, tho presently after he were hanged again
(but by the Neck, as Christian Malefactors suffered) which was accordingly
granted to him. Mel. Adam. invit. Ja. Andr.

23. Johannes Isaac, a Jew, was converted, by reading Isa. 53.

24. Lyra, Immanuel, Tromelius, Paulus, Riccius, Lud. Curetus, were converted
Jews.

25. R. Hakkunas Ben Nehunia was Converted by Occasion of the Miracles which he
saw. -- I am Hakkunas, one of them that believe, and have washed my self with
the Holy Waters, and walk in those right ways, being induced thereunto by
Miracles. Hottinger out of Suidas, etc.

26. Elias Levita, before his death, became a Christian, and with thirty more
Jews received Baptism, (but upon what Occasions and Inducements I cannot
learn.) A. C. 1547. Alsted.

27. Eve Cohan was Converted, by occasion of reading the New Testament, which
she found in the Chamber of her Dancing Master, in Holland; but being
threatened, and illtreated by her Mother upon it, married her Master, came over
into England, and was Baptized at London about half a score Years ago.

28. J. Sul, a Turkish Chaous, was born in Constantinople, and for his
Dexterity, in managing Affairs, was employed by the Grand Seignior, in the
Ambassies; once in Venice, once into Russia, and once to the Emperor of
Germany; where he resided at Vienna eighteen Months. He had also Thirty three
Galleys under his Command. This great Man was, by one of his Father's Slaves,
who attended ordinarily upon him, much and frequently importuned to believe
that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, the only true Prophet, greater than
Mahomet. J. Sul, for a long time, refused to hearken to him, and sharply
rebuked him for speaking to him of that Matter; and when yet the Slave would
not be silent, but he did often beat him, kick him, and caused him to be
Bastonadied for his Importunity; all which the Slave endured with much
Patience, and told him, that though he should kill him, he would not be silent
concerning the Matter. And it pleased God, that at last some special Providence
concurring, he was induced to believe, that indeed Jesus Christ, whom the Jews
Crucified, was the Son of God, and now alive in Heaven, having all Power in
Heaven and Earth committed to him. And hereupon he took up a secret Resolution
within himself to forsake his natural Country, and his Father's House, and to
fly to the Christians, to learn the Law of Christ, and to make an open
Profession of his Name, that so his Soul might be saved in the great day of the
Lord, being convinced, that all the Pleasures and Enjoyments of this World,
(whereof he had a large Portion) could not make any Man happy here, nor deliver
him from Death, nor bring him to the Assurance of obtaining Glory in the World
to come: But that owning the Name of Jesus Christ by Faith, and Obedience,
would procure all this.

After he was convinced hereof, and thereupon fully resolved to go into some
Christian Country, he was two whole Years before he could contrive, and find
out a way how he might escape with Safety. For had he been discovered, he, by
their Law, was to be burnt alive. This made him the more wary; at last, God's
Providence so ordered it, that he got Safe into Smyrna, and from thence to
Leghorn.

At Leghorn he was honorably entertained by one of the great Duke's Cousins,
who would have had him baptized; but because he was recommended to the
Archbishop of Paris, and was to be conducted thither by some that came with
him from Smyrna, he excused himself, and rejected that Favor. At Paris he was
received with much Respect, as a Person of Quality, and lodged in St. Lazaro, a
place appointed for entertaining, and Instruction of Proselites, who were
bountifully there entertained.

The Priest that was to instruct and fit him for Baptism, would have imposed
upon his Belief and Practice in these things: That Christ is in the Host. That
an Agnus Dei has a Divine Virtue in it: That the Crucifix is to be worshipped:
That the Pope is a Saint, and Christ's Vicar: That Saints and Images are to be
respected in the Worship of God. But in these Points he did so argue with them,
that they could not convince him, and therefore were forced to let him alone.
And he was much troubled to find himself yoaked with Men of such a Belief; so
that he had thoughts of returning to Constantinople, if the way had been open
to him.

Whilst he lay under these Temptations, Providence so ordered it, that he fell
into Acquaintance with two Arabians, who were become Protestants. By their
means he got notice, that there were (besides the Papists, among whom he was)
other Christians in Paris, whose Faith and Worship was free from Superstition,
and a way was contrived how he should be brought into Acquaintance with them;
for under pretense of walking abroad, to take the Air, he shifted himself of
the company of those which attended him from St. Lazaro, and went with the
Arabians to the House of a Protestant, and was made acquainted with the
Protestant Ministers in Paris, who took special Care of him for the space of
Forty three Days: In which time they instructed him diligently in the Truth,
which also he did heartily embrace. But great Search being made for him, and
they not being able to protect him from the Power of those who would have taken
him into England; where he arrived, March the last, and was entertained kindly;
and after 2. while, had Means of Subsistence provided for him, and was
committed to the Care of Mr. Durie, and Mr. Calandrine, who took a great deal
of pains in instructing him in the Principles of Religion, and in observing his
Conversation: And in Process of time, when he had gained a competent measure of
Knowledge (which he greedily drank) and had given good Evidence of the
Soundness and Sincerity of his Faith, he was put upon making a Consession of
his Faith; which was written in French; and being translated into English, was
publicly read to the whole Congregation. It was subscribed thus:

J. Sul, Chaous, the Slave of my Lord Jesus Christ.

After which, the Minister that was to Baptize him, asked him, Whether he did
not renounce before God, and that Gongregation, the Mohammedan Sect? He
answered, Yea, He did renounce it utterly.

Q. Do you desire to make Profession of the Christian Faith, and to be baptized
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, as a Disciple
of Christ?

A. Yea, It is my earnest desire.

Q. Are you resolved, in the future Course of your Life, to submit to all the
Ordinances of Christ? etc.

A. Yea, It is my sincere Resolution.

After this he was Baptized by the Name of Richard Christophilus. Jan. 30.
1658. in the Church of St. Paul Covent Garden. See the Printed Narrative at
large; or Mr. Clark 's Abridgment of it, in his Examples, Vol. 2. c. 23. p.
120, 121. etc.

29. One Richard White, a Smith, of Wilden-Hall, was a profane Atheistical
Man, and believing that there was no Devils; in his Cups would wish he could
once see the Devil, if there were such a Thing; and that suddenly he changed
his Life, and became a Prosessor of Zeal, and Strictness in Religion, and told
them, that in a clear Moonshine Night, the Devil, in the shape of a great uggly
Man, stood by his Bedside, opening the Curtains, and looking him in the Face,
and at last took up the Blanket, and sometimes smiled on him, then was more
uggly, and after a while (in which he lay in great Terror) the Apparition
vanished, and he was affrighted into the aforesaid Change of Life. Attested by
most credible and Religious Persons, near Wolverhampton, in Staffordshire; who
dwelling in the same-House with Mr. Baxter, often told the same to him. Hist.
Disc. of Apparitions and Witches. p. 59.

30. Serj. Glanvil's Father had a fair Estate, which he intended to settle on
his elder Brother; but he being a vicious young Man, and there appeared no
Hopes of his Recovery, he settled it on him, that was his second Son. Upon his
death, his eldest Son finding that what he had before looked on, as the
threatenings of an angry Father, was now but too certain, became Melancholy, and
that by Degrees wrought so great a Change on him, that what his Father could
not prevail in while he lived, was now effected by the Severity of his last
Will, so that it was now too late for him to change, in hopes of any Estate
that was gone from him. But his Brother observing the reality of the Change,
resolved within himself what to do; so he called him, with many of his Friends
together, to a Feast; and after other Dishes had been served up to the Dinner,
he ordered one that was covered to be set before his Brother, and desired him
to uncover it; which he doing, the Company was surpised to find it full of
Writings; so he told them that he was now to do what he was suit his Father
would have done, if he had lived to see that happy Change, which they now all
saw in his Brother; and therefore he freely restored to him the whole Estate.
Dr. Burnet, in his Life of Sir Matthew Hale, y. 8.

31. Bruno, born in Collogne, and Professor of Philosophy in Paris, about the
year of Christ, 1080. being present at the singing of the Office for his
Fellow-Professor, now dead, (highly reputed for his Holy Life) the dead Corpse
sits up in the Bier, and cries out, I am in God's just Judgments condemned.
These words he uttered three several Days; at which, Bruno was so affrighted,
that a Man, held so Pious, was Damned, began to think what would become of
himself, and many more. Therefore, concluding there was an Hell, took himself,
with six of his Scholars, to a hideous place for dark Woods, high Hills,
Rocks, and wild Beasts, in the Province of Dauphin, near Grenoble, and there
built a Monastery, having obtained the Ground of Hugo, Bishop of Grenoble; the
place called Carthusia, whence his Monks took their Name. See my Book of all
Religions.

32. Luther tells us of two Cardinals, riding in great Pomp to the Council of
Constance, and by the way they heard a Man bitterly weeping and wailing: When
they came to him, they found him intently viewing an uggly Toad; and asked him,
why he wept so bitterly? he told them, his Heart was melted with this
consideration, that God had not made him such a loathsome and deformed
Creature; hoc est quod amare fleo, said he: Whereupon one of them cries out,
Well said the Father, Surgunt indocti, and rapient Coelum, The Unlearned will
arise, and take Heaven, and we, with all our Learning, shall be cast into Hell.
Luther in tertium praecept. See more in this Book.

A Relation of the wonderful Conversion of a Kentish Gentleman, Mr. Studly,
related to me by Mr. Knight, Minister, intimately acquainted with him.
33. His Father was a Lawyer, in Kent, of about 400 l. per annum, who had built
a very fair Mansion House upon the Estate. He was a great Enemy to the Power of
Religion, and an Hater of those that were then called Puritans. His Son, in his
youth, seemed to follow in the same Steps, till the Lord, that had separated
him from the Womb, called him home, which was as follows: The young Man was
at London, and being drunk in some Company; and going in the Night toward his
Lodging, fell into a Cellar, and in the Fall was seized with Horror, and
thought he fell into Hell at that time. It pleased God he took little Harm by
the Fall, but lay there some Hours in a drunken Drowse, his Body being heated
with what he drank, and his Soul awakned, he thought he was actually in Hell.
After that he was come to himself, and was gotten home into Kent, he fell into
Melancholy, betook himself to read and study the Scriptures, and to much
Prayer: Which at length his Father perceived; and fearing he would turn
Puritan, was troubled, and dealt roughly with him, made him dress his Horses,
which he humbly and willing submitted to. And when, at that time, his Father
perceived he sat up late at Night, reading in his Bible, he denied him
Candlelight; But being allowed a fire in his Chamber, he told Mr. Knight he
was wont to lie along, and read by the fire light; and said, that while he was
dressing his Fathers Horses in his Frock, and in that time of reading by the
fire, he had those Comforts from the Lord, and Joys, that he had scarce
experienced since. His Father seeing this means ineffectual, resolved to send
him into France, that by the Airiness of that Country his Melancholy temper
might be cured. He went, and being at his own dispose, by the Lords guiding
him, he placed himself in the House of a Godly Protestant Minister; and between
them, after they were acquainted (and such is the Cognation of saving grace in
Diverse Subjects, that a little time will serve for Christians to be acquainted)
there grew great endearment.

Great progress he made in speaking the Language; and his Father expecting an
Account from the Gentleman with whom he sojourned, of him, of his proficiency
in speaking French, he sent it to him; but soon after had Orders to return
home. And the Father directing it, or he entreating it, the Landlord, with whom
he had sojourned, came into England with him, and both made very welcome at his
Father's House, He not knowing that he was a Minister. At last the Father took
the French Gentleman and his Son at Prayers together, and was angry, paid him
what was due to him, and sent him away. Then his Father having an interest in
(...) Person of Honor, a great Lady at White Hall, whose Courts he as a Lawyer
kept, and his Son by his now past Education, accomplished for such an employ,
prevailed with that Lady to take his Son for her Gentleman, to wait upon her in
her Coach. He thought by a Court Life to drive away his Melancholy (as he
called his Sons seriousness in Religion). The Lady had many Servants, some
given to Swearing and Rudeness, whom this Young Gentleman would take upon him
to reprove, with that Prudence and Gravity, that Sin fell down before him. And
if any of the Servants had been ill employed, and they had heard him coming,
they would say, Let us cease, or be gone, Mr. Studly is coming. After a years
time, his Father waits upon the Lady, to enquire of his Sons carriage. She, not
being instructed to personate any thing, Answered only as it was, That she was
glad she had seen his Sons Face, he had wrought a mighty reformation in her
Family. She, that had formerly been troubled with unruly Servants, by his
prudent carriage, was now as quiet in her House as if she had lived in a
private Family in the Country. After this the Father stormed. What, will he
make Puritans in White Hall? Told the Lady that was no place for him, he would
take him with him, which to her trouble he did. When he had him at home in
Kent, as his last refuge, he thought of Marrying him. And to that end found out
a Match which he thought fit for his Ends, to Stifle that work of Religion in
his Son. He bad him one Night put on his best Clothes in the Morning, and
ordered his Servant to make ready their Horses in the Morning, and himself to
wait upon them. When they were riding on the way, he bad the Man ride before,
and spoke to his Son to this purpose. Son, you have been matter of great grief
to me, and having used much means to reclaim you from this way you are in, to
no purpose, I have one more remedy to apply, in which if you comply with me I
shall settle my Estate upon you, else you shall never enjoy a groat of it; I am
riding to such a Gentleman's House, to whose Daughter I intend to marry you. The
Son said little, knowing that Family to be profane; but went with his Father,
who before had made way there. They were entertained Nobly, he had a sight of
the Young Lady, a great Beauty, and the Young Man much in Love with her. When
they had taken their leaves, on the way his Father asked him, what he thought of
her? He Answered, no Man living but must be taken with such an one, he feared
she would not like him. The Father was glad it had taken, bid him take no care
for that. The Wooing was not long: At Three Weeks End they both came to London
to buy Things for the Wedding. The Father had charged. That in the Time of
Wooing in that Gentleman's House, there should be no Swearing or Debauchery,
lest his Son should be discouraged. Wedding Clothes were bought, and the Day
come the Young Couple were married. At the Wedding-Dinner, at her Father's
House, the Mask was taken off; they fell to drinking Healths, and Swearing,
among their Cups, and, amongst others the Bride Swore an Oath. At which the
Bridegroom, as a man amazed, took occasion to rise from Table, stepped forth, and
went to the Stable, took an Horse, none observing, all were busy within; he
mounted, and Rode away, not knowing what to do. He bewailed himself as he Rode
along, as undone, and deservedly, for that he had been so taken in Love, and
the business so hurried on in design. He said he had at that time restrained
Prayer, and slackened his Communion with God; when as in that Grand Affair of
his Life, he should have been doubly and trebly serious; and so might thank
himself that he was utterly undone. He sometimes thought of riding quite away.
At last being among the Woods, he led his Horse into a Solitary place, tied him
to a Tre^, in his distress, and betook himself to his Prayers and Tears, in
which he spent the Afternoon. The Providence of God had altered his Argument of
Prayer; which was now for the Conversion of his New Married Wife, or he was
undone. This he pressed with Prayers and Tears a great part of that Afternoon,
and did not rise from Prayer without good hope of being heard. At the
Bride-House was hurry enough, Horse and Man (after they missed the Bridegroom)
sent every way. No News of him. He was wrestling, as Jacob once at Peniel. In
the Evening he returned home, and enquiring where his Bride was, went up to
her, and found her in her Chamber pensive enough; She asked him if he had done
well, to expose her to scorn and derision all the day? He entreated her to sit
down upon a Couch there by him, and he would give her an Account of his doing
what he had then done, and tell her the Story of his whole Life, and what the
Lord through Grace had done for him. He went over the Story here
abovementioned, with many Beautiful Particulars (no question here omitted,) not
without great Affection and Tears, the Floodgates of which had been opened in
the Wood. And ever and anon in the discourse would say, Through grace God did
so and so for me. When he had told her his Story over (And by the way, this was
the Apostle Paul's method, by which many were converted, to tell over the Story
of his Conversion) she asked him, what he meant by that word, so often used in
the Relation of his Life, Through Grace, so ignorantly had she been Educated;
And asked him, if he thought there were No grace in God for her, who was so
wretched a stranger to God? Yes, my Dear, says he, there is grace for thee,
and that I have been Praying for this day in the Wood; and God has heard my
Prayer, and seen my Tears, and let us now go together to him about it. Then did
they kneel down by the Couch side, and he Prayed, and such Weeping and
Supplication there was on both sides, that when they were called down to
Supper, they had hardly Eyes to see with, so swelled were they with Weeping. At
Supper the Brides Father, according to his custom, Swore. The Bride immediately
said, Father, I beseech you Swear not. At which the Bridegroom's Father, in a
great Rage, rose from Table: What, (says he) is the Devil in him! Has he made
his Wife a Puritan already? And swore bitterly, He would rather set fire with
his own hands to the Four Conrers of his fair built House, than ever he should
enjoy it. And accordingly he acted, made his Will, gave his Son, when he should
die, Ten Pounds, to cut off his Claim; and gave the Estate to some others, of
whom Dr. Reeves was one. And not long after Died. Dr. Reeves sent for the
Gentleman, paid him his Ten Pounds, told him he had been a Rebellious Son, and
disobliged his Father, and might thank himself. He received the Ten Pounds, and
meekly departed. His Wife (the Match was so huddled up in a design) had no
Portion promised, at least that the Young Man knew of, who relied on his
Father. So that she was also deserted by her Friends. And having Two Hundred
Pounds in her own hand, that hand, that had been given her by a Grandmother,
with that they took and stocked a Farm in Sussex, where Mr. Knight has often
been, and seen her who had been highly bred, in her red Wastcoat, and Milking
her Cows, and was now become the great Comforter and Encourager of her Husband,
exceeding cheerfully. God, says she, has had Mercy on me, and any pains
taking is pleasant to me. There they lived some years with much comfort, and
had the Blessing of Marriage, Diverse Children. After some three years, he was
met in Kent on the Road by one of the Tenants of the Estate, and Saluted by the
Name of Landlord. Alas, said he, I am none o^ your Landlord. Yes, you are, said
he, I know more than you do of the settlement: Your Father, tho a cunning
Lawyer, with all his Wit, could not alienate the Estate from you, whom he had
made Joint-purchaser. My self, and some other Tenants know it, have refused to
pay any Money to Dr. Reeves; I have Sixteen Pounds ready for you in my hands,
which I will pay to your Acquittance, and that will serve you to wage Law with
them. He was amazed at this wonderful Providence, received the Money, sued for
his Estate, in a Term or two recovered it. He that loses his Life for my sake
and the Gospel, shall find it.

His Blessed Wife, in the midst of Blessings, enjoying a Loving Husband, Diverse
fine Children, a plentiful Estate; in the midst of these outward Blessings,
fell into a Way of questioning the truth of her Grace, because of outward
Prosperity. This was her Sin without doubt, for which Mr. Knight rebuked her.
But it was a severe rebuke that the Lord gave her for her unthankfulness; A
fine Boy, about three years old, fell into a Kettle of scalding Wort, and was
taken out by the Mother, and Dyed. This she looked on as the Lords Discipline
for her unthankfulness, and was instructed. -- This Relation was sent me by the
Reverend Mr. Singleton, now living in Hogsdon-Square, near the City of London:
And he received it from Mr. Knight, who was intimately acquainted with Mr.
Studly, as was hinted before.

34. One Nicholas West, born at Putney in Surrey, being a Student in
Kings-College in Cambridge, proved a Rakehel and very Wicked, for something
crossing him in the College, he could not find how to be revenged but by
setting on fire the Master's Lodgings, part whereof he burnt to the ground, and
immediately after he left the College, and lived very loosely; but soon after,
by the influence of the Grace of God, and good Advice, he seasonably retrenched
his Wildness, turned hard Student, and became an excellent Scholar, and after
smaller promotions, he was at last made Bishop of Ely, after which he became a
worthy Benefactor to that College, and rebuilt the Master's Lodgings, which he
before had caused to be burnt: He Died, An. Dom. 1533. Memorands of Kings
College. Those bodies are usually the most Healthful, that break out in their
Youth; and many times the Souls of many prove the sounder, for having vented
themselves in their younger days; commonly none are greater Enemies to Vice,
than such as have formerly been the Slaves of it; a certain blackness in the
Cradle has been observed to give beginning and rise unto the most perfect
Beauties; and there are no sort of Men, that have shined in greater Glory in
the world, than such whose first days have been sullied and a little overcast.

35. Henry the fifth, tho while Prince, was Wild, and Companion of Riotous
Persons, yet coming to the Crown, the first thing he did was the Banishment of
all such, his old Companions, Ten Miles from his presence.

36. Paphnutius is reported to convert a Harlot by this means: Pretending Love,
he desired to be brought into the most private Room she had, which she brought
him into, but still he found fault, and complained to her, that he was afraid
some Eye would see him; to which she Answered, None can see thee here but only
God. To which he replied, And do thou think that God sees thee, and yet wilt
play the Harlot? Which he so enforced, that it prevailed upon her to a change.
Chetwoods Hist. Collect.

Wonderful were the Conversions of the Indians in America, under the Ministry
of the Reverend Mr. Eliot, the first Preacher of the Gospel amongst 'em. I
shall give you the Narrative of these Conversious, as I sind it drawn up in Mr.
Eliot's Life, written by Mr. Cotton Mather, which is as follows, viz.

37. The Indians, that had felt the Impressions of Mr. Eliot's Ministry, were
quickly distinguished by the Name of Praying- Indians; and these Praying
Indians, as quickly were for a more decent, and English way of Living, and they
desired a more fixed Cohabitation At several Places did they now combine and
settle: But the place of greatest Name among their Towns, is that of Natick.
Here 'twas, that in the year 1651. those that had heretofore lived like the
wild Beasts in the Wilderness, now compacted themselves into a Town; and they
first applied themselves to the forming of their Civil Government. Our general
Court, notwithstanding their exact Study to keep these Indians very sensible of
their being subject unto the English Empire, yet had allowed them their smaller
Courts, wherein they might govern their own smaller Cases and Concerts after
their own particular Modes, and might have their Town Orders (if I may call
them so) peculiar to themselves. With respect hereunto, Mr. Eliot, on a Solemn
Fast, made a public Vow, That seeing these Indians were not prepossessed with
any Forms of Government, he would instruct them into such a Form as we had
written in the Word of God, that so they might be a People in all things ruled
by the Lord. Accordingly he expounded unto them the Eighteenth Chapter of
Exodus; and then they chose Rulers of Hundreds, of Fifties, of Tens; and
therewithal entered into this Covenant.

We are the Sons of Adam; We and our forefathers have a long time been lost in
our Sins; but now the Mercy of the Lord begins to find us out again;
therefore the Grace of Christ helps us; we do give our selves and our
Children unto God, to be his People. He shall rule us in all our Affairs; the
Lord is our Judge; the Lord is our Lawgiver; the Lord is our King; he will
save us; and the wisdom which God has taught us in his Book shall guide us. Oh
Jehovah! teach us Wisdom; send thy Spirit into our Hearts; take us to be thy
People, and let us take thee to be our God.

Such an Opinion about the Perfection of the Scripture had he, that he thus
expressed himself upon this Occasion; God will bring Nations into Distress and
Perplexity, that so they may be forced unto the Scriptures; all Governments
will be shaken, that Men may be forced at length to pitch upon that firm
Foundation, The Word of God.

The little Towns of these Indians being pitched upon this Foundation, they
utterly abandoned that Polygamy which had heretofore been common among them.
They made severe Laws against Fornication, Drunkenness, and Sabbath-breaking,
and other Immoralities; which they began to lament after the Establishment of a
Church Order among them, and after the several Ordinances and Privileges of a
Church Communion. The Churches of New England have usually been very strict in
their Admissions to Church Fellowship, and required very signal Demonstrations
of a Repenting and a Believing Soul, before they thought Men fit Subjects to be
entrusted with the Rights of the Kingdom of Heaven. But they seemed rather to
augment than abate their usual Strictness, when the Examination of the Indians
was to be performed. A day was therefore set apart, which they called
Natootomeuhtenicusuk, or a Day of asking Questions, when the Ministers of the
adjacent Churches, assisted with all the best Inrerpreters that could be had,
publicly examined a good number of these Indians, about their Seize,
both in Knowledge, and in Virtue. And notwithstanding the great satisfaction
then received, our Churches being willing to proceed surely, and therefore
slowly, in raising them up to a Church State, which might be comprehended in
our Consociations, the Indians were afterward called in considerable
Assemblies, convened for that purpose, to make open Confession of their Faith
in God and Christ, and of the Efficacy, which his Word had upon them for their
Conversion to him; which Confessions being taken in Writing from their Mouths,
by able Interpreters, were scanned by the People of God, and found much
Acceptance with them.

I need pass no further Censure upon them, than what is given by my
Grandfather, the well-known Richard Mather, in an Epistle of his, published on
this occasion; says he, There is so much of Gods Work among them, as that I
cannot but count it a great Evil; yea, a great Injury to God and his Goodness,
for any to make light of it. To see and hear Indians open their Months, and
lifting up their Hands and Eyes in Prayer, to the living God, calling on him by
his Name Jehovah, in the Meditation of Jesus Christ, and this for a good while
together; to see and hear them exhorting one another from the Word of God; to
see and hear them confessing the Name of Christ Jesus, and their own
Sinfulness; sure, this is more than usual. And though they spoke in a Language,
of which, many of us understood but little, yet we that were present that day,
saw and beard them perform the Duties mentioned, with such grave and sober
Countenances, with such comely Reverence in their Gesture, and their whole
Carriage, and with such plenty of Tear^ trickling down the Cheeks of some of
them, as did argue to us, that they spoke with the holy Fear of God, and it
much affected our Hearts.

At length was a Church State settled among them: They entered, as our Churches
do, into an Holy Covenant, wherein they gave themselves, first unto the Lord,
and then unto one another, to attend the Rules and Helps, and expect the
Blessings of the Everlasting Gospel; and Mr. Eliot, having a Mission from the
Church of Roxbury, unto the Work of the Lord Christ, among the Indians,
conceived himself sufficiently authorized unto she performing of all Church.
work about them; grounding it on Acts 13.1, 2, 3, 4. and he accordingly
administered, first the Baptism, and then the Supper of the Lord unto them. Thus
far Mr. Cotton Mather.

I shall next insert the Dying Speeches of several of the Converted Indians,
formerly published by the Reverend Mr. Eliot. -- They are delivered to me by a
Friend that brought them with him from Boston, in New England, and are so great
a Rarity, that 'twas with difficulty he procured them in New England, where
they were Printed; neither was there a Copy of 'em to be found in London. Mr.
Eliot begins thus, Viz.

Here be but a few of the Dying Speeches and Counsels of such Indians as died
in the Lord. It is an humbling to me that there be no more; it was not in my
Heart to gather them, but Major Gookins hearing some of them rehearsed, he
first moved that Daniel should gather them, in the Language as they were
spoken, and that I should Translate them into English; and here is presented
what was done that way. These things are Printed, not so much for Publishment,
as to save Charge of Writing out of Copys for those that did desire them.

JOHN ELIOT.

38. Waban was the first that received the Gospel; our first Meeting was at his
House; the next time we met, he had gathered a great Company of his Friends to
hear the Word, in which he has been steadfast: When we framed our selves in
order, in way of Government, he was chosen a Ruler of Fifty; he has approved
himself to be a good Christian in Church Order, and in Civil Order, he has
approved himself to be a Zealous, Faithful, and Steadfast Ruler to his Death.
His Speech is as follows. I now rejoice, though I be now a dying; great is my
Affliction in this World, but I hope that God does so afflict me, only to try
my praying to God in this World, whether it be true and strong, or not, but I
hope God does gently call me to Repentance, and to prepare to come unto him;
therefore he lays on me great pain and affliction, though my Body be almost
broken by Sickness, yet I desire to remember thy Name. Oh my God, untll I die,
I remember those Words, Job 19.23, to 28. Oh that my Words were now written! Oh
that they were printed in a Book; that they were graven with an Iron Pen and
Lead, in a Rock, for ever. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth. And though after my Skin Worms
destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh I shall see God, etc.

I desire not to be troubled about Matters of this World; a little I am
troubled; I desire you all, my Brethren, and you my Children, do not greatly
weep and mourn for me in this World; I am now almost dying, but see that you
strongly pray to God, and do you also prepare and make ready to die, for every
one of you must come to dying: Therefore confess your Sins, every one of you,
and believe in Jesus Christ; I believe that which is written in the Book of
God. Consider truly, and repent, and believe; then God will pardon all your
great and many Sins.

God can pardon all your Sins as easily as one; for God's free Mercy and Glory
do fill all the World. God will in no wise^ forget those that in this World do
sincerely repent and believe: Verily, this is Love, oh my God. Therefore I
desire that God will do this for me, though in my Body I am full of Pain: As for
those that died before we prayed to God, I have no hope about them, now I
believe that God has called us for Heaven; and there in Heaven are many
Believers Souls abiding. Therefore I pray you, do not overmuch grieve for me,
when I die in this world, but make your selves ready to die, and follow me, and
there we shall see each other in ^^^^al Glory; in this World we live but a
little while; therefore we must be always preparing, that we may be ready to
die. Therefore, oh my God, I humbly pray, receive my Soul, by thy free Mercy in
Jesus Christ, my Savior and Redeemer; for Christ has died for me, and for all
my Sins in this World committed.

My great God has given me long Life, and therefore I am now willing to die.

Oh Jesus Christ help my Soul, and save my Soul; I believe that my Sickness
does not arise, out of the Dust, nor comes at peradventure, but God sends
it, Job. 5.6, 7.

By this Sickness God calls me to repent of all my Sins, and to believe in
Christ; now I confess my self a great Sinner; Oh pardon me, and help me, for
Christ his sake.

Lord, thou call me with a double Calling, sometimes by Prosperity and
Mercy, sometimes by Affliction. And now thou call me by Sickness, but let me
not forget thee, O my God: For those that forget thy Name, thou will forsake
them. As Psalm 9.17. All that forget God shall be cast into Hell; therefore let
me not forget thee, Oh my God.

I give my Soul to thee, Oh my Redeemer, Jesus Christ; pardon all my Sins, and
deliver me from Hell, Oh do thoa help me against Death, and then I am willing
to die; and when I die, (...) help me, and receive me. In so saying he died.

39. Pla^bohon, He was the second Man next Waban, what received the Gospel; he
brought with him to the second Meeting at Wabay's House, many; when we formed
them into Government, he was chosen Ruler of Ten; when the Church at
Hassenamessit was gathered, he was called to be a Ruler then in that Church;
when that was scattered by the War, they came back to Natick Church, so many as
survived, and at Natick he died. His Speech as follows. I rejoice, and am
content and willing to take up my Sorrows and Sickness; many are the Years of
my Life; long have I lived, therefore now I look to die: But I desire to
prepare my self to die well. I believe God's Promise, that he will for ever
save all that believe in Jesus Christ. Oh Lord Jesus help me; deliver me, and
save my Soul from Hell, by thine own Blood, which thou have shed for me, when
thou did die for me, and for all my Sins: Now help me sincerely to confess
all my Sins; Oh pardon all my Sins: I now beg in the Name of Jesus Christ a
Pardon for all my Sins; for thou, O Christ, art my Redeemer and Deliverer: Now
I hear God's Word, and I do rejoice in what I hear; though I do not see, yet I
hear and rejoice, that God has confirmed for us a Minister in this Church of
Natick, he is our Watchman. And all you People deal well with him, both Men,
Women and Children; hear him every Sabbath Day, and make strong your praying
to God; and all you of Hassaunemesue, restore your Church and Praying to God
there.

Oh Lord help me to make ready to die, and then receive my Soul; I hope I shall
die well by the help of Jesus Christ: Oh Jesus Christ deliver and save my Soul
in everlasting Life in Heaven, for I do hope thou art my Savior: Oh Jesus
Christ. So he died.

40. Old Jacob, He was among the first that prayed to God; he had so good a
Memory, that he could rehearse the whole Catechize, both Questions and Answers,
when he gave thanks at Meat, he would sometimes only pray the Lord's Prayer;
his Speech is as follows. My Brethren, now hear me a few Words; stand fast
all you People in your praying to God, according to that Word o God, 1 Cor.
16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith; quit you like Men, and be strong in
the Lord. Especially, you that are Rulers and Teachers: Fear not the Face of
Man when you Judge in a Court together; help one another, agree together: Be
not divided one against another; remember the Parable of ten Brethren that held
together; they could not be broken, nor overcome; but when they divided one
against another, then they were easily overcome; and all you that are Rulers,
judge right Judgment; for you do not judge for Man, but for God in your Courts,
2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Therefore judge in the fear of God.

Again, You that are Judges, see that ye have not only Humane Wisdom, for Man's
Wisdom is in many things contrary to the Wisdom of God, counting it to be
foolishness. Do not judge that right which only seems to be right, and
consider, Matthew. 7.1, 2. Judge right, and God will be with you, when you so do.

Again, I say to you all the People; make strong your Praying to God, and be
constant in it. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Pray continually.

Again, lastly, I say to you Daniel, our Minister, be strong in your Work. As
Mat. 5.14, 16. You must bring Light into the World, and make it to shine, that
all may see your good Work, and glorify your Heavenly Father.

Every Preacher that makes strong his Work, does bring precious Pearls: As
Matthew. 13.52. And thou shall have Everlasting Life in so doing.

I am near to Death; I have lived long enough; I am about 90 Years old, I now
desire to die in the presence of Christ. Oh Lord, I commit my Soul to thee.

41. Antony, He was among the first that prayed to God; he was studious to read
the Scriptures and the Catechism, so that he learned to be a Teacher, but after
the Wars he became a Lover of strong Drink, was often admonished, and finally
cast out from being a Teacher. His Dying Speeches follow. I am a Sinner, I do
now confess it, I have long prayed to God, but it has been like an Hypocrite;
though I was a confessing Churchmember, yet like an Hypocrite; though I was a
Teacher, yet like a Backsliding Hypocrite, I was often drunk; Love of strong
Drink is a lust I could not overcome; though the Church did often admonish me,
and I confessed, and they ^orgave me, yet I fell again to the same Sin, though
Major Gookins and Mr. Eliot often admonished me; I confessed, they were willing
to forgive me, yet I fell again.

Now Death calls for me, and I desire to prepare to die well: I say to you
Daniel, beware that you love not strong Drink, as I did, and was thereby
undone: Strengthen your Teaching in, and by the word of God; take heed that you
defile not your work, as I did; for I defiled my Teaching by Drunkenness.

Again, I say to you, my Children, forsake not praying to God; go not to
strange places, where they pray not to God, but strongly pray to God as long as
you live; both you and your Children. Now I desire to die well, though I have
been a Sinner; I remember that word that says, That though your Sins be many and
great, yet God will pardon the Penitent, by Jesus Christ our Redeemer. Oh Lord,
save and deliver me by Jesus Christ, in whom I believe; send thy Angels when I
die, to bring my poor Soul to thee, and save my poor sinful Soul in thy
Heavenly Kingdom.

42. Nehemiah; this very hopeful young Man going out to hunt with a Companion,
who fell out with him, and stabbed him mortally, and killed him: A little was
gathered up, spoke by him, as follows: I am ready to die now, but knew not of
it, even now when I went out of my door; I was only going to hunt; but a wicked
Man has killed me, I see that word is true, He that is well to day, may be
dead to morrow: He that laughed yesterday may sorrow to day. My Misery overtook
me in the Woods. No Man knows the day and time, when his Misery comes.

Now I desire patiently to take up my Cross and Misery; I am but a Man, and
must feel the Cross. Oh Christ Jesus help me; thou art my Redeemer, my Savior,
and my Deliverer; I confess my self a Sinner; Lord Jesus pardon all my Sins, by
thy own Blood, when thou diedst for us; O Christ Jesus save me from Hell: Save
my Soul in Heaven; Oh help me, help me. So he died. The wicked Murderer is fled.

43. John Owussumug sen, He was a Young Man when they began to pray to God, he
did not at the present join with them, he would say to me, I will first see
into it, and when I understand it, I will answer you; he did, after a while
enter into the Civil Covenant, but was not entered into the Church Covenant
before he dyed, he was propounded to join to the Church, but was delayed, he
being of a quick passionate temper, some witty littigations prolonged it, I
till his Sickness, but had he recovered, the Church was satisfied to have
received him, he sinished well. His Speech as follows: Now I must shortly
die; I desired that I might live; I sought for Medicines to cure me; I went to
every English Doctor, at Dadham, Medfield, Concord, but none could cure me in
this World.

But Oh Jesus Christ, do thou heal my Soul, now I am in great pain, I have no
hope of living in this World; a whole Year I have been afflicted; I could not
go to the public Sabbath worship to hear God's Word; I did greatly love to go
to the Sabbath Worship.

Therefore I now say to all you, Men, Women and Children, Love much, and
greatly to keep the Sabbath, I have been now long hindered from it, and
therefore now I find the worth of it; I say unto you all, my Sons and Children,
do not go into the Woods among non-praying People, abide constantly at Natick:
You my Children and all my Kindred, strongly pray to God: Love and Obey the
Rulers, and submit unto their Judgment, hear diligently your Ministers: Be
obedient to Major Gookins and to Mr. Eliot, and Daniel.

I am now almost dead, and I exhort you strongly to Love each other, be at
peace, and be ready to forgive each other.

I desire now rightly to prepare my self to dye, for God has given me warning
a whole year, by my Sickness. I confess I am a Sinner: My heart was proud, and
thereby all Sins were in my heart, I knew that by Birth I was a Sechim, I got
Oxen, and Cart, and Plough, like an English Man, and by all these things my
heart was Proud.

Now God calls me to Repentance, by my Sickness this whole Year. Oh Christ
Jesus help me, that according as I make my confession, so through thy grace I
may obtain a pardon of all my Sins: For thou Lord Jesus did dye (...) us, to
deliver us from Sin. I hear and believe, that thou have dyed for many:
Therefore I desire to cast away all Worldly hindrances, my Lands and Goods, I
cast them by they cannot help me now, I desire truly to prepare to dye: My
Sons, I hope Christ will help me to dye well: Now I call you my Sons, but in
Heaven we shall all be Brethren, this I Learned in the Sabbath Worship, all
miseries in this World upon Believers, shall have only Joy and Blessing in
Jesus Christ: Therefore Oh Christ Jesus help me in all my miseries, and deliver
me, for I trust in thee; and save my Soul in thy Heavenly Kingdom, now behold
me and look upon me who am dying. So he dyed.

44. John Speen, he was among the first that prayed to God, he was a diligent
Reader, he became a Teacher, and carried well for Diverse years, until the Sin
of strong drink did infect us, and then he was so far infected with it, that he
was deservedly laid aside from Teaching. His last Speeches were as follows:
Now I dye, I defire you all my Friends, forgive him that hurt me, for the word
of God says in Mat. 6.3, 4. Forgive them that have done you wrong, and your
Heavenly Father will forgive you, but if you do not forgive them, your Heavenly
Father will not forgive you; Therefore I entreat you all my Friends, forgive
him that did me wrong, ( for John Nunusquanit beat him and hurt him much a
little before his Sickness) now I desire to dye well, now I confess all my
Sins, I am a Sinner, especially I loved strong Drink too well, and sometimes I
was mad drunk, tho I was a Teacher, I did offend against praying to God, and
spoiled my Teaching; all these my Sins and Drunkeness, Oh I pray you all
forgive me, Oh Jesus Christ help me now, and deliver my Soul, and help me that
I may not go to Hell, for thou O Christ art my Deliver and Savior, Oh God help
me, Lord, tho I am a Sinner, Oh Lord do not forget me. And so he dyed.

45. Black James, He was in former times, reputed by the English to be a Pawaw,
but I cannot tell this, I know he renounced and repented of all his former
ways, and desired to come to Christ, and pray to God, and died well, as appears
in what follows. Now I say, I almost dye, but you all my Sons, and all you
that pray at Chabanukong komu^, take heed, that you leave not off to pray to
God, for praying to God is exceeding good, for praying to God is the way that
will bring you to the Heavenly Kingdom; I believe in Christ, and we must follow
his Steps.

Especially you my Sons, beware of Drunkenness, I desire you may stand fast in
my room, and Rule well, I am almost now dead, and I desire to dye well, Oh Lord
Jesus Christ help me, and deliver my Soul to die well. So he died.

CHAP. XIX. Strange ways of Restraining Persons from Sin.
THE Doctrine of the Irresistibleness of Gods Decrees, was so far ventilated in
the last Age, that the Letters of Accord between the Judicious Bishop
Sanderson, and the Learned Dr. Hammond, sufficed to confirm me, (and I think
they may be sufficient for others) in this Opinion, viz. That those whom God
has Elected to everlasting Life, shall be so far taken care of, that such
means shall be allowed them, and such methods used toward them, that they
shall not fail of Inheriting Everlasting Life. For whom God Loves, he Loves
unto the end: And all things shall work together for their Good, and for the
promoting of their Salvation. But on the other hand: (as the Learned Mr.
Willam's observes in his Sermon to Youth). Vanity unhealed is of an improving
Nature; and there is no bad Child, but grows worse: Sin is not a Stream that
grows empty, or a Root that dies by mere time. God knows, we have had
experience of that. Alas, how does Villainy grow with Years! The Child that
began with few Sins, grows up to many Sins; insomuch that we have some Young
Men before eighteen, have committed as great Sins as the Man of eighty. Youth
enters with lesser Sins, and proceeds to grosser Sins: We have many Young
People that seem to abound in Wickedness, as they improve in Age; as if they
grew older only that they may grow Viler. One Sin brings on another, by the
lesser thou art sitted for a greater. Sinful Habits are strengthened by Sinful
Acts: And fear and shame for Sin wear off, yea, are even extinguished by a
course of Sin. Lust may be strongly Rooted before old Age; and I sear it is so
with abundance of Youths: Is it not so with some of you? Did not some of you
blush at a little Sin, and now thou can mock at great ones! Are there not
some amongst you that once dared not to tell a small Lie, and now you can lie
all sorts? Are there none here that trembled when they swear a little Oaeth,
and now can Swear at the Bliodiest rate, and add Blasphemy and Cursing to their
Oaths! Sirs, did not some of you feel a check for a light Act, and now you can
commit Fornication and Uncleanness, without any inward Rebuke! It was hard to
bring thee to pilfer a P^n^y, and now thou can steal Shillings and Pounds: It
was much ado that thou could endure to be Drunk in the Night, but now thou
can do it openly, and Glory in it. Thou durst not formerly have neglected a
Sermon, and thou must pray by thy self, but now, alas, poor Creature! Thou
can play away a whole Sabbath, and spead Weeks without Prayer, without one
serious Prayer. Thus far Mr. Wilkins. I now proceed to give Instances of
Persons restrained from Sin.

1. St. Augustine after his conversion, being grievously vexed with inward
conflicts against his corrupt and remanent affections to Sin, intentively
musing and meditating with himself what to do more then he had done, Viz. By
purposes, vows, watchings, fasting, etc. heard a Voice saying, in te stas, et
non stas; whereupon addressing him to Jesus Christ in an humble manner by
faithful and fervent Prayer, he found present releif, and was much strengthened
with the grace of Gods Spirit in the inner Man. Ibid.

2 Mr. Dod, being late at Night in his Study, was strongly moved (tho at an
unseasonable hour) to visit a Gentleman of his Acquaintance; and not knowing
what might be the design of Providence therein, he obeyed, and went; when he
came to the house, after a few knocks at the Door, the Gentleman himself came
to him; and asked him, whether he had any business to him: Mr. Dod Answered, no;
but that he could not be quiet till he had seen him. O Sir, (replied the
Gentleman,) you are sent of God at this hour, for just now (and with that,
takes the halter out of his Pocket,) I was going to destroy my self. And thus
was the mischief prevented. Mr. Flavel's Div. Conduct. p. 98.

3. Mr. Bolton, whilst he was in Oxford, had familiar acquaintance with Mr.
Anderton, a good Scholar, but a strong Papist, who knowing Mr. Bolton's good
parts, and perceiving that he was in some out-ward wants, took this Advantage,
and used many Arguments to persuade him to be reconciled to the Church of Rome,
and to go over with him to the English Seminary, assuring him he should be
furnished with all necessaries, and have Gold enough. Mr. Bolton being at that
time, poor in mind and purse, accepted the motion, and a day and place was
appointed in Lancashire, where they should meet and take Shipping, and be gone:
But Mr. Anderton came not, and so he escaped the Snare. See the Life of Mr.
Bolton.

4. Thus Basil was along time exercised with a violent Headache, which (as he
observed) was used by Providence to prevent lust.

5. Dela Cerda says, that Albertine a Jesuit told him, that a Young Man came
hastily to him to confess; and told him; O Sir, says he, I could not stay, so
strange a thing has befallen me! I and my Companion were resolved, in Revenge
against one that had wronged me, to go after him, into the Fields, and kill
him: And while I was setting my Pastol in order, that I might not miss, a
Beautiful Young Man stood by me, and asked me what I was about? And when I
denied to tell him, he told me, that he knew my purpose, and dissuaded me; and,
in short, did so open the suflerings of Christ for his Enemies, and what Sins
he had forgiven us, and bound us to forgive one another, That I was melted into
Tears, and my mind changed; and the Young Man Vanished away. (An Angel, if
true.) Hist. Disc. of Apparitions and Witches, p. 162.

CHAP. XX. Strange ways of Promoting Salvation.
THE ways of the Almighty, and his Dealings with particular Men, (as well as
those of his common Providence and Judgments) are so strange, and filled with
variety of Spiritual stratagems; that we may well say of him, His Paths are in
the deep waters, and his Footsteps are not known. The Woman of Samaria drawing
water, and giving to our Savior to Drink, received the water of Everlasting
Life from him, and drank to her Neighbors likewise of the Spiritual Drink.
Zacheus climbing a Sycamore, out of Curiosity to see Jesus, Jesus saw him and
invited himself to his House. S. Paul was knocked down in the midst of his
Sinful Career, and made to do obeisance at the Feet of that Jesus he was going
to persecute.

1. Origin, after he had been prevailed upon to offer incense in the Idol
Temple, being Excommunicated by the Church, going into Judea, being well known
there, for his Expositions was entreated by the Ministers at Jerusalem, with
much importunity, to bestow a Sermon; he stood up, took the Bible, opened it,
and at the very first casting his Eye upon that Text, Psalm. 50.16. Unto the
ungodly said God, why do thou Preach my Laws? etc. He presently shut the
Book, wept bitterly, the People also weeping with him, and was able to say no
more. After this, he wandered up and down in great grief of Conscience, and
wrote his Lamentation. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. S. Augustine going on a time to hear S. Ambrose, was accidently rebuked by
some words of the Sermon, or lecture that he heard, which he applied to
himself, as designed particularly against him. Ibid. See the Chapter of strange
Conversions.

3. It is Noted, by Melchior Adam in the Life of Junius, how very an Atheist he
was grown in his younger years; but in order to his Conversion to God, first, a
wonderful preservation of his Life in a public tumult at Lions in France must
make way, which forces from him the Acknowledgement of a Deity. Then his Father
sends for him home, and with much gentleness persuades him to read the
Scriptures; he lights upon the first of John, and with it he feels a Divine
Supernatural Majesty and Power seizing his Soul, which brought him over by a
complete Conversion to Jesus Christ. Thus, as the Woman of Tekoa told David,
does God devise means to bring back his Banished. Flav. Divine Conduct, p. 61.

4. Lavater tells us, that many Spanish Soldiers, going into the Wars of
Germany, were there converted to Christ, by falling into the Cities and Towns,
where Godly Ministers and Christians were. Ibid.

5. A Minister of Wales, who had two Livings, but took little care of either,
being at a Fair, bought something at a Pedlars standing, and rent off a Leaf of
Mr. Perkin's Catechism to wrap it in, and reading a line or two in it, God set
it home so, as it did the work Ibid.

6. The Marriage of a Godly Man into a Carnal Family, has been ordered by
Providence, for the Conversion and Salvation of many therein. Thus we read, in
the Life of that renowned English worthy, Mr. John Bruen, that in his second
Match it was agreed, that he should have one Years Diet in his Mother-in-Laws
House: During his abode there that year (says Mr. Clark) the Lord was pleased
by his means, Graciously to work upon her Soul, as also upon his Wifes Sister,
and half Sister, their Brothers, Mr. William and Thomas Fox, with one or two of
the Servants in that Family. Ibid. p. 62.

7. Augustine once Preaching to his Congregation, forgot the Argument which
first he proposed, and fell upon the Error of the Manichees, beside his first
intention: By which discourse, he converted one Firmus his Auditor; who fell
down at his Feet Weeping, and Confessing he had lived a Manichee many Years.
Possidonius in vita Augustini. c. 15. Flavel's Div. Conduct. p. 63.

8. I knew one, says Mr. Flavel, who going to Preach, took up another Bible,
than that he designed, in which, not only missing the Notes, but the Chapter
also in which his Text by, was put to some loss thereby: But after a short
pause, he resolved to speak to any other Scripture that might be presented to
him, and accordingly read that Text, 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack
concerning his Promise, etc. And tho he had nothing prepared; yet the Lord
helped him to speak both Methodically and Pertinently from it: By which
discourse, a Gracious change was wrought upon one in that Congregration, who
has since given good Evidence of a sound Conversion, and Acknowledged this
Sermon to be that first and only means thereof. Mr. Flavel's Div. Conduct. p.
63.

9. One, who had lived many Years in a Town where Christ had been as clearly,
and as long Preached, as in any Town of England, when he was about Seventy Six
Years of Age, went to visit a Sick Neighbor. A Christian Friend of mine (says
mine Author) came to see him also, and finding this Old Man there; whom he
Judged to be one that lived upon his own Stock: Civility, good Works, etc. He
purposely fell into that Discourse, to show how many Persons lived upon their
Duties, but never came to Christ. The Old Man sitting by the Bedside, heard
him, and God was pleased to convince him, that he was such a Parson, who had
lived upon himself without Christ to that day; and would say afterward, had I
died before Threescore and Sixteen, I had perished, for I knew not Christ. Mr.
Firmin in his Real Christian, p. 97, 98.

10. In the Year 1673. There came into this Port (says Mr. Flavel) meaning
Dartmouth, a Ship of Poole, in her return from Virginia; in which Ship was one
of that place, a lusty Young Man of Twenty Three Years of Age, who was a
Surgeon in the Ship. This Person in the Voyage fell into a deep Melancholy,
which the Devil greatly improved to serve his own design for the ruin of this
Poor Man; however, it pleased God to restrain him from any attempts upon his
own Life, until he arrived here. But shortly after his arrival, upon the Lords
Day early in the morning (being in Bed with his Brother) he took a Knife
prepared for that purpose, and cut his own Throat, and withal leapt out of the
Bed, and tho the wound was deep and large, yet thinking it might not soon
enough dispatch his wretched Life, desperately thrust it into his Stomach; and
so lay wallowing in his own Blood, till his Brother awaking, made a cry for
help: Hereupon a Physician and a Surgeon coming in, found the wound in his
Throat mortal, and all they could do at present, was only to stitch it and
apply a Plaster, with design, rather to enable him to speak for a little
while, than with any Expectation of cure; for before that, he breathed through
the wound, and his Voice was Inarticulate.

In this condition I found him that morning, and apprehending him to be within
a few Minutes of Eternity, I labored to work upon his Heart the sense of his
condition, telling him, I had but little time to do any thing for him, and
therefore desired him to let me know, what his own apprehensions of his present
condition were: He told me, he hoped in God for Eternal Life; I replied, that I
feared his hopes were ungrounded, for that the Scripture tell us, No Murderer
has Eternal Life abiding in him, but that was self-murder, the grossest of
all murders: And insisting upon the Aggravation and Heinousness of the Fact, I
perceived his vain Confidence began to fall; and some Moltings of Heart
appeared in him. He then began to lament with many Tears, his Sin and Misery,
and asked me, if there might yet be hope for one that had destroyed himself,
and shed his own Blood? I replied, the Sin indeed is great, but not
unpardonable; and if the Lord gave him Repentance unto Life, and Faith, to
apply Jesus Christ, it should be certainly pardoned to him: And finding him
unacquainted with these things, I opened to him the Nature and Necessity of
Faith and Repentance, which he greedily sucked in, and with great Vehemence
cried to God, that he would work them upon his Soul, and entreated me also to
pray with him, and for him, that it might be so.

I prayed with him, and the Lord thawed his Heart exceedingly. The Duties of
the Day necessitating me to leave him, I briefly summed up what was most
necessary in my parting counsel to him, and took my leave, never expecting to
see him any more in this World. But beyond my own and all Men's Expectation, he
continued all that day, and panted most ardently after Christ Jesus; no
Discourses pleased him, but Christ and Faith; and in this Frame I found him in
the Evening. He rejoiced greatly to see me again, and entreated me to continue
my Discourses upon these Subjects; and after all, told me, -- Sir, the Lord
has given me Repentance for this Sin; yea, and for every other Sin. I see the
evil of Sin now, so as I never saw it before. Oh I loath my self; I am a very
vile Creature in my own Eyes; I do also believe; Lord help my unbelief; I am
heartily willing to take Christ upon his own Terms. One thing troubles me; I
doubt this bloody Sin will not be pardoned. Will Jesus Christ (said he) apply
his Blood to me, that have shed my own? I told him, Christ shed his Blood even
for them, that with wicked Hands had shed the Blood of Christ; and that was a
Sin of deeper Guilt than this. Well (said he) I will cast my self upon Christ;
let him do by me what he pleases. And so I parted with him that Night.

Next Morning the Wounds were to be opened, and then the Opinion of the
Chyrurgeon were, he would immediately expire.

Accordingly, at his Desire, I came that Morning, and found him in a most
serious frame. I prayed with him, and then the Wound in his Stomach was opened,
but by this time the Ventricle it self was swollen out of the Orifice of the
Wound, and lay like a live discolored Tripe upon his Body, and was also cut
through; so that all concluded it was impossible for him to live; however they
stitched the Wound in the Stomach, enlarged the Orifice, and fomented it, and
wrought it again into his Body, and so stitching the Skin, left him to the
Dispose of Providence.

But so it was, that both the deep VVound in his Throat, and this in his
Stomach healed; and the more dangerous VVound Sin had made upon his Soul, was,
I trust, effectually healed also. I spent many Hours with him in that Sickness,
and after his return home, received this Account from Mr. Samuel Hardy, a
Minister in that Town: Part whereof I shall Transcribe.

Dear Sir, I was much troubled at the sad Providence in your Town, but did much
rejoice, that he fell into such Hands for his Body and Soul. You have taken
much Pains with him, and I hope to good purpose. I think, if ever a great and
thorough Work were done such a way, it is now; and if never the like, I am
persuaded now it is. Never grow weary of such good Works. One such Instance is
(methinks) enough to make you to abound in the work of the Lord all your days.
Flavel's Divine Conduct.

CHAP. XXI. Wants strangely supplied. JOseph was sold into Egypt, by the Envy
of his Brethren, to make Provision for them and their Father in a time of
Famine: Elijah is fed by an Angel, when he was ready to starve with Hunger
under the Juniper-Tree, and found, to his great Surprizal, a Cake, baked on the
Coals, and a Cruise of Water at his Head; another time by a Raven, who brought
him Bread and Flesh, Morning and Evening; and a third time by the Wisdom of
Zarepheth's Barrel of Meal, and Cruise of Oil, which failed not, so long as
there was necessity of it: What should I tell of Daniel, and the three
Children's Pulse and Water; our Savior's Loaves and Fishes; of the Money found
in the Belly of a Fish; of the great Draught of Fishes, that astonished St.
Peter into Amazement? God feeds the young Ravens, etc.
1. Origin, with his poor Mother, and six Children, after the Father's Death,
and the Confiscation of all his Goods to the Emperor, procured a Sustenance for
himself and them, by teaching a Grammar School; and after being weary of that
Profession, he betook himself to the stndy of Sacred Scripture and Divinity;
and thus throwing himself upon Divine Providence, it pleased God he was
entertained by a Religious and Rich Matron, together with his Mother and
Brethren. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Mr. Samuel Clark, in the Life of that painful and humble Servant, Mr. John
Fox, records a memorable Instance or Providence, and it is thus: That toward
the end of King Henry the Eighth his Reign, he went to London, where he quickly
spent that little his Friends had given him, or he had acquired by his own
Diligence, and began to be in great want. As one day he sat in St. Paul's
Church, spent with long Fasting, his Countenance thin, and his Eyes hollow,
after the ghastful manner of dying Men, every one shunning a Spectacle of so
much horror: There came one to him, whom he had never seen before, and thrust
an untold Sum of Money into his Hand, bidding him be of good Cheer, and accept
that small Gift in good part from his Countryman; and that he should make much
of himself, for that within a few Days, new Hopes were at Hand, and a more
certain Condition of Livelihood. Three Days after the Duchess of Richmond sent
for him, to live in her House, and be Tutor to the Earl of Surrey's Children,
then under her Care.

3. Mr. Isaac Ambrose, a worthy Divine, whose Labors have made him acceptable
to his Generation, in his Epistle to the Earl of Bedford, prefixed to his last
things, gives a pregnant Instance in his own Case; his Words are these: For my
own part (says he) however the Lord has seen cause to give me but a poor
pittance of outward things, for which I bless his Name; yet in the Income
thereof, I have many times observed so much of his peculiar Providence, that
thereby they have been very much sweetened, and my Heart has been raised to
admire his Grace. When of late, under an hard Dispensation (which I judge not
mete to mention, wherein I suffered conscientiously) all Streams of wonted
Supplys being stopped, the Waters of Relief for my self and Family did run low:
I went to Bed with some Staggerings and Doubtings of the Fountains letting out
it self for our refreshing; but e're I did awake in the Morning, a Letter was
brought to my Bedside, which was signed by a choice Friend, Mr. Anthony Ash,
which reported some unexpected breakings out of God's Goodness for my Comfort.
These are some of his Lines -- Your God who has given you an Heart, thankful
to record your Experiences of his Goodness, does renew Experiences for your
Encouragement. Now shall I report one, which will raise your Spirit towards-the
God of your Mercies. VVhereupon he sweetly concludes; One Morsel of God's
Provision, especially when it comes in unexpected, and upon Prayer, when wants
are most, will be more sweet to a Spiritual Relish, than all former Enjoyments
were. Flavel's Divine Conduct. p. 93.

4. Rochell was strangely relieved by a Shoal of Fish, that came into the
Harbor, when they were ready to perish with Famine, such as they never
observed before, nor after that time. Ibid. p. 31.

5. Mr. William Garaway, a Gentleman, sufficiently known for his excellent
Parts, and Activeness, and Fidelity to both King and Country in several
Parliaments, during these three last Reigns, told me lately of another such a
Special and Remarkable Providence as this was, which happened to a certain
Seaport Town in England, (Hastings) about Three Years ago, where, when the
People were in great Poverty, and suffered much by Scarcity of Money and
Provisions, it pleased God, that an unusual and great Showl of Herrings came up
the River, by which the Inhabitants were plentifully supplied for the present;
and the next week after, a Multitude of Cod succeeded them, which were supposed
to have driven the former into the River before them; by which means the
Necessity of the poor Inhabitants was supplied unexpectedly, to Admiration.

6. And this very Year it is very observable, when Money is at a low ebb amongst
us, and People every where muttering and complaining of the baseness of the old
Coin, and the slowness of Coining new Money, etc. God has sent us in his
Gracious Providence such a plentiful Harvest, that not only the Farmers, and
poor People, but even the Fields themselves, (to use the Psalmist's Phrase)
seem to laugh and sing.

7. One Mr. Norwood, late of Deptford, a serious Christian, being low in the
World; and having several small Children; his Wife then lying in, was
extremely discontented at the Poverty and Straits of the Family; the poor man
pinched with this double Distress, Want of Provision, and Peace too, and belng
unwilling to trouble his Master, who was a Meal-Man, and had relieved him
formerly in his Troubles, retires to Prayer, opens his Case to God Almighty,
begs earnestly for a Supply, returns home to his Wife, and finds her in a
pleasant Temper; who asked him, If any body had been with him? Telling him,
That some body (who would not tell whence he came) had brought her Five
Shillings. This extremely affected and cheered the good man, that he was free
to speak of it in all Companies, as occasion offered it self; and at last,
mentioned it to the very Person (a Minister, Mr. J. J.) that sent it, who
professed, that being in his Study at that time, upon a sudden, and warm
Impulse of mind, he was put upon it.

8 Another time his Wife was reduced to great Necessities, for want of Shifts,
etc. and was disturbed (as before;) the good man goes the next Lord's Day to
Church, was Invited to Dine and Sup with a Friend, said nothing of these wants;
but at going away, the good Woman of the House put him up Shifts for his Wife
and Children, and I think (says my Relater) for himself too, and ties up some
money in one of them.

These are both Attested by one Mr. John Lane of Horsly down Lane in Southwark,
in a Letter dated July 3. 1695. and subscribed by several other hands of St.
Olives Parish.

9. Another person, one Atkins, formerly of Oxford, lately of St. Olives in
Southwark, being brought to low Circumstances, and so straitened with Poverty,
that they had neither Bread, nor Drink, nor Candle, nor money to buy with; the
Wife grew impatient, and the good man endeavored to satisfy her, with
recounting over their former Experiences of Gods Goodness to them, etc. told
her, they would go to Prayer, and beg for a supply: he had not been long at his
Devotions, but a person knocking at the Door, asked for Mr.Atkins; but not
willing to stay for his coming, left Five Shillings with the woman for him, not
telling who sent it; nor did they ever know his Name to this day; which so
wrought upon the unbelieving Wife, that she was mightily affected with it, and
laid the consideration of it deeply to Heart.

This is likewise Attested by the aforesaid Author, Mr. John Lane, etc.

10. A. C. 1555. betwixt Oxford and Aldebrough, in the County of Suffolk, when
by unseasonable Weather a great Dearth was in the Land, a Crop of Pease,
without Tillage or Sowing, grew in the Rocks, insomuch that in August, there
were gathered above one hundred Quarters (a Quarter being 8 Bushels) and in
Blossoming remained as many more. This is related by Mr. Speed, and by the
Author of the World Surveyed, and others, for a very great Truth.

CHAP. XXII. Strange Instances of Consolation, and Protection in Dangers. MAN's
Extremity, we use to say, is God's Opportunity; and no doubt, but one great
Reason why God chooses rather such Seasons to appear in, is to give a clearer
Demonstration of his Power, and to shut out all others, that may put in for a
share of the Glory, as Co-rivals with Him. He will not give His Honor to any
of His Creatures, which they would be apt to challenge, if God should put forth
himself too early for their Relief and Assistance, when they think they can
stand upon their own Legs.
I. Personal Deliverances and Comforts, etc.
1. Polycarp, being Conducted to the Theater, in order to his Suffering
Martyrdom, was Comforted and Encouraged by a Voice from Heaven, Be of good
Cheer, O Polycarp, and play the Man! The Speaker no Man saw, but the Voice was
heard by many of us; said his Church at Smirna, in their Epistle to the
Brethren of Pontus. Clark's Mar. of Ecclesi. History.

2. A brief Account of Mr. Roswell 's Trial and Acquittal. -- About the same
time, Mr. Roswell, a very worthy Divine, was Tried for Treasonable Words in his
Pulpit, upon the Accusation of very vile and lewd Informers; and a Surry Jury
found him Guilty of High Treason, upon the most villainous and improbable
Evidence that had been ever given, notwithstanding Sir John Tallot (no
Countenancer of Dissenters) had appeared with great Generosity and Honor, and
Testified, That the most material Witness, was as Scandalous and Infamous a
Wretch as lived.

It was at that time given out by those who thirsted for Blood, That Mr.
Roswell and Mr. Hays should die together; and it was upon good Ground believe,
that the happy deliverance of Mr. Hays, did much contribute to the preservation
of Mr. Roswell; though it is very probable, that he had not escaped, had not
Sir John Talbot's worthy and most honorable Detestation of that accursed
Villainy, prompted him to repair from the Court of King's Bench, to King Charles
II. and to make a Faithful Representation of the Case to him; whereby, when
inhumane; bloody Jefferys, came a little after in a Transport of Joy, to make
his Report of the Eminent Service he and the Surry Jury had done, in finding
Mr. Roswell Guilty, the King (to his disappointment) appeared under some
Reluctance, and declared, That Mr. Roswell should not die. And so he was most
happily delivered. Bloody Assizes.

3. Origin mightily Encouraged the Martyrs of his time, visited such as were in
deep Dungeons, and close Imprisonment; and after Sentence of Death, accompanied
them to the place of Execution, putting himself often in great Danger thereby;
he kissed and embraced them at their last Farewell, so that once the Heathens,
in their Rage, had stoned him to Death, if the Divine Power of God had not
marvelloussy delivered him; and the same Providence did at many other times
Protect and Defend him, oven so often as cannot be told, etc. Ibid.

4. Augustine going abroad to visit his Churches, was laid in wait for by the
Circumcellions, who designed to Murder him; and they had certainly effected it,
but that the Person who was his Guide, by a special Providence of God, mistook
his way, and so led him into a by-path, whereby he escaped their hands; as
afterward came to his Knowledge; for which he praised God as his only
Deliverer. Ibid.

5. Paulus Fagius, when the Town of Is^a, where he was Minister, was greatly
afflicted with the Pestilence, understanding that many of the wealthiest
Inhabitants intended to forsake the place, without having any Respect or Care
for such as labored with that Disease, and that the Houses of such as were
Infected, were commanded to be shut up by the Magistrate, openly Admonished
them, either to continue in the Town, or liberally to bestow their Alms before
their Departure, for the Relief of such as were Sick; and during the time of
the Visitation, he himself in person, would visit those that were sick; he
would administer Spiritual Comfort unto them, Pray for them, and would be
present with them Day and Night, and yet by the Providence of God he remained
untouched, and was preserved by the All powerful Hand of God. Fuller Abel
Rediv. p. 149.

6. A Gentlewoman, having lain in a Trance for some Days, was at length Buried
for dead, with a Gold Ring on her Finger, the Sexton knowing thereof, he and
his Wife, with a Lanthorn and Candle, went privily the next Night, and dug
up the Coffin, opened it, untied the winding Sheet, and was going to take off
the Ring; when suddenly the buried Lady raised up her self, (being just then
supposed miraculously to come out of her Trance) the Sexton and his Wife ran
away in a horrible Fright, leaving their Lanthorn behind them, which she took
up, and made haste to her House, and she knocking hard at the Door, and the
Maidservant asking who was there, she said, It Is I, let me in: The Maid being
much Surprised thereat, neglected to open the Door, but ran away to her Master,
and acquainted him therewith; he would scarce believe it, till himself went to
the Door, and heard her Voice, and let her in; got her into a warm Bed, and
being well looked after, she perfectly recovered, and lived to have Three
Children afterward. This is in a Book called, The Victory of Patience.

7. In the Massacre of Paris, one Merlin, a Minister of the Reformed Religion,
fled from the Persecutors to save his Life, and hid himself in a Hay-mow, where
he was strangely preserved and nourished, for the space of a Fortnight, by a
Hen that came constantly, and every Day laid an Egg by him, by which he was
sustained. Clark's Mirr. p. 365.

8. In the same Persecution, another Man being closely pursued for his Life,
got into a little Cellar in an old Castle, over the Door of which presently
came a Spider, and Spun a thick Webb, where the Persecutors came presently
after to look for him, but they seeing a thick Web over the Door, declined
seeking him there, by which he was miraculously Saved. See a Book called,
Mankind Displayed.

9. At Seven-Oak in Kent, was taken up an Infant of unknown Parents, but by
Charitable People was Baptized, and brought up, and bound Apprentice in London,
and came at last to be Mayor of the City. Chetwind's Hist. Collect.

10. There is lately come to my Hand (says Mr. Mather, in his Book of
Providence) an Account of some Remarkables, which have happened at Norwich in
New England, drawn up by Mr. Fitch, the Judicious and eminently Faithful Pastor
of the Church in that place; which that others may be encouraged to follow his
Example, in observing and recording the special Works of Divine Providence, I
shall here insert, as I received it.

Remarkable Providence at Norwich.
11. Many times the Heavens have been shut up, but God has answered our
Prayers in sending Rain, and sometimes so speedily and so plentifully, after
our seeking the Lord by Fasting and Prayer, that the Heathen, now for more than
twenty years, upon occasion of want of Rain, will speak to us to call upon the
Name of the Lord our God; one special Instance of this kind I have already
given, and it is upon Record, in the History of the War with the Indians in
New England.

12. Many among us have been in more than ordinary hazard by Rattle-Snakes,
some have set their Feet upon them, some have been bitten by them upon the
Skin; and one, as he was stooping down to d^nk at a Spring of Water, spied a
Rattle-Snake, within two Foot of his Head, rising up against him; thus manifold
ways in danger by this Venomous Creature, and yet none of us have suffered any
harm, but only one was bitten in the Finger and in a short time perfectly
healed.

13. In the time of the Wars with the Indians, we were not only preserved from
the Heathen in the midst of the Heathen, but by the Lord's making some of them
to be a Wall of Defense unto us. And thus we were saved by a destroying means.

14. And at this time the Providence of God was very remarkable in preserving
many of our People, in one of our Garrisons who were driven to Garrison several
Houses, and the House of which now I speak, did contain about sixty Persons;
and in this House one of the Soldiers taking a Gun Laden with Bullets into
his hand, as he stood in a lower-Room, the Lock being half bent, and he holding
the Gun right upwards, the Gun was Discharged, tho many People were in the
Chamber, yet none of them suffered any harm, because Providence did guide the
Shot into the Summer, that piece of Timber which is the support of the Chamber.

15. Also one in the same House, looking with a Candle under a Bed for
something he wanted, fired some Flax, which filled the Room with Flame and
Smoke, and two small Children lay sleeping in this peril, but were preserved
from the fire, or any harm by the throng of People in the Room, at length one
of the Children was taken up by one of the Men with a purpose of throwing it
out of the Camber Window, but at that very moment there was such an abatement
of the Flame, and hope that the worst of the danger was past, that he held the
Child in his Arms; and yet presently after the fire brake out again in the
uppermost Room in the House, nigh to a Barrel of Gunpowder: But some were
guided, strengthened and succeeded in their endeavor, to the extinguishing the
fire; so that the Lives, and Limbs, and Goods of all these were preserved by
the good hand of God, who does wonderfully when we know not what to do.

16. One of the Children of the Church grown up, (though not in full Communion)
was left to fall into a most notorious abominable Practice, which did occasion
the Church to meet, and humble their Souls by Fasting and Prayer, and at this
time in the Sermon and Prayer, it was declared, That the Lord had determined
either to bring our Children nearer to him, and not to suffer them to live out
of full Communion with his Church, or else he would in his Anger leave them to
such Abominations, as shall cut them off from his Church: And since this time,
many young People have by the Grace of the Lord been prepared for full
Communion, and have taken hold of the Covenant, confessing, that they have felt
the impression of the Word upon that abashing Occasion spoken: And thus the
fall of one has been the rising of many. Where Sin abounds, the Lord can make
Grace to superabound.

Concerning some Personal Deliverances.
1. There was a Young man endeavoring to subdue a Young Horse; and a Rope at
one end of it was fastened about the Horses Neck, but the Horse running with
great speed, the other end of the Rope caught the Foot of this Young Man, as in
a snare, and was so entangled therein, that he was drawn Ten Rods upon his
back, in a very rough and uneven place of Land, he being utterly unable to free
himself; and none at hand that could help him; and thus it being come to this
Extremity, the Horse of himself stood still, so long, and no longer time, than
that the Young Man did clear his Foot out of the Rope; and thus was delivered
out of the danger, and suffered not a broken Bone, nor any considerable bruise
or harm.

2. There was another Young Man, who sat upon a Plough-Beam, and suddenly his
Cattle moving, his Plough turned, and one of his Legs was Entangled within the
Plough, and the Plough-Irons pressing hard against some part of his Body, but
could not free himself; and the more he called to the Cattle, the more speedily
they moved, and thus was in danger of being torn in pieces; but in this
extremity it was not long before the Cattle of themselves stood still.

3. There was another Young Man, who did fall about Ten Foot from some part of
the Mill Timber into deep Waters, and a place of many Rocks; a Stream very
violent, and he was carried about eleven Rods down the Stream, where there was
a great piece of Ice, and while he was in this confounded and amazed Posture,
his hand was guided to take hold of that Ice, and there to hold until one who
saw him fall, did adventure upon that Ice, and drew him out of the Waters, and
thus they were both delivered. Thus far Mr. Mather.

4. Martin Bucer, upon a Sermon Preached against the Impieties and
Superstitions of the Church of Rome, whilst he attended upon the Prince Elector
Palatine in Belgium, did so incur the ill will of the Monks and Friars, that
they said Snares for him; but he having notice thereof, fled secretly away, and
went unto Franciscus Sickingem, by whom he was kindly entertained, promising
him safety, till the times were better quieted, in reference to Religion. Ibid.
p. 155.

5. I will here set down a Remarkable story of my Own Father, William Turner; a
Private Man, and disengaged from Parties; who yet in the time of our late Civil
Wars, being requested by a Neighbor to assist him in the seecuing of a
Gelding, which he had in a Pasture, not far from my Father's House, upon the
Expectation of an Army, that was coming in that Road: My Father readily,
without any excuse, went along with him, took the Horse out of the Pasture,
went along the Road, so long, till the Neighbor fearing danger, diverted into
the Feilds: My Father being not far from his own House, and trusting partly to
the innocence of his cause, kept the Road, and bid Farewell to his Companion;
but by and by meeting with some Soldiers, he passed by them, and after them,
others; till at last, finding the lane narrow, and the Soldiers come in
greater multitudes, to avoid the trouble of giving way to so many, having a
confidence in the swiftness of his Horse, and the Knowledge of bypath, he
turned back again, but had not gone far, till he was shot at once and again,
and at last shot through his Body between the Bowels and Bastard-Ribs, and at
last seized: His Horse, Boots, Sword, and Clothes all taken from him; and a
tattered suit of Apparel from a common Soldier put upon him: And at last
brought to the General, who passed this Sentence upon him, that he should be
hanged the next Rendezvour. Accordly he was driven before them to the next
Market Town, ( Drayton in Shropshire) put under the Table, whilst the General
and his Officers went to breakfast, in order to be hanged by and by. But upon a
false report, the General caused the Trumpeter to sound a March, and so left my
Father bleeding inwardly in the Inn. Three Surgeons, that were sent for,
successively, one after the other, gave him over for desperate; but at last a
Gentlewoman, related to the Earl of Shrewsbury, looking upon his wound, did
believe it curable, and accordingly undertook the Cure, and in six Months at
least effected it; but so, that my Father upon the least Surcharge of new Ale
or Beer, or any windy Liquor, was obnoxious to Fainting-Fits; till it pleased
God, after 20 Years, or thereabouts, to order it so, that the Escharre broke
out in way of an Issue, which continued with him (I think) to almost the time
of his Death, which was in the 77th. Year of his Age, A. D. 1689, 90. This I
thought my self bound in point of Gratitude to the Divine Providence to Record.

6. Beza being in France, in the first Civil War, and there tossed up and down
for two and twenty Months, Recorded six hundred Deliverances from Dangers in
that space, for which he solemnly gave God thanks in his last Testament.
Flavel's Divine Conduct, p. 104.

7. Extracted from Mr. Aubery 's Miscellanies. -- Anno 1670. A poor Widow's
Daughter in Herefordshire, went to Service, she was Aged about 20, fell very
ill, even to the point of Death; her Mother besought God to spare her
Daughter's life, and take her to him: At this very time, the Daughter fell into
a Trance, which continued about an Hour; they thought she had been Dead: When
she recovered out of it, she declared the Vision she had in this Fit, viz. That
one in black Habit came to her, whose Face was so bright and glorious she could
not behold it; and also he had such brightness upon his Breast, and (if I
forget not) upon his Arms; and told her, That her Mother's Prayers were heard;
and that her Mother should shortly die, and she should suddenly recover: And
she did so, and her Mother died. She has the Character of a modest, humble,
virtuous Maid. Had this been in some Catholic Country, it would have made a
great Noise.

8. It Is certain there was one in the Strand, who lay in a Trance a few Hours
before he departed: And in his Trance had a Vision of the Death of King Charles
the II. It was at the very Day of his Apoplectick Fit.

9. There is a Sheet of Paper, Printed 16 -- concerning Ecstasies, that James
Usher, late Lord Primate of Ireland, once had: but I have been assured from my
Honored Friend, James Tyrrel, Esquire; (his Lordship's Grandson) that this was
not an Ecstasie; but that his Lordship upon reading the 12, 13, 14, etc.
Chapters of the Revelation, and farther Reflecting upon the great increase of
the Sectaries in England, supposed that they would let in Popery, which
consideration put him into a great Transport at the time when his Daughter (the
Lady Tyrrel) came into the Room; when he Discoursed to her diverse things (though
not all) contained in the said Printed Paper. Thus far Mr. Aubery.

10. Mr. Brewen of S^apleford, as he excelled others in the Holiness of his
Life, so he much excelled himself toward his death; his Motions toward Heaven
being then most vigorous and quick. The Day before his last sickness, he had
such extraordinary Inlargements of Heart in his Closet-Duty, that he seemed to
forget all the Concernments of his Body, and this lower World, and when his
Wife told him, Sir, I fear you have done your self hurt with Rising so early.
He Answered; If you had seen such glorious things as I saw this Morning, in
private Prayer with God, you would not have said so, for they were so wonderful
and unspeakable, that whether I was in the Body, or out of the Body, with Paul,
I cannot tell.

And so it was with the Learned and Holy Mr. Rivet, who seemed as a Man in
Heaven, just before he went thither.

11. It is Recorded of our Famous Jewel, That about the beginning of Queen
Mary's Reign, the Inquisition taking hold of him in Oxford, he fled to London
by Night, but providentially losing the Road, he escaped the Inquisitors, who
pursued him: However, he fell that Night into another eminent hazard of Life;
for wandering up and down in the Snow, he fainted, and lay starving in the way,
panting and laboring for Life, at which time Mr. Latimer's Servant found and
saved him. See his Life.

12. The Protestants besieged in Bezier's in France, were delivered by a
Drunken Drummer, who going to his Quarters at Midnight, rang the Alarm-Bell of
the Town, not knowing what he did; and just then were their Enemies making
their Assault. And as weak and improbable means have been blessed with Success
to the Church in general, so to the preservation of its particular Members also.

William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, as he lay in Camp near to the Duke of
Alva's Army, some Spaniards in the Night brake into his Camp, and some of them
ran as far as the Prince of Orange's Tent, where he was fast asleep; but he had
a Dog lying by him on the Bed, that never left Barking, and Scratching him by
the Face, till he had awaked him, whereby he escaped the Danger. Strada.

13. Queen Elizabeth's Preservation in the Tower, in the time of her
Imprisonment, is a Remarkable Providence not to be forgot, viz. When her Bloody
Sister, Queen Mary, had designed her Death, she was preserved by King Philip,
Queen Mary's Husband, who had not perhaps his Fellow in Christendom, at that
time, for Cruelty and Persecution of the Reformed, and was moved to the Saving
the Princess Elizabeth's Life, not so much by his Bowels of Compassion, as a
Principle of Policy: For if Queen Mary should die Childless (as indeed he
feared) if the Princess Elizabeth had been taken out of the way, the Queen of
Scots, a Papist, would have come to the Crown of England, who being inseparably
joined in League with France, might (both of them together) been too hard for
Spain; and that his Gentleness to the Princess could be on no other account,
appears plainly, by his putting his Eldest Son to death upon no other Account,
than for his being so mercifully inclined to the Protestants in the Netherlands.

This remarkable Providence needs no vouching; but however it may be found in a
Book that goes under the Name of Mr. Slingsby Bethel, in Octavo, p. 6. Printed
in London, A. C. 1694.

14. When several oppressed with the Cruelty and Tyranny of Richard the Third,
did confederate to Raise Henry Earl of Richmond to the Crown, and by his
Marriage with Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter of Edward the Fourth, to Unite the
Houses of York and Lancaster, Mr. Henry Wiat was one therein Engaged and
Entrusted, in the Association and Correspondence between the Duke beyond Sea,
and his Friends in England, and passed with Messages, for which he was
Suspected and Examined, but for want of Proof discharged; he was afterward
thereof Accused, committed to the Tower, and Tortured, for Discovery of the
Duke's Design, and Friends in England; but neither Threats, Torture, or fair
Promises of Reward, could prevail, so that he was cast into the Dungeon, and
Fed with Bread and Water, and there lay at the Duke's Descent and Victory,
where a Cat did use to come to him, and bring Provision, or he had been
Starved. He, for his Fidelity, was preferred, made a Knight Baronet, by Henry
the Seventh, and of the Privy Council to Henry the Seventh, and Henry the
Eighth.

This Relation has been received true in the Family in Kent, and in Memory
thereof, his Picture is preserved, with a Cat creeping in at a Grate, with a
Pidgeon in its Mouth; and these Verses added.

Hunc macrum rigidum maestum fame frigore cura Pavi, fovi acui carne calore
Joco.

This Relation was sent me November 16. 1696. by Counselor Wiat, now Living at
Sergeants Inn, near Fleet Street.

II. Sea-Dangers, and Deliverances.
1. Great were the Dangers, and wonderful the Deliverances of Will. Okely, and
his Company, the Relation of which from his own Book, I have thus Contracted.
An. Dom. 1639. We took Ship at Gravesend, in the Mary of London, Mr. Boarder
Master, bound for the Isle of Providence in the West Indies. Five Weeks we lay
in the Downs, waiting for a Wind, and then we set Sail, and came to Anchor near
the Isle of Wight; but by this time all our Beer in the Ship stunk, and we were
forced to throw it overboard, and to take Vinegar to mix with Water for our
Voyage. The next Lord's Day we set Sail again, and coming between the Island
and the main Land, we stuck fast in the Sands, but the Tide coming in, heaved
us off. The sixth Day after our setting Sail from the Isle of Wight, we
discovered three Turks Men of War, who Chased us, and at break of Day boarded
and took us: Having kept us close Prisoners at Sea, at the end of five or six
Weeks, they brought us to Algiers, where I was sold for a Slave the first
Market Day, to a Patron, who told me, I must allow him two Dollars a Month, and
live ashore where I would, and get it where I could; though I knew not where to
Levy the least Mite of it. Wandering up and down, I light of an Englishman in
his little Shop, that Traded with Tobacco, and a few other Things. His Partner
I became, with a little Money I had reserved, and a small modicum my Patron had
allowed me for my Stock. Here I got Money, and hired a Cellar, where I laid up
some other of my Goods. When weary of my Slavery, I formed a design for my
Liberty, and Communicated it to John Anthony, Carpenter, William Adams,
Brick-layer, John Jephs, Seaman, John, a Carpenter, and two others, Men of
able Bodies, and useful in the intended Project, which being formed in Parcels;
and afterward put together, might be the means of our Escape. They approved
the Proposal, and in my Cellar we began our Work: We provided first a piece of
Timber, of twelve Foot long, to make the Keel; but because it was impossible to
convey a piece of Timber of that length out of the City, but it must be seen
and suspected, we therefore cut it in two Pieces, and fitted it for Joynting
just in the middle. Then we provided Ribs; after which, to make the Boat
water-tite, because Boards would require much ^ammering, and that noise was
like to betray us, we bought as much Canvas as would cover our Boat twice over:
upon the Canvas of the Carine, we provided also as much Pitch, Tar, and Tallow,
as would serve to make it a kind of Tarpawling Cere-Cloth, to swaddle the naked
Body of our Infant-boat; of two Pipe-staves, sawed across from Corner to
Corner, we made two things to serve for Oars; and for our Provision, we had a
little Bread, and two Leather-Bottles full of fresh Water; we also remembered to
buy as much Canvas as would serve for a Sail. We carried out all these in Parts
and Parcels, fitted them together in the Valley, about half a Mile from the
Sea, whither four of our Company carried the Boat on their Shoulders, and the
rest followed them. At the Seaside we stripped, put our Clothes into the Boat,
and carried it and them as far into the Sea as we could; all seven got in, but
finding she was overladen, two of them were content to stay on Shore; having
bid them farewell, we lanched out, June 30. 1644. The Bill of Lading was John
Anthony, William Adams, John Jephs, John -- Carpenter, and William Okeley; four
of us wrought continually at the Oars, the fifth was to free the Boat of that
Water, which by degrees leaked through the Canvas; our Bread was soon spoiled,
with soaking in salt Water; our fresh Water stunk of the tanned Skins and
Owze, yet we complained not. Three days with good Husbandry, our Bread lasted
us, but then pale Famine stared us in the Face, Water indeed we might have,
but it must be salt out of the Sea, or that which had been strained through our
own Bodies, and that we chose of the two; but that we must not have after a
while, unless we would accept of the other first, and the Misery was, these did
not assuage our Thirst, but increase it. The VVind too for some time was full
against us; but God rebuked it, made it our Friend; a second Inconvenience was,
that our Labor was without Intermission; and a third, the extremity of Heat by
Day, the Season raging hot, the beginning of July, and we wanted fresh Water,
to cool the Heat, our Labor made it insupportable to our Bodies, and our
little Hope made it as grievous to our Souls: one Help we had, a poor one, he
that emptied the Boat, threw the Water on the Bodies of the rest to cool them;
but our Bodies thus scorched and cooled, rose up in Blisters all over. Great
pain we felt, great dangers we were in, great miseries we endured, great wants
we were under, and had nothing left but Hope, Food, and Strength. If any ask by
what Directions we steered our Course to Mayork, whither we designed; for the
Day a Pocket-Dial supplied the place of the Compass, by Night the Stars, when
they appeared, and when not; we guessed our way by the Motions of the Clouds,
four Days and four Nights were we in this woeful plight, on the fifth all hope
that we should be saved, was perished, so that we left off our Labor, because
we had no Strength left, only emptied the Boat of Water, when God sent some
Relief to us; as we lay hulling up and down, we discovered a Tortoise, not far
from us, asleep in the Sea: Had Drake discovered the Spanish Fleet, he could
not have more rejoiced: We took up our Oars, silently rowed to our Prey, took
it into our Boat, with great Triumph; we cut off her Head, and let her bleed
into a Pot; we drank the Blood, eat the Liver, and sucked the Flesh. It
wonderfully refreshed our Spirits, and we picked up some Crumbs of Hope. About
Noon we thought we discovered Land; it is impossible to express the Joy of our
raised Souls at this Apprehension; we wrought hard, and after further Labor,
were fully satisfied that it was Land, and it was Mayork; we kept within sight
of it all day, the sixth of July, and about Ten a Clock at Night we came under
the Island, and crept as near the Shore as we could, and durst, till we found a
convenient place, where we might thrust in our Weather-beaten Boat. When we
were come to the Land, we were not insensible of our Deliverance; but though we
had escaped the Sea, we might die at Land; we had no Food since we eat the
Liver, and drank the Blood of the Tortoise; therefore John Anthony and my self
were sent out to scout abroad for ftesh Water, because we spoke some Spanish;
we came to a Watchtower of the Spaniards; spoke to him on the Watch, told him
our Condition, earnestly begging some fresh Water, and some Bread; he threw us
down an old moldy Cake; but so long as it were a Cake, Hunger did not consider
its Mouldiness; then he directed us to fresh Water, which was hard by. We stood
not telling Stories, we remembered our Brethren left with our Boat, and
observing the Sentinels Directions, came to a Well, where there was a little
Water, and eat a bit of our Cake; but the Passage was so disused, that we had
much ado to force our Throats to relieve our Clamourous Stomachs. We return to
our Boat, acquaint them with the good Success of our Embassy, and all prepare
to make to the Well; so tying our Boat as fast as we could to the Shoat, we
left her to Mercy. Now we are at the Well, it has Water, and we have something
to draw, but God must give us a Throat to swallow; for William Adams attempting
to drink, after many Essays, was not able to swallow it, but still the Water
returned; so that he sunk down to the Ground, faintly saying, I am a dead Man;
but after much striving, he took a little; so refreshed with our Cake and
Water, we lay down by the Well-side till the Morning; when it was clear Day, we
again went to the Watchman, entreating him to direct us to the next House or
Town, where we might find Relief, he civilly pointed us to one, about Two Miles
off, and long it was e're our blister'd Feet could overcome the tediousness of
that little way. When we came to the honest Farmer, moved with our Relation,
sent us out Bread and Water, and Olives; and seeing us thankful Beggars, he
enlarged his Civility to us, called us into his House, and gave us good warm
Bean-pottage, which seemed to me the most pleasant Food I ever did eat in my
Life. Thence we advanced to the City of Mayork, about ten Miles from that
place; that Night we lay by a VVell-side, and in the Morning we entered the
Suburbs, the Viceroy was informed of us, and we were commanded to appear before
him, who after he had examined us, and heard our Story, ordered we should be
maintained at his own Cost, till we could have passage to our own Country; but
our English Ships seldom trading thither, we petitioned the Viceroy for a
passage in the King of Spain's Galleys, which were in the Road bound for
Alicant, which he graciously granted us. After some other Troubles, we met with
contrary winds, and it was five VVeeks e're we could reach the Downs, where we
arrived in September, 1644. The Commander of the Ship was Capt. Smith, of
Redriff. Mr. Thomas Sanders, my Wife's Brother, being in Mayork, not long after
we came thence, saw our Boat hung up for a Monument upon the side of the great
Church there. Mr. Robert Hales was there, 1671. and assures me, that he saw the
naked Ribs and Skelliton of it then hanging in the same place. Okely his
Ebenezer. Sect. 8. Page 43, 44. etc. Wanley's Wonders of the Little World. Page
642.

Anno Dom. 1630. May the First, the Muscovy Merchants of London, sent a Ship,
called the Salutation, for Greenland, which arrived there in safety, June 11.
following, together with two other Ships, all which were commanded by Captain
William Goodler. The Captain's Ship stayed at Bell-sound, that of the
Salutation at the Foreland; the Captain having killed store of Whales, sent
away for the Salutation, which in the way, meeting with cross Winds, the Master
set Eight of his Men ashore, to kill some Venison. These Men taking with them a
Brace of Dogs, a Fire-lock, two Lances, and a Tinber-box, went on Shore, killed
fourteen; Night coming on, and they weary, they went to rest, intending next
day to end their Hunting, and so to return to their Ship. But the next day
proved foggy, and much Ice being betwixt the Shore and the Ship, the Ship was
fain to stand so far off into the Sea, that they lost Sight of her; they hunted
on Green-Harbour, and there they found that the Ship was departed, they made
all speed possible with their Shallop to Bellsound, to their Captain; and for
fear of Delay, heaved their Venison overboard; but having no Compass, they
wandered up and down so long, till the Ships were departed. This filled them
with Fear and Astonishment, knowing that neither Christian nor Heathen had ever
inhabited those desolate Climates, that none could be hired for any Reward
soever by the Merchants, to winter there, and that nine able Men left behind
formerly, as they now were, died all miserably upon the place, became the Prey
of Bears and Foxes; all which made them amazed, to stand looking upon one
another: That which increased their Horror was their want of all necessary
Provision, no Clothes for Shift or Warmth, no Food, no House for Shelter. After
a space, knowing the danger of Delay, and Extremity, they advised upon the most
likely course for their Preservation, that they resolved to go to
Green-Harbour, to hunt for Venison, where, in their going, stay, and return,
they killed nineteen Deers, and four Bears, with which they laded their
Shallop, and finding another old Shallop left there, they laded it with the
Graves or Fritters of Whales that had been boiled there that Year, and took
their way to Bellsound, to their Tent, where they intended to winter; in the
way of their Passage they had like to have lost all their Provision, but saved
it by a desperate Remedy, running into the high wrought Sea, and by force,
drawing their Shallops to the Shore. This done, they arrived at Bellsound,
where they took out their Provision, considered their Tent, and with part of
the Materials of a lesser Tent there by, pieces of old Casks, and old Shallops
left there (as it is usual) they made up their House and Cabbins, where they
lodged two and two, and with mavelous Industry provided themselves with
Firewood and Shelter against the Extremity of the Cold, their Beds were the
Deer-Sltins, dried. Having thus fitted every thing in the best manner they
could, on the 12th of September, looking out into the Sound, they espied two
Sea-Horses lying asleep on a piece of Ice; whereupon, hastening to them with an
old Harping-Iron, they slew first the old one, and then the young; flead,
roasted, and eat them; not long after they killed another: But Nights and Cold
increasing upon them, and they viewing their Provision, found it too small by
half; whereupon they agreed to one reasonable Meal a day, and to fast
Wednesdays and Fridays, except from the Greaves of the Whale, a loathsome Meal;
at which Diet they continued three Months. To repair their Clothes and Shoes
they made Thread of Rope-yarn, and Needles of Whale-bone. October. 10. the Nights
being grown very long, all the Sea was frozen over, and then Grief and Fear
began to work upon them; but they prayed to God for Strength and Patience in
their Miseries, and by his Assistance cheered up themselves to use the best
Means for their Preservation; then for the Preservation of their Venison, and
lengthning of their Firing, they thought best to roast every day half a Deer,
and to stow it in Hogsheads, which accordingly they did, leaving so much raw as
would serve to roast every Sabbath Day a quarter. Here another trial of their
Patience befell them; their Whale-Fritters that had been drenched with
Seawater, and lay close together, was grown moldy and spoiled; and again,
surveying their Bear and Venison, they found it would not afford them five
Meals a Week, so that they were fain to cut off one Meal more, and for three
Months after they fed four Days upon the moldy Whale-Fritters each Week, and
the other three on Bear and Venison. Besides the want of Meat, they began to
want Light, no Sun appearing from the 14th of October, to the 3d of February,
but the Moon shined as here in England; against this, having found a Sheet of
Lead in the Coopers Tent, with Rope-yarn and Oil, they made a Lamp, which they
kept continually burning to their great Comfort. In the beginning of January,
as the Days began to lengthen, the Cold began to strengthen to that extremity,
that it raised Blisters on their Flesh; and if at any time they touched Iron,
it would stick to their Fingers like Birdlime; if they went out to fetch Water,
it would so pincb them, that they were sore, as if they had been beaten; for
Drink, from the 10th. of January, to the 20th. of May, they had none but
Snow-water, which they melted with hot Irons. The last of January they found
their Food would last but six Weeks longer, but they had recourse to God for a
Supply; and looking out one bright day, they saw a great She-Bear, with her
Cub, coming toward the Tent; her they slew with their Lances; the Cub
escaping, they drew her into the Tent, and this Bears served them 20 Days. In
March, the Days so lengthned, that the Fowl and Foxes came abroad, of which
Foxes, by Traps, they catched fifty, and sixty Fowl, as big as Pigeons, and
they had killed seven more Bears, so that with two or three Meals a Day their
Strength was much increased. In May the First, the Weather grew warm, so that
they went out to seek Provision. In this Month there came two Ships of Hull
into the Sound, who knowing some Men had been left there the Year before, and
being desirous to know whether they were dead or alive, the Master manned a
Shallop to go as near the Shore as they could, and so over the Ice, to the
Tent. When these Men came near the Tent, they haled them with the usual word of
the Sea, crying Hey, to which, one of them in the Tent answered again, Ho:
which sudden Answer almost amazed them all; but perceiving them to be the very
Men to their Ship, where they stayed till the London Fleet came, which was
three Days after, They went aboard the Admiral, where Captain William Goodler
was, who made them very welcome, gave them Apparel to the Value of Twenty
Pounds, and after fourteen Days Refreshment they grew all perfectly well. Thus
they continued in the Fleet, till the 20th of August, when they set sail, and
at last came safe into the River of Thames. and the Muscovy Merchants dealt
very well by them. The Names of these eight Persons were William Fakely,
Gunner, Edward Pelham, Gunner's-Mate, that wrote this Story; John Wise, and
Robert Goodfellow, Seamen, Thomas Airs, Whale-cutter, Henry Beer, Cooper, John
Dawes, and Richard Kellet, Land-men. Clark's Mirr. C. 105. P. 512, 513. etc.
Stow's Annals, P. 1017.

3. Horrible was that Tragedy, which the Western Indies beheld in the Persons
of seven Englishmen; the Relation of it take as follows. The forementioned
seven being in St. Christopher's-Istand, had prepared themselves for a Voyage
of one Night, and had taken with Provisions for no longer a time, but a Tempest
intercepted their Return, and carried them so far off into the Sea, that they
could not find Land in less than seven Days; in which they were so sparing of
their one Nights Provision, that they made it serve them to the fifth day; that
past, they must wrestle with mere Famine, which was so much the more grievous
to them, in regard the Sun was extreme hot, that dried up their parched
Throats, exhaled the Saltness from the troubled Sea. They had now little Hope
of retrieving themselves from their intricate Error, and were therefore forced
(O cruel Necessity!) to cast Lots among themselves, to see whose Flesh and
Blood should satisfy the Hunger and Thirst of the rest. The Lot fell upon him
who first gave the Counsel; who was not only unaffrighted at his hard Fortune,
but encouraged the rest, who had a kind of Horror, as to what they went about;
he told them, that Fortune was a Favourer of the Bold, that there was no
possibility of Escape, unless they immediately staid their slying Life by
humane Flesh; that for his part he was well content, and that he thought
himself happy if he could serve his Friends when he was dead. With such Words
as these he so persuaded them, that one (drawn out by Lot also) cut his Throat,
of whose Carcass (I tremble to relate it) each of them was so desirous of a
piece, that it could scarce be divided so quickly: They fell to the Flesh wirh
eager Teeth, and sucked out the Blood into their thirsty Stomachs: One only was
found amongst them, who being nearly related to the dead Person, resolved to
endure all things, rather than to pollute himself with the Blood of his Friend;
but the next day his Famine drove him into such a Madness, that he threw
himself overboard into the Sea: His Associates would not suffer so delicate a
repast (as his Carcass) to be so unseasonably snatched from them. But this
Madness had already so vitiated his Blood, and the Flesh all about the Veins,
that in the whole Body there was scarce any thing found fit to eat, save only
his Bowels. At last it pleased God to show them Mercy in their wandering and
distress, and brought their small Ship to the Isle of St. Martin, in which they
were kindly received by the Dutch Garrison, and sent back to the rest of their
Friends, where scarce had they set Foot on the Shore, but they were accused of
Murder; but inevitable Necessity pleading in their Behalf, they were set free
by the Magistrate. Nich. Tulpii Observe. Med. L. 1. C. 43. P. 81. Wanley's
Wonders of the Little World. P. 638.

4. Richard Clark, of Weymouth, in Dorsetshire, was a known Pilot, and Master
of the Ship, called the Delight, which, Anno Dom. 1583. went with Sir Humphrey
Gilbert for the discovery of Norembege, It happened, that without any Neglect
or Default of his, the Ship struck on Ground, and was cast away on Thursday,
August 29. in the same Year. Of them that escaped Shipwreck, sixteen got into a
small Boat of a Tun and a half, which had but one Oar to work withal; they were
seventy Leagues from Land, and the weather so foul, that it was not possible
for a Ship to brook half a Course of Sail. The Boat being overburden'd, one of
them, Mr. Hedley, made a Motion to cast Lots, that those four which drew the
shortest, should be cast overboard, provided if one Lot fell on the Master, he
notwithstanding should be preserved, in whom all their Safety was concerned.
The Master disavowed the Acceptance of any such Privilege, replying, They
would live or die together. On the fifth day Mr. Hedly (who first mentioned
Lot-drawing) and another, died, whereby their Boat was somewhat alighted. Five
Days and Nights they saw the Sun and Stars but once, so that they only kept up
their Boat with their single Oar, as the Sea did drive it. They continued four
Days without sustenance, save what the Weeds (which swam into the Sea) and salt
Water did afford. On the Seyenth Day, about Eleven of the Clock, they had sight
of, and about Three they came on the South part of New Foundland. All the time
of their being at Sea the Wind kept continually South; if it had shifted to any
other Point, they had never come to Land, but it turned North within half an
Hour of their Arrival. Being all come to Shore, they kneeled down, and gave God
praise for their miraculous Deliverance. There they remained three Days and
Nights, having their plentiful Repast upon Berries and wild Pease. After five
Days rowing along the Shore, they happened on a Spanish Ship of Sir John de
Luz, which courteously brought them home to Biscay. Here the Vistiors of the
Inquisition came aboard the Ship, put them on Examination, but by the Master's
Favor, and some general Answers, they escaped for the present. But fearing a
second search, they shifted for themselves; and going twelve Miles by Night
into France, and so safely arrived in England. Thus, as the Psalmist speaks,
They which go down into the Sea, and occupy in great Waters, these Men see the
Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep. Hackluit's English Voyages,
Vol. 3. Page 163. Full. Worth. Page 282. in Devonshire.

5. Dr. William Johnson, late Chaplain and Subalmoner to King Charles I. going
aboard from Harwich on Michaelmas-Day, Sep. 29. 1648. was seized presently with
a dull sadness of Spirit, and was (to use his own Words) in a strange Anguish
and Propassion, so that he suffered Shipwreek in his Mind, and all the terrors
thereof, before it came; so really sick, that to be drowned in his Thoughts had
been no Affliction to him. After some time, (and not long) about four a Clock
in the Afternoon, the Ship sprung a leak, the Doctor crawled upon the Deck,
sees the sad Sight, one fell to his Prayers, another wrung his Hands, a third
wept; after all they fell to work, but in vain, for the Wound was incurable. At
last they cast out their Longboat, shot off eight or nine Guns, to give notice
to the Master of the Ship, that went out with them; leaped all into the Boat,
and in leaping, the Doctor had like to have been drowned: No Mr. Cook, (who was
Master of the Ship) came to their Relief; he and all his Men perished at the
same time. Now it blew half a Storm, and they in a small Vessel, many Leagues
from any Shore, without Compass to guide them, or Provision to sustain them,
starved with Cold, and Night growing upon them, without any thing in their Boat
but a small Kettle (which served as a Scoop to cast the Water out) and three
Bags of pieces of Eight, to the value of 300 l. sterling; nothing to help them
but their Prayers. In this extremity of Danger (see the Goodness of God) a Ship
made toward them, and they with their two Oars toward it; but the Sea was
boisterous, the Waves raging; so that they were fain to keep out the Sea with
their Backs, sitting close to one another, and to make use of their Kettle; and
for a long time were not able to reach the Ship, nor the Ship them. Though the
good Man, the Skipper, hung on the Lee, and did what he could to retard the
Course of his Ship, and hung out a Light to them; at last they got into the
Ship; but the Doctor being weak, and his Hands made useless and numb with cold
and wet, was left in the Boat, till with the help of a Rope, the Seamen pulled
him up. Now they began to think over their Losses in the Shipwreck, but they
were not considerable, when God had so graciously spared their Lives. The next
day (Thursday) it blew very fair for Norway, whither their Ship was bound, and
about 12 a Clock at Noon they came within view of it; but to escape the Rocks,
they thought to keep off the Coast till Morning, and so sat down to eat, the
Doctor not having made a Meal in five Days. About ten a Clock at Night, when
they had set their Watch, and prayed, with secure Thoughts they laid themselves
to rest, some of them upon their Bed; but God appointed a harder Lodging for
them, such a one, as for Jacob in his Journey to Padan Aram, Genesis 28.11. for
the Ship, with full Sails, ran upon a Rock, and gave such a Crack, that it was
able to have awakened the most dead asleep among them. The Mariners cried out,
Mercy, Mercy, Mercy; the Master bid the Doctor pray for them, pray for them,
for they should certainly perish. The Ship stuck so fast in the Cleft of the
Rock, and brake in the hinder parts, and one of the Seamen with a Rope in his
Hand fastened to one of the Masts, leaped from the Bow of the Ship to the Rock,
the rest following him, 28 in number, the Doctor being left alone upon the
Deck, began to wonder what was become of his Company; and perceiving that they
had all crowded to the Head of the Ship, he went to see, and there found a
Dane, who took pity on him, and helped him to get down with hird; and being got
down the Rope with much difficulty and danger, he climbed up on all four to his
Company on the Rock. Immediately the Ship began to decline, and the Master
being left last of all in the Ship, made lamentable Moan to them to help him;
but too late, for the Ship brake, and sunk immediately, and he, good Man, with
a Light in his Hand, (who had been so kind, in saving others but a little
before) was now, with four of the Mariners, drowned himself. Now the rest were
upon a little Rocky Island, unhabitable, where they passed a sad Night; the
Country People call the Rock Arn-scare; next Morning they were hungry, one of
the Boys brought the Doctor a Leaf of Scurvy Grass, some of them went a Fishing
with a long Arm, and a bended Finger, and drew up some small Muscles. Fresh
Water was not to be had; the Doctor being in a Fever, was forced to lap salt
Water, which he still vomited up again, and this he was told was both a present
Cure of his Sickness, and future Preservation of his Health. A Danish Ship
passed by, but though they waved their Hats to them, came not near them. Then to
their Prayers and singing Psalms, after which, some of them made a Raft, and
ventured to Sea upon it, and it proved to be then a great Calm, and the
Goodness of God appeared miraculous, in that, after the Loss of two great
Ships, he should save them by a swimming Plank; for by this means several
Shawls came rowing toward them before Night, and brought Provision with them,
so that they got all once more to Land, in Waller-Island, where they were
lodged in the Parson's House, (who was a Lutheran) and showed them no little
kindness, the People weeping bitterly at the Relation of their misfortunes, and
setting before them Meat and Drink, Rye-Pancakes for Bread, and good Lubeck
Beer, and after Sermon a doubtful Meal, full of Variety, in one Dish; as Beef,
Mutton, Lard, Goat, Roots, and so many of God's Creatures, that it seemed the
First Chapter of Genesis in a Dish. From Ostersound they came for England in a
Ship, which presently had almbst fallen foul upon a Rock, afterward sprang a
Leak, so that they were forced to pump for their Lives; till at last they got
safe (but through Dangers and Troubles) to Yarmouth. See the Narrative it self,
called, Deus Nobiscum, with a Sermon, by W. Johnson, D. D.

6. Dr. Baily, of St. John's- College in Oxford, had a Son, who was Servant to
Sir John Robinson, Alderman of London, and afterward Lieutenant of the Tower;
this Son being at Sea, and engaged in the Fight between a Squadron of the
Parliament and the Dutch, in the Leghorn-Road; the Ship wherein he was (which I
think was the Providence) was blown up; and it was supposed all the Men lost;
about a Month or two afterward the Doctor being at Sir John Robinson's House,
his Son, to the great admiration of his Father and Master, came at that instant
to them; told them, that sitting on a Pole upon the Poop, by the Flag-staff, he
was blown up into the Sea, and there continued on the Pole till next day, when
the Dutch found him, pitied him, and took him aboard with them, and so saved
him. This was related to me by the Worshipful William Garraway, of Ford, in
Sussex, Esquire;

7. The following Relations are to be found in Mr. Mather's Book of Providence.
Remarkable was that which happened to Jabez MMusgrove, of Newbery, who being
shot by an Indian, the Bullet entered in at his Ear, and went out at his Eye, on
the other side of his Head, yet the Man was preserved from Death; yea, and is
still in the Land of the Living.

8. Remarkable was that Deliverance, mentioned by Mr. Janeway, wherein that
gallant Commander, Major Edward Gibbons, of Boston, in New England, and others,
were concerned. The substance of the Story is this. A New England Vessel going
from Boston to some other parts of America, was through the Continuance of
contrary Winds, kept long at Sea, so that they were in very great straits for
want of Provision; and seeing they could not hope for any Relief from Earth or
Sea, they apply themselves to Heaven in humble and hearty Prayers; but no Calm
ensuing, one of them made this sorrowful motion, that they should cast Lots,
which of them should die first, to satisfy the ravenous Hunger of the rest.
After many a sad Debate, they come to a result, the Lot is cast, and one of the
Company is taken, but where is the Executioner to be found, to act this Office
upon a poor Innocent? It is Death now to think who shall act this bloody part
in the Tragedy: But before they fall upon this in-voluntary Execution, they
once more went unto their Prayers; and while they were calling upon God, he
answered them, for there leapt a mighty Fish into the Boat, which was a double
Joy to them, not only in relieving their miserable Hunger, which no doubt made
them quick Cooks, but because they looked upon it to be sent from God, and to
be a token of their Deliverance. But alas! their Fish is soon eaten, and their
former Exigencies come upon them, which sink their Spirits into Despair; for
they know not of another Morsel. To Lot they go again the second time, which
falletn upon another Person, but still none can be found to sacrifice him; they
again send their Prayers to Heaven with all manner of fervency, when behold a
second Answer from above! a great Bird lights, and fixes it self upon the Mast;
which one of the Company espies, and he goes, and there she stands, till he
took her with his Hand by the Wing. This was Life from the Dead the second
time, and they feasted themselves herewith, as hoping that second Providence
was a forerunner of their complete Deliverance, But they have still the same
Disappointments, they can see no Land, they know not where they are. Hunger
increases again upon them, and they have no hopes to be saved but by a third
Miracle. They are reduced to the former course or casting Lots, when they were
going to the heartbreaking work, to put him to death, whom the Lot fell upun,
they go to God, their former Friend in Adversity, by humble and hearty Prayers;
and now they look and look again; but there is nothing. Their Prayers are
concluded, and nothing appears, yet still they hoped and stayed, till at last
one of them espies a Ship, which put new Life into all their Spirits. Their
bear up with their Vessel, they Man their Boar, and desire and beg like
perishing, humble Supplicants to Board them, which they are admitted. The
Vessel proves a French Vessel; yea, a French Pyrate. Major Gibbons petitions
them for a little Bread, and offers Ship and Cargo for it. But the Commander
knows the Major, (from whom he had received some signal Kindnesses formerly at
Boston) and replied readily and cheerfully, Major Gibbons, not a hair of you or
your Company shall perish, if it lie in my power to preserve you. And
accordingly he relieveth them, and sets them safe on Shore.

9. Mr. James Janeway has published several other Remarkable Sea-Deliverances;
of which, some belonging to New England, were the Subjects. He relates (and I
am informed that it was really so) that a small Vessel (the Master's Name
Philip Hungare) coming upon the Coast of New England, suddenly sprang a Leak,
and so Foundered. In the Vessel there were eighteen Souls, twelve of which got
into the Longboat. They threw into the Boat some small matters of Provision,
but were wholly without Fire. These twelve Men sailed five hundred Leagues in
this small Boat, being by almost miraculons Providence preserved therein for
five Weeks together. God sent Relief to them, by causing some flying Fish to
fall into the Boat, which they eat raw, and well pleased therewith. They also
caught a Shark, and opening his Belly, sucked his Blood for Drink. At the last,
the Divine Providence brought them to the West Indies. Some of them were so
weak, as that they soon died; but most of them lived to declare the Works of
the Lord.

10. Remarkable is the Preservation, of which some belonging to Dublin, in
Ireland, had Experience; whom a New England Vessel providentially met, in an
open Boat, in the wide Sea, and saved them from perishing. Concerning which
memorable Providence, I have received the following Narrative: A Ship of
Dublin, burdened about seventy Tuns, Andrew Bennet, Master, being bound from
Dublin to Virginia; this Vessel having been some Weeks at Sea, onward of their
Voyage; and being in the Latitude of 39. about 150 Leagues distant from
Cape-Cod in New England, on April 18. 1681. A day of very stormy Weather, and a
great Sea, suddenly there sprang a Plank in the fore part of the Ship, about
six a Clock in the Morning; whereupon the Water increased so fast in the Ship,
that all their Endeavouts could not keep her from sinking above half an Hour;
so when the Ship was just sinking, some of the Company resolved to lanch out
the Boat, which was a small one. They did accordingly, and the Master, the
Mate, the Boatswain, the Cook, two Fore-mast-men, and a Boy, kept such hold of
it, when a Cast of the Sea suddenly helped them off with it, that they got into
it. The heaving of the Sea now suddenly thrust them from the Ship, in which
there were left nineteen Souls, viz. sixteen Men, and three Women, who all
perished in the mighty Waters, while they were trying to make Rafters, by
cutting down the Masts, for the preservation of their Lives, as long as might
be. The seven in the Boat apprehended themselves to be in a condition little
better than that of them in the Ship, having neither Sail nor Oars, neither
Bread nor Water, and no Instrument of any sort, except a Knife, and a piece of
Deal-board, with which they made sticks, and set them up in the sides of the
Boat, and covered them with some Irish-Cloth of their own Garments, to keep off
the spray of the Sea as much as could be by so poor a matter. In this condition
they drove with an hard VVind and high Sea all that day, and the night
following. But in the next Morning, about six a Clock, they saw a Ketch, (the
Master was Mr. Edmund Henfield, of Salem, in New England) under Sail, which
Ketch coming right with them, took them up, and brought them safe to
New England. And it is yet further remarkable, that when the Ship Foundred, the
Ketch which saved these Persons was many Leagues to the VVestward of her, but
was by a contrary VVind caused to stand back again to the Eastward, where these
distressed Persons were (as has been said) met with, and relieved.

11. January 13. 1670. Three Women, viz. the Wives of Lieut. Filer, and of
John Drake, and of Nathaniel Lomas, having crossed Connecticut-River, upon a
necessary and neighbourly Account, and having done the work they went for, were
desirous to return their own Families; the River being at that time partly shut
up with Ice new and old, and partly open; There being some Pains taken
aforehand to cut a way through the Ice, the three Women abovesaid got into a
Canoo, with whom also there was Nathaniel Bissel, and an Indian. There was
likewise another Canoo, with two Men in it, that went before them, to help
them, in case they should meet with any Distress, which indeed quickly came
upon them for just as they were getting out of the narrow passage between the
Ice, being near the middle of the River, a great part of the upper Ice came
down upon them, and struck the end of their Canoo, and broke it to pieces; so
that it quickly sunk under them: The Indian speedily got upon the Ice, but
Nathaniel Bissel, and the abovesaid Women, were left floating in the middle of
the River, being cut off from all manner of humane Help, besides what did arise
from themselves, and the two Men in the little Canoo, which was so small, that
three Persons durst seldom, if ever, venture in it; they were indeed discerned
from one Shore, but the dangerous Ice would not admit from either Shore, one to
come near them. All things thus circumstanced, the suddenness of the Stroke and
Distress (which is apt to amaze Men, especially when no less than Life is
concerned) the extreme Coldness of the Weather, it being a sharp Season, that
Persons out of the Water were in danger of freezing, the unaptness of Persons
to help themselves, being mostly Women, one big with Child, and near the time
of her Travel (who was also carried away under the Ice) the other as unskilled
and unactive to do any thing for self-preservation, as almost any could be, the
Waters deep, that there was no hopes of footing, no passage to either Shore, in
any Eye of Reason, neither with their little Canoo, by reason of the Ice, nor
without it, the Ice being thin and rotten, and full of holes. Now, that all
should be brought off safely, without the loss of Life, or wrong to Health, was
counted in the day of it, a Remarkable Providence. To say how it was done, is
difficult, yet something of the manner of the Deliverance may be mentioned, the
abovesaid Nathaniel Bissel piercing their Danger, and being active in swimming,
endeavored, what might be, the preservation of himself, and some others; he
strove to have swum to the upper Ice, but the Stream being too hard, he was
forced downwards to the lower Ice, where, by reason of the slipperiness of the
Ice, and disadvantage of the Stream, he found it difficult getting up; at
length, by the good Hand of Providence, being gotten upon the Ice, he saw one
of the Women swimming down under the Ice; and perceiving an Hole, or open
place, some few Rods below, there he waited, and took her up as she swum along.
The other two Women were in the River, till the two Men in the little Canoo
came for their Relief; at length all of them got their Heads above the water,
and had a little time to pause, though a long and difficult, and dangerous way to
any Shore, but by getting their little Canoo upon the Ice, and carrying one at
a time over hazardous Places, they did, (though in a long while) get all safe
to the Shore, from whence they came.

12. Very memorable was the Providence of God toward Mr. Ephraim How, of
New Haven, in New England, who was for an whole twelve Month given up by his
Friends as a dead Man, but God preserved him alive in a desolate Island, where
he had suffered Shipwreck, and at last returned him home to his Family.

The History of this Providence might have been mentioned amongst
Sea-Deliverances, yet considering it was not only so, I shall here Record what
himself (being a godly Man) did relate of the Lord's mavelous Dispensations
toward him, that so others might be encouraged to put their trust in God, in
the times of their greatest Straits and Difficulties.

On the 25th. of August, in the Year 1676. the said Skipper How, with his two
eldest Sons, set sail from New Haven for Boston, in a small Ketch, Burden 17
Tun, or thereabout: After the Dispatch of their Business there, they set Sail
from thence for New Haven again on the 10th. of September following: But
contrary winds forced them back to Boston, where the said How was taken ill
with a violent Flux, which Distemper continued near a Month, many being at that
time sick of the same Disease, which proved mortal to some. The Merciful
Providence of God having spared his Life, and restored him to some measure of
Health; he again set Sail from Boston, October. 10. By a fair wind they went
forward, so as to make Cape Cod; but suddenly the weather became very
Tempestuous, so as that they could not seize the Cape, but were forced off to
Sea; when they were endangered in a small Vessel by very fearful Storms, and
outrageous Winds and Seas. Also, his eldest Son fell sick, and died in about
Eleven Days after they set out to Sea. He was no sooner dead, but his other Son
fell sick, and died too. This was a bitter Cup to the good Father. It is noted
in 1 Chronicles. 7.22. that when the Sons of Ephraim were dead, Ephraim their Father
mourned many days, and his Brethren came to comfort him. This Ephraim, when his
Sons were dead, his Friends on Shore knew it not, nor could they come to
comfort him: But when his Friends and Relations could not, the Lord himself
did; for they died after so sweet, gracious, and comfortable a manner, as that
their Father professed he had Joy in parting with them. Yet now their outward
Distress and Danger was become greater, since the Skipper's two Sons were the
only help he had, in working the Vessel. Not long after, another of the
Company, viz. Caleb Jones (Son to Mr. William Jones, one of the worthy
Magistrates in New Haven, (fell sick, and died also, leaving the World with
comfortable Manifestations of true Repentance toward God, and Faith in Jesus
Christ. Thus the one half of their Company was taken away, none remaining but
the Skipper himself, one Mr. Augur, and a Boy. He himself was still sickly, and
in a very weak Estate, yet was fain to stand at the Helm 36 Hours, and 24 Hours
at a time; in the mean time the boisterous Sea overwhelming the Vessel, so as
that if he had not been lasht fast, he had certainly been washed overboard. In
this Extremity he was at a loss in his own Thoughts, whether they should
persist in striving for the New England Shore, or bear away for the Southern
Islands. He proposed that Question to Mr. Augur; they resolved that they would
first seek to God by Prayer about it, and then put this difficult case to an
Issue, by casting a Lot: So they did, and the Lot fell on New England. By that
time a Month was expired, they lost the Rudder of their Vessel, so that now
they had nothing but God alone to rely upon. In this deplorable State were they
for a Fortnight. The Skipper (though infirm, as has been expressed) yet for six
Weeks together was hardly ever dry; nor had they the benefit of warm Food for
six Weeks together was hardly ever dry; nor had Weeks, in the Morning betimes,
the Vessel was driven on the Tailings of a Ledge of Rocks, where the Sea broke
violently; looking out they espied a dismal Rocky Island to the Leeward, upon
which, if the Providence of God had not by the Breakers given them timely
warning, they had been dashed in pieces. And this extremity was the Lord's
opportunity to appear for their Deliverance; they immediately let go an Anchor,
and get out the Boat, and God made the Sea calm. The Boat proved leaky; and
being in the midst of Fears and Amazements they took little out of the Vessel.

After they came ashore they found themselves in a rocky desolate Island, near
Cape Sables, where was neither Man nor Beast to be seen, so that now they were
in extreme danger of being starved to Death. But a Storm arose, which beat
violently upon the Vessel at Anchor, so as that it was Staved in pieces; and a
Cask of Powder was brought ashore, (receiving no damage by its being washed in
the Water) also a Barrel of Wine, and half a Barrel of Molosses, together with
many things useful for a Tent to preserve them from cold. This notwithstanding,
new and great distresses attended them; for though they had Powder and Shot,
there were seldom any Fowls to be seen in that dismal and desolate place,
excepting a few Crows, Ravens and Gulls. These were so few, as that for the
most part, the Skipper shot at one at a time. Many times half of one of these
Fowls, with the Liquor, made a Meal for Three. Once they lived five Days
without any Sustenance, at which time they did not feel themselves pincht with
Hunger as at other times; the Lord in Mercy taking away their Appetites, when
their Food did utterly fail them. After they had been about twelve Weeks in
this miserable Island, Mr. How Is dear Friend and Consort, Mr. Augur, died; so
that he had no living Creature but the Lad beforementioned, to Converse with:
And on April 2. 1677. that Lad died also; so that the Master was now left alone
upon the Island, and continued so to be above a Quarter of a Year, not having
any living Soul to Converse with. In this time he saw several Fishing Vessels
Sailing by, and some came nearer the Island, than that which last took him in;
but though he used what means he could that they might be acquainted with his
Distress, none came to him, being afraid: for they supposed him to be one of
those Indians who were then in Hostility against the English. The good Man,
whilst he was in his desolate State, kept many Days of Fasting and Prayer,
wherein he did confess and bewail his Sins, the least of which deserved greater
Evils than any in this World ever were, or can be subject unto, and begged of
God, that he would find out a way for his Deliverance. At last it came into his
mind, That he ought very Solemnly to Praise God (as well as Pray unto Him) for
the great Mercies and signal Preservations which he had thus far experienced.
Accordingly he set apart a Day for that end, spending the time in giving Thanks
to God for all the Mercies of his Life, so far as he could call them to mind,
and in special, for those Divine Favors which had been mingled with his
Afflictions; humbly blessing God for his wonderful Goodness in preserving him
alive by a Miracle of Mercy. Immediately after this, a Vessel belonging to
Salem in New England, providentially passing by that Island, sent their Boat on
shore, and took in Skipper How, who arrived at Salem, July 18. 1677. and was at
last returned to his Family in New Haven.

I have seen a Manuscript, wherein many memorable Passages of Divine Providence
are Recorded. And this which I shall now mention amongst others.

13. About the Year 1638. A Ship fell foul upon the Rocks and Sands, called the
Rancadories, sixty Leagues distant from the Isle of Providence. Ten of the
Floating Passengers got to a Spot of Land, where having breathed a while, and
expecting to Perish by Famine, eight of them chose rather to commit themselves
to the Mercy of the Waters; two only stood upon the Spot of Land, one whereof
soon died, and was in the Sands buried by his now desolate Companion. This
Solitary Person in the midst of the roaring Waters, was encompassed with the
Goodness of Divine Providence. Within three Days God was pleased to send this
single Person (who now alone was Lord and Subject in this his little
Commonwealth) good store of Fowl, and to render them so tame, that the forlorn
Man could pick and choose where he list. Fish also were now and then cast up
within his reach, and somewhat that served for Fuel, enkindled by Flint to
dress them. Thus lived that Insulary Anchorite for about two Years, till at
last having espied a Dutch Vessel, he held a rag of his Shirt upon the top of a
Stick toward them, which being come within view of, they used means to fetch
him off the said Spot of Sand, and brought him to the Isle of Providence. The
Man having in so long a time conversed only with Heaven, looked at first very
strangely, and was not able at first Conference promptly to Speak and Answer.

3. Princes and Magistrates delivered from Plots, etc.
THE Mercy of God is of a very extensive Nature, and his Goodness reaches to
all Mankind; but is most illustriously visible in watching over Kings and
Princes, those Great Instruments of Good to Mankind; and so we find it Recorded
in more Capital and Legible Characters, by the Penmen of S. Scripture, and so
we may find it too in Humane Histories. It would be too wide a Field to walk
in, to take a Prospect of Foreign Nations; I shall in this place confine my
self to my Own, and Remark a little what signal Deliverances our Princes have
received since the Reformation.

I. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
1. Pope Paulus Quintus, a Man of a fierce Nature and Disposition, A. C. 1569.
was so far wrought upon, That in the most Solemn manner that could be, he
Excommunicated and Anathematized our Blessed Queen, and caused a Brief thereof,
with his Leaden Bull annexed thereto, to be fastened to the Gate of the Bishop
of London's Palace, near Paul's Church, by one John Felton, who being
Apprehended, confessed the Fact, and received the reward of his Treason on a
Gibbet, before the said Gate. This Excommunication caused much Trouble on Man's
part, but manifold Preservations and Deliverances on God's part.

2. A C. 1563. Arthur Poole, of the Race of George, Duke of Clarence, of the
House of York, with sundry of his Kindred and Alliance, Conspired to set on
foot again the Title of Mary Queen of Scots, and to bring an Army out of France
into Wales, to back the same; but before they could bring their Plot to
maturity, it was discovered, and themselves Condemned.

3. A. C. 1570. the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland, encouraged by
Promises of Aid from the Pope and Spaniard, raised a Rebellion against the
Queen in the Northern Parts, but the Fire was soon quenched; the Earl of
Northumberland being taken and Beheaded, and the Earl of Westmoreland flying
beyond Sea, ended his Days in a poor and mean Condition.

4. A. C. 1570, John Story, Doctor of Law, a Spy to the Duke de Alva, Conspired
with one Prestol, a Man much addicted to Magic, and a Subject to the King of
Spain, against the Life of Queen Elizabeth: He gave Intelligence to the said
Duke, how he might Invade England, and cause Ireland to revolt: But God brought
this Treason to light; Story and Prestol were by the Parliament Condemned for
Treason, and accordingly Executed.

5. A. C. 1571. The Bishop of Rosse practiced with sundry English Men, to
intercept Queen Elizabeth, and to trouble the Parliament then sitting, that so
another Queen might be set up instead of Elizabeth; but there fell out such
mutual Mistrust amongst the Conspirators, that their Plot turned to their own
Confusion.

6. A. C. 1578. Thomas Stukely, an English Fugitive, plotted with Pius V. and
Gregory XIII. to Lead Forces into Ireland, to Assist the Rebels, and to Conquer
it for the Pope's Natural Son; for which purpose he was made General of 8000
Italian Soldiers; but by the persuasion of Sebastian, King of Portugal, he
first led his Troops into Mauritania, and was there Slain.

7. A. C. 1580. Nicholas Sanders, an English Priest, had a Consecrated Banner
given him by the Pope, and an Army of Spaniards, wherewith he entered Ireland,
and joining with the Rebels, caused a great Insurrection, but it proved the
Ruin of himself, and of all his Accomplices.

8. A. C. 1581. Robert Parsons, Edmond Campion, with other Seminary Priests,
were sent by the Pope from Rome to England, to withdraw the Queen's Subjects
from their Allegiance, and to prepare them to take part with Foreign Powers,
when sent into England, but their design was frustrated; Campion, Sh^rwin,
Kirby and Bryant were Convicted, Condemned for High Treason, and accoadingly
Executed.

9. A. C. 1583. John Somervil was Apprehended, as he came in a desperate
manner, to have killed the Queen, being moved thereto (as himself confessed) by
the Reading of certain Popish Books, published by certain Priests. After his
Condemnation, he Strangled himself in Newgate.

10. A. C. 1585. Will. Parry, Doctor of Law, made a promise to kill the Queen,
upon promise of Absolution from the Pope, but through Terror he deferred, till
his Treason was discovered, and he received a due Reward for the same.

A. C. 1586. John Ballard, a Romish Priest, persuaded some Gentlemen to kill
the Queen, as she was going to take the Air; which they vowed to do; but being
discovered before the Effect, Fourteen of them were Executed as Traitors.

A. C. 1587. William Stafford, a young Gentleman, and one Moody, a desperate
Ruffian, were Suborned by a Foreign Ambassador then in England, to kill the
Queen, but were prevented.

13. A. C. 1588. Philip, formerly of England, then King of Spain, endeavored
by his Invincible Armado to recover England; the Strength of which take out of
Ranzovius's Com. Bell. l. 1. c. 8.

The Navy consisted of 130 Ships, and carried 57868 Lasts; Soldiers, etc.
19295. Seamen 8052. great Guns 2441. (Pilas seu glandes Tormentarias) I know
not well, whether my Author means Mortar-Pieces, or Cannon-Bullets, 123090.
Hundreds of Powder, 1151. a great quantity of fresh Water, Dishes, Candles,
Lamps, Clubs, Leather, Tow, Flax, and Straw, to stop the chinks of the Ships,
great Plenty; Shields, Wax-Candles, Tallow-Candles, long Sacks a great Number,
for carrying of the great Guns, 40 Mules, together with Wagons, Wheels, etc.
Fieldpieces 1500. long Guns 7000. Forked and Crooked at the Handle, 1000.
Halbards and Axes 1000. Short Pikes 6000. Pioneers 700. Persons needful for
such an Expedition, Stipendiary Soldiers, Gunners, Physicians, Surgeons,
Priests, Monks, Nobles, Servants, Governors, Judges, Admirals, Mariners,
Seamen, Cooks, etc. almost 30693. Provision for 6 Months, thus; Hundreds of
Biscuit 11000 Barrels of Wine 21255 Hundreds of Salt Flesh 6000 Hundreds of
Cheese 3433 Hundreds of Salt Fish 8000 Hundreds of Oats 3000 Hundreds of Beans,
etc. 6320 Baths of Oil 11398 Baths of Vinegar 13687 Pipes of Potable Water 11870

Paid to the Soldiers for Stipend, 12000 Ducats, besides a great quantity of
Gold and Silver, for carrying on, and maintaining the War.

And yet, says my Author, the English discharged upon this Fleet 10000 Guns.
Pant. Attic. Bellar. par. 2. p. 208, 209. ex Comment. Bell. Ranzov. l. 1. c. 8.

14. A. C. 1593. Patrick Cullin, an Irish Fencer, was hired by English
Fugitives in the Low Countries, to kill the Queen, and with that purpose came
over; but Intelligence being given thereof, he was Apprehended and Executed.

15. The same Year Edmond York and Richard Williams, were hired in like manner
to kill the Queen, and to burn her Navy with Balls of wild Fire, but the
mischief was prevented, and they deservedly Executed.

16. A. C. 1598. Edward Squire being in a Ship on the Sea, was taken by the
Spaniards, and by them carried into Spain, where he was suborned, and directed
by Richard Whalepool, and English Fugitive, and a Jesuit, to destroy the Queen,
by laying a strong Poison (which the Jesuit then gave him) on the pummel of the
Sadle whereon the Queen should ride, that she laying her Hand thereon might
carry the scent to her Nose, and thereby receive it into her Brain; which, if
she had done, it had been her Death. Never any Treason against her came so near
to Execution as this! For the Traitor Squire observed his Direction, did the
Deed, and that immediately before the Queen rode abroad; but the Divine
Providence kept her from touching the Pummel with her Hand, yet was the Treason
discovered, and the Traitor received his reward.

17. A. C. 1599. The Earl of Tyr-Owen, an Irishman, having been some while in
Spain, returned from thence with a Rebellious Mind, and by the Assistance of
Spain, and the Popish Faction, raised a Rebellion, whereby more damage accrued
to the Queen and State, than by any other Rebellion all her Days; yet by the
good hand of God this Rebellion also, was subdued, and that Land secured and
quieted.

18. A. C. 1600. There was a Plot for the removing some of the Queens chief
Officers, and Counselors from about her, which had it been effected, might
have proved dangerous to her Person and State; the rather because many Papists
had a great hand in that Conspiracy: But the Lord prevented the mischief
intended.

19. A. C. 1602. Henry Garnet, Superior of the Jesuits in England, Robert
Tresmand, Jesuit, Robert Catesby, Francis Tresham, and others, in the Name of
all the Romish Catholics, in England, employed Thomas Winter into Spain, to
obtain an Army from thence to join with a Popish Army that should be raised
here, to change the Government and Religion settled among us; Spain and England
being then at Wars, the motion was readily embraced by the Spaniards, and an
hund^ed thousand Crowns promised to help forward the business; but before any
thing could be effected, it pleased God to take away that Peerless Princess,
full of Years, in peace on her Bed, having Reigned Gloriously, 44 Ysars, four
Months, and seven Days, being sixty nine Years, six Months, and seventeen Days
old.

II. In the Reign of King James.
1. In the first Year of his Reign, before he was solemnly Anointed and
Crowned, Watson and Clark, two Romish Priests drew into their Conspiracy some
Noble Men, some Knights, and some Gentlemen, to surprise the King and his Son
Prince Henry, presuming on Foreign Forces for Aid and Assistance, intending to
alter Religion, and to set up such Officers of State, as they ohought best; but
their Plot, before it came to execution, was discovered, the Traitors
Condemned, some of them Executed, and others through the Kings Clemency spared.

Garnet, and Tresmond, Jesuits, with Catesby, and Tresham, notwithstanding the
Death of Queen Elizabeth, when they saw that King James Defended the same
Faith, continued to solicit the King of Spain to send an Army into England to
join with the Forces of the Papists here for Extirpation of Religion: But the
King of Spain being in Treaty with the King of England about Peace, refused to
hearken to any such motion; whereupon they, together with other Unnatural and
Traiterous Subjects, Plotted the matchless, merciless, devilish and damnable
Gunpowder Treason, as is now to be showed.

The Plot was to under-mine the Parliament House, and with Powder to blow up
the King, Prince, Clergy, Nobles, Knights, and Burgesses, the very Confluence
of all the flower of Glory, Piety, Learning, Prudence and Authority in the
Land; Fathers, Sons, Brothers, Allies, Friends, Foes, Papists, and Protestants,
all at one blast.

Their intent, when that Irreligious Achievement had been performed, was to
surprise the remainder of the King's Issue, to alter Religion and Government,
and to bring in a Foreign Power. Sir Edmond Baynam, an attainted Person, (who
styled himself Prince of the Damned Crew) was sent unto the Pope, as he was the
Temporal Prince, to acquaint him with the Gunpowder Plot, and now to the Plot
it self.

The Sessions of Parliament being dissolved, July 7th. A. C. 1605. and
Prorogued to the 7th. of February following, Catesby being at Lambeth, sent for
Thomas Winter, who before had been employed into Spain, and acquainted him with
the design of blowing up the Parliament House, who readily apprehending it,
said, This indeed strikes at the Root, only these helps were wanting, a House
for Residence, and a skillful Man to carry the Mine; but the first, Catesby
assured him was easy to be got, and for the Man, he commended Guy Fawkes, a
sufficient Soldier, and a forward Catholic: Thus Robert Catesby, John Wright,
Thomas Winter, and Guy Fawkes, had many Meetings and Conferences about the
business, till at last Thomas Piercy came puffing into Catesby's Lodging at
Lambeth, saying, What Gentlemen, shall we always be thinking, and never do any
thing? You cannot be ignorant how things proceed. To whom, Catesby answered,
that something was resolved on, but first an Oath for Secrecy was to be
Administered, for which purpose, they appointed to meet some three Days after,
behind St. Clements Church, beyond Temple Bar, where being met, Peircy
professed, that for the Catholic cause, himself would be the Man to advance
it, were it with the slaughter of the King, which he was ready to undertake and
do.

No, Tom. ( said Catesby) thou shall not adventure thy self to so small
purpose, if thou will be a Traitor, there is a Plot to greater Advantage, and
such a one as can never be discovered. Hereupon all of them took the Oath of
Secrecy, heard a Mass, and received the Sacrament, after which, Catesby told
them his devilish Devise by Mine, and Gunpowder, to blow up the
Parliament House, and so by one stroke, with the Destruction of many, effect
that at once, which had been many Years attempting. And for case of Conscience
to kill the Innocent with the nocent, he told, that it was Warrantable by the
Authority of Garnet himself, the Superior of the English Jesuits, and of
Garrard, and Tresmond, (Jesuitical Priests likewise) who by the Apostolical
Power did commend the Fact, and Absolve the Actors. The Oath was given them by
the said Garrard in these words.

You shall swear by the blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose
to receive, never to disclose, directly nor indirectly, by Word, or
Circumstance, the Matter that shall be proposed to you, to keep secret, nor
desist from the Execution thereof until the rest shall give you leave.

The Project being thus far carried on, in the next place, the first thing they
sought after, was a House wherein they might begin the Work, for which purpose
no place was held fitter than a certain Edifice adjoining to the Wall of the
Parliament House, which served for a Withdrawing Room to the Assembled Lords,
and out of Parliament was at the disposal of the Keeper of the place, and
Wardrobe, thereto belonging: These did Piercy hire for his Lodgings,
entertained Fawkes as his Man, who changed his Name into Johnson, had the Keys
and keeping of the Rooms. Besides this, they hired another House to lay in
Provision of Powder, and to frame, and to fit Wood in for the carrying on the
Mine, which Catesby provided at Lambeth, and Swore Robert Keys into their
Conspiracy, whom he made the Keeper of those Provisions, who by Night conveyed
the same into Fawks's Rooms.

The appointed day for the Parliament, being the 17th. of February, it was
thought fit to begin their work in October before: But Fawkes returining out of
the Country, found Piercy's Rooms appointed for the Scottish Lords to Meet in,
who were to Treat about the Union of the two Kingdoms, whereupon, they forbore
to begin their Work: But that Assembly being Dissolved upon the 11th. of
December, late in the Night, they entered upon the Work of Darkness, beginning
their Mine, having Tools aforehand prepared, and baked Meats provided, the
better to avoid Suspicion, in case they should send abroad for them.

They which first began the Mine, were Robert Catesby, Esquire; the Arch Contriver
and Traitor, and ruin of his Name, Thomas Piercy, Esquire; akin to the Earl of
Northumberland, Thomas Winter, John Wright, and Guy Fawkes, Gentlemen, and
Thomas Bates, Catesby's Man, all of them well grounded in the Romish School,
and earnest Laborers in this Vault of Villainy; so that by Christmass-Eve, they
had brought the Mine under an Entry adjoining to the Wall of the
Parliament House, under-proping are Earth as they went, with this Framed
Timber, nor till that day were they seen abroad of any Man.

During this under-mining much consultation was had how to order the rest of
the business, when the Deed should be accomplished: The first was, how to
surprise the next Heir to the Crown: For though they doubted not but Prince Henry
would accompany his Father, and perish with him; yet they suspected that Duke
Charles, as too young to attend the Parliament, would escape the Train, and
perchance be so carefully Guarded and Attended at Court, that he would hardly
be gotten into their Hands; but Piercy offered to be the remover of this Rub,
resolving with some other Gentlemen to enter into the Dukes Chamber, which by
reason of his Acquaintance, he might well do, and others of his like
Acquaintance should be placed at several Doors of the Court, so that when the
Blow was given, and all Men in a maze, then would he carry away the Duke, which
he presumed would be easily done, the most of the Court being then absent, and
for such as were present, they would be altogether unprovided for Resistance.

For the surprise of the Lady Elizabeth, it was held a matter of far less
difficulty, she remaning at Comb-Abby, in Warwickshire, with the Lord
Harrington, and Ashby, Catesby's House being not far from the same, whither
under the pretense of Hunting upon Dunsmore-Heath, many Catholics should be
Assembled, who knowing for what purpose they were met, had the full liberty in
that distracted time to provide Money, Horses, Armor, and other necessaries
for War, under pretense of strengthening and guarding the Heir apparent to the
Crown.

Then it was debated, what Lords they should save from the Parliament, and it
was agreed, that they should keep as many as they could that were Catholics,
or Favorers of them; but that all others should feel the smart, and that the
Treason should be charged upon the Puritans, to make them the more odious to
the World.

Next it was controverted what Foreign Princes they should make privy to this
Plot, seeing they could not enjoin them Secrecy, nor oblige them by Oath, and
this much troubled them. For though Spain was held fittest to second their
Plot, yet he was slow in his Preparations; and France was too near, and too
dangerous to be dealt with; and how the Hollanders stood Affected to England,
they knew very well. But while they were thus busying themselves, and
tormenting their Brains, the Parliament was Adjourned to the Fifth Day of
October ensuing; whereupon they brake off both Discourse and Work, till
Candlemass, and then they laid in Powder, and other Provisions, beginning their
Work again; and having in the mean time taken into their Company, Cristopher
Wright, and Robert Winter, being first Sworn, and receiving the Sacrament for
Secrecy, the Foundation Wall of the Parliament House being very hard, and nine
Foot thick, with great difficulty they wrought half through; Fawkes being their
Sentinel to give warning when any came near, that the Noise in digging might
not be heard.

The Laborers thus working into the Wall, were suddenly surpised with a great
Fear, and casting away their Digging Tools, betook themselves to their Weapons,
having sufficient Shot and Powder in the House, and fully resolving rather to
die in the place, than to yield, or be taken. The cause of this their Fear was
a noise that they heard in a Room under the Parliament House, and which they
meant to have mined, which was directly under the Chair of State; but now all
on a sudden they were at a stand, and their Countenances cast each upon other,
as doubtful what would be the issue of this their Enterprise, Fawkes scouted
out to see what he could discover abroad; and finding all safe and free from
Suspect, he returned, and told them, that the noise was only occasioned by the
Removal of Coals that were now upon Sale, and that the Cellar was to let, which
would be more commodious for their purpose, and also would save their labor
for the Mine. Hereupon Thomas Peircy, under pretense of Stowage for his Winter
Provision and Coals, went and hired the Cellar; which done, they began a new
Conference, wherein Catesby found the whole weight of the Work, too heavy for
himself alone to support: For besides the Maintenance of so many Persons, and
several Houses, for the several Uses hired, and paid for by him, the Gunpowder
and other Provisions would rise to a very great Sum, and indeed too much for
one Man's Purse. He desired therefore that himself, Piercy, and one more, might
call in such Persons as they thought fit to help to maintain the Charge,
alleging, that they knew Men of Worth and Wealth that would willingly assist,
but were not willing that their Names should be known to the rest. This
request, as necessary, was approved; and therefore ceasing to dig any further
in the Vault, knowing that the Cellar would be fitter for their purpose, they
removed into it 20 Barrels of Gunpowder, which they covered with a thousand
Billets, and five Hundred Faggots, so that now their Logding Rooms were cleared
of Suspicious Provisions, and might be freely entered into, without danger of
Discovery.

But the Parliament being again Prorogued to the 5th of November following,
these Persons thought fit that for a while they should again disperse
themselves (all things being already in so good a forwardness) and that Guy
Fawkes should go over to acquaint Sir William Stanley, and Master Hugh Owen,
with these their Proceedings, yet so, as the Oath of Secrecy should be first
taken by them. For their Design was to have Sir William Stanley's Presence so
soon as the fatal Blow should be given, to be a Leader to their intended
Stratagems, whereof (as they thought) they should have great Need, and that
Owen should remain where he was, to hold Correspondence with Foreign Princes,
to allay the Odiousness of the Fact, and to impute the Treason to the
discontented Puritans.

Fawkes coming into Flanders, found Owen, unto whom, after the Oath, he
declared the Plot, which he very well approved of; but Sir William Stanley
being now in Spain, Owen said that he would hardly be drawn into the Business,
having Suits now in England at the Court: Yet he promised to engage him all
that he could, and to send into England with the first, so soon as the Plot had
taken Effect. Upon this, Fawkes, to avoid further Suspicion, kept still in
Flanders all the beginning of September, and then returning, received the Keys
of the Cellar, and laid more Powder, Billets and Faggots; which done, he
retired into the Country, and there kept till the end of October.

In the mean time, Catesby and Peircy meeting at the Bath, it was there
concluded, that because their numbec was but few, Catesby himself should have
power to call in whom he would to assist their design, by which Authority he
took in Sir Everard Digby, of Rutlandshire, and Francis Tresham, Esquire; of
Northamptonshire, both of them of sufficient State and Wealth: For Sir Everard
offered Fifteen Hundred Pounds, to forward the Action, and Tresham Two
Thousand. But Peircy disdaining that any should outrun him in Evil, promised
Four Thousand Pounds out of the Earl of Northumberland's Rents, and ten swift
Horses, to be used when the Blow was past. Against which time, to provide
Ammunition, Catesby also took in Ambrose Rookwood, and John Grant, two Recusant
Gentlemen, and without doubt, others were acquainted also with it, had these
two grand Electors been apprehended alive, whose own Tongues only could have
given an Account of it.

The business being thus forwarded abroad by their Accomplices, they at home were
no less active: For Peircy, Winter, and Fawkes, had stored the Cellar with
thirty fix Barrels of Gunpowder, and instead of Shot, has said upon them Bars
of Iron, Logs of Timber, Massy stones, Iron Crows, Pickaxes, and all their
working Tools, and to cover all, great Store of Billets and Faggots, so that
nothing was wanting against that great and terrible day. Neither were the
Priests and Jesuits slack on their parts, who usually concluded their Masses
with Prayers for the good Success of their expected Hopes.

Upon Thursday, in the Evening, ten Days before the Parliament was to begin, a
Letter, directed to the Lord Monteagle, was delivered by an unknown Person to
his Footman, in the Street, with a strict Charge to give it into his Lords own
Hands, which accordingly he did: The Letter had neither Date nor Subscription,
and was somewhat unlegible.

This Letter was imparted to the Earl of Salisbury, then Principal Secretary,
and they both presently acquainted the Lord Chamberlain, next to the Earl of
Worcester and Northampton, and last, to the King, as follows.

My Lord,
Out of the Love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
Preservation: Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your Life, to devise
some Excuse, to shift off your Attendance at this Parliament. For God and Man
have concurred to punish the Wickedness of this time: And think not slightly of
this Advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may
expect the Event in safety. For though there be no Appearance of any Stir, yet
I say they shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet they shall
not see who hurts them. This Counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do
you good, and can do you no harm: For the danger is past so soon as you have
burnt the Letter; and I hope God will give you the Grace to make a good use of
it, to whose holy Protection I commend you.


His Majesty, after reading this Letter, pausing a while, and then reading it
again, delivered his Judgment, that the Style of it was too quick and pithy to
be a Libel, proceeding from the Superfluities of an idle Brain, and by these
Words, That they should receive a terrible Blow at this Parliament, and yet
should not see who hurt them; he presently apprehended, that a sudden Danger by
a Blast of Gunpowder was intended by some base Villain in a Corner, though no
Insurrection, Rebellion, or desperate Attempt appeared: And therefore wished
that the Rooms under the Parliament House should be thoroughly searched, before
himself or Peers should sit therein. Hereupon it was concluded that the
Lord-Chamberlain, (according to his Office) should view all Rooms above and
below; but yet, to prevent idle Rumors, and to let things ripen further, it
was resolved, that this Search should be deferred, till Monday, the day before
the Parliament met, and that then it should be done with a seeming slight Eye,
to avoid Suspect.

According to this Conclusion, the Earl of Suffolk, Lord-Chamberlain, upon
Monday, in the Afternoon, accompanied with the Lord Monteagle, repaired into
these Under-Rooms, and finding the Cellar so fully stored with Wood and Coals,
demanded of Fawkes, the counteffeit Johnson, who stood there, attending as a
Servant of small Repute, who owned the place? He answered, that the Lodgings
belonged to Master Thomas Peircy, and the Cellar also, to lay in his
Winter-Provision, himself being the Keeper of it, and Master Thomas Peircy's
Servant; whereunto the Earl, as void of any Suspicion, told him, That his
Master was well provided for Winter Blasts: But when they were come forth, the
Lord Monteagle told him, That he did much suspect Peircy to be the Inditer of
the Letter, knowing his Affection in Religion, and the Friendship betwixt them
professed, so that his Heart gave him (as he said) when heard Peircy named,
that his Hand was in act.

The Lord-Chamberlain returning, related to the King and Council what he had
seen, and the Suspicion that the Lord Monteagle had of Peircy, and himself of
Johnson, his Man, all which increased His Majesty's Jealousy, so that he
insisted (contrary to the Opinion of some) that a harrow Search should be made,
and the Billets and Coals turned up to the bottom; and accordingly the Search
was concluded to be made, but under color of searching for certain Hangings,
belonging to the House, which were missing, and conveyed away.

Sir Thomas Knevet (a Gentleman of His Majesty's Privy-Chamber) was employed
herein, who about Midnight, before the Parliament was to begin, went to the
place with a small, but trusty number of Persons: And at the Cellar Door,
entering in, finding one (who was Guy Fawkes) at so unseasonable an Hour,
cloaked, and booted, he apprehended him, and ransacking the Billets, he found
the Serpent's Nest, stored with Thirty six Barrels of Powder, and then
searching the Villain, he found a Dark-Lanthorn about him, three Matches, and
other Instruments for blowing up the Powder: And being no whit daunted, he
instantly confessed his Guiltiness, vowing, that if he had been within the
House, he would have blown up House and self and all; and before the Council,
lamented nothing so much, as that the Deed was not done, saying, The Devil, and
not God, was the Discoverer of it. Catesby and the rest posted into
Warwickshire, and began an open Rebellion, being joined with about Eighty more;
and so Trooping together, broke open the Stables belonging to Warwick-Castle,
and took thence some great Horses. Thence into Worcestershire, and so to
Staffordshire; where they rifled the Lord Windsor's House of all the Armor,
Shot, Powder, etc. But being pursued by the high Sheriff of Worcestershire and
his Men, who rushed in upon them, both the Wrights were shot through, and
slain, with one Musquet-Bullet; the rest being taken, were carried Prisoners to
London, being all the way gazed at, reviled, and detested by the common People
for their horrid, and horrible Treason; and so at last they received the just
Guerdon of their Wickedness. See a fuller Account in Bishop Carleton's Thankful
Remembrance of God's Mercy.

III. In the Reign of King Charles the First.
1. Sir John Temple, Master of the Rolls, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, within the Kingdom of Ireland, and who was Father of
the present Sir William Temple; relates in his History of the Irish Rebellion,
in 1641. and which History was first Printed in London, in 1646. there in P.
16, 17 and 18, sets down, that the first Plot for the Rebellion, carried on
with so great Secrecy, as none of the English had Notice of it before it was
ready to be put in Execution, and that on the 22d. of October, 1641. In the
very Evening before the Day appointed for a Surprizal of the Castle and City of
Dublin, Owen O Conall, a Gentleman of an Irish Family; but one, who had been
bred a Protestant, and who had been drinking that Evening, came to the Lord
Justice Parsons there, about Nine of the Clock, and acquainted him with a
Conspiracy for the seizing upon His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, and the
Magazine therein, the next day; but he did then make such a broken Relation of
a Matter, that seemed so incredible in its self, as that his Lordship did then
give but very little Belief to it at first, in regard it came from an obscure
Person, and one he conceived somewhat distempered in Drink; but in some Hours
after, O Conall being somewhat recovered from his said Distemper, was examined
upon Oath before the Lords Justices, and his Examination gave such a particular
Account of the Conspiracy, and the Conspirators therein, that caused the Lords
Justices to sit up all that Night in Consultation, for the strengthening of the
Guards in the Castle of Dublin, and likewise of the whole City, and for the
seizing of the Persons of the Conspirators, that the Execution of the Plot was
thereby prevented, and otherwise the Castle of Dublin had been the next day in
the Possession of the Rebels of Ireland, and all the Protestants in Dublin had
been the next day massacred.

The Papists planted the Sovereign Drug of Arminianism here in England, on
purpose to promote Divisions among us, and endeavored to Advance Arbitrary
Power, and inflame the Puritans; as the Author of the History of Popish
Sham-Plots, from the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, tells us, out of a Letter sent
to the Rector of Brussels. And Cardinal Richlieu sent over one Chamberlain
hither, who for four Months had Consultations with the Jesuits, how to stir up
the Scots, and foment our Broils; as may be seen in Dr. Heylin's Life of
Archbishop Laud, and Habernfeild's Plot, etc. Or to speak in the very Words of
the late Learned Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Barlow. When King James slept with his
Fathers, and was Translated to a better Kingdom, out of the reach of Popish
Conspirators, their Designs slept not; they prosecuted their Plots and
Conspiracies (to Ruin our Church and Established Religion) as much in Charles
the First, as in his Father's time; and at last it came to this Issue, that
(other Means failing) the King and Archbishop must be taken away. This was
discovered by an Honorable Person ( Andreas ab Habernfeild) to the English
Ambassador (Sir W. Boswel) at the Hague, and by him to the Archbishop, and by
him to the King; and the Original Copy of the Discovery being found in the
Archbishop's Library, after his Death, was then published, and is in print in
many Hands, and among others, in mine. -- In the mean time (adds my Author) the
Civil Wars began, and our Popish Conspirators are first in Arms, and the bloody
Rebellion; and in Ireland murdered above 100000 Protestants in cold Blood,
without any Provocation given, but to kill Heretics, (which according to them
was Lawful and Meritorious) -- And farther, when in Process of that fatal
Rebellion, (carried on by English, and covertly by Popish Rebels) that good
King was taken, and a Council of Priests and Jesuits sitting in London,
signified the Condition of Affairs here, to a Council of their Confederates at
Paris, and they transmitted the Case to Rome, from whence Directions and
Commands were returned back again to London; in short, it was determined, that
it was for the Interest of the Catholic Cause, that the King shculd die; and
accordingly their Council of Priests and Jesuits in London voted his Death.
This (says the same Reverend Author) is now notoriously known to be true, and
in print published to the World, by Reverend and Learned Person; who, if any
shall call him to Account for it) is so convinced of the Ttuth of what he writ,
that he publicly offers to make it good, viz. Dr. Du-Moulin, (Canon of
Canterbury) in two Books, written to the same purpose. See more in Bishop
Barlow's Book, called Popish Principles, etc. inconsistent with the Safety of
Protestant Princes.

The Irish Papists, when they had promised to furnish his Majesty with 10000
Men, for the helping of him against the Parliament, did not, but endeavored to
cut off the King's Army there by Force and Treachery, and employed
Commissioners to Rome, France, Lorrain, and Spain, to invite a Foreign Power
into England. See Fowls Hist. of Romans Treasons, and the Lord Orcery 's Answer
to Peter Welsh.

About 30 Priests or Jesuits were met together by a Protestant Gentleman,
between Roan and Diep, to whom they said (taking him to be one of their Party)
they were going to England, and would take Arms in the Independent Army -- to
be Agitators. The Romish Priest and Confessor is known; who, when he saw the
fatal Stroke given to the King, flourished with his Sword, and said, Now the
greatest Enemy we had in the World is gone. When the Murder was cried down as
the greatest Villainy, the Pope commanded all the Papers about the Queen to be
burnt. Many intelligent Travelers told what Joy there was in the English
Convents beyond Seas, and the Seminaries, upon Tidings of the King's Death.
Benedictines were afraid, lest the Jesuits should get their Lands, and the
English Nuns contended, who should be Abesses; the Friars of Dunkirk were
jealous, lest the Jesuits should engross all the Glory to themselves. Du-Moul.
Answer to Plul. Angl. And though the Papists, during the Civil Wars, flocked to
the King's Army, it was because the Parliament rejected them. They are the
Words of one of their own Party, that most of the Romanists, that seemed to be
of the old King's side, only fled to his Garrisons for shelter, and not to take
up Arms, to offend the Parliament. Christ. Moderator, par. 2. p. 12, 29.
Several of them boasted, they were able to make appear their Faithfulness, and
good Affection to them (the Rump). See the Petitions of Sir R. Talbot, and
Garret Moor, Esquire; See more on this Subject in Dr. Stillingfleet 's Idolatry of
the Church of Rome, p. 301, etc.

IV. In the Reign of King Charles II.
1. There was a Design carried on all along to alienate the Affections of
Protestants one from another, as plainly showed it self first of all at the
King's Return; who being put hard to it, by the several Obligations he had
contracted upon himself, and Promises made of showing Favor to each
considerable Party in England. For he had at his Coronation in Scotland
promised, and swore by the Eternal and Almighty God, who lives and reigns for
ever, to rule the People committed to his Charge, according to the Will and
Command of God, revealed in his Word, and according to the lowable Laws and
Constitutions of that Realm, no ways repugnant to the said Word, and to procure
to the utmost of his Power to the Kirk of God, and whole Christian People, true
and perfect Peace, in time coming, etc. See the Form and Order of his
Coronation, printed by Robert Douglas, Minister at Edinburgh, and reprinted at
London, 1660. p. 20. etc. After this Engagement to the Kirk of Scotland, he
made as kind a Promise to the Papists at Breda, (as I remember) that upon
Condition they would assist him, in Recovery of his Father's Throne, he would
do what he could to promote the Interest of the Catholic Cause in England: And
he could do no less but oblige himself as faithfully to the Church of England,
who had been faithful Sticklers for his Father, as long they were able, and
afterward applied to the Son with such a Courage and Resolution, that they
never left him, till they had brought him safe to his long-desired Home. In
this Distraction of Mind he came to his Throne, and any one may easily guess
what Difficulties he must needs encounter in his following Reign. What
Endeavors were used to hinder the Puritans (or Protestant Dissenters) from
obtaining Favor with the King, as that they were ready, with Forces raised, to
oppose his Majesty, etc. See the Account of the Sham-Presbyterian-Plot, the
Papists devised then, in Yarraton 's Discovery, p. 4, 5, 6, 8, 16. What Metheds
were taken to widen the Differences between the Churchmen and Dissenters, is
too plain to need a Descant, and too fresh to be forgotten.

2. Another Plot in this King's Reign was the Burning of London, in 1666. For
it was not enough with our Adversaries to enkindle a Fire of Passion and
Discord in the Minds of People, they proceeded next to kindle a material Fire
in our most stately Buildings, and nothing less would serve, than the
Metropolis of the Nation, the great Mart of these three Kingdoms. For the Proof
whereof, I shall insist only upon these seven Particulars.

1. Strange, (Provincial of the Jesuits) Gray, Pennington, Barton, Jesuits,
etc. and Keimask, a Dominican Friar, pretending to be Fifth-Monarchy-Men,
prevailed with one Green, a Fifth-Monarchy man, but poor, by lending him 30 l.
to be an Instrument in firing London, Green brought in eight other
Fifth-Monarchy-men, as Assistants; but deferring to do it presently, they were
discovered, tried, and executed, (only Green died in Prison) the Jesuits were
not discovered, because not known to be such, 1665/6. as appears by Oates's
Nar. Art. 34. compared with the public Gazet, Apr. 30. 1666.

2. Several Persons were taken with Fireballs, brought before the Magistrates,
and Committed to Custody, but rescued by the Favor of the D. of Y.

3. One Hubbard was Executed, who confessed, that he began the Fire with one
Pie-de-loup, a Frenchman, who came over on that Design with 23 other
Frenchmen.

4. Several Letters were produced from beyond Sea, enquiring whither London was
Burnt, hearing date some Days before the Fire began.

5. Several words which the Papists had cast out here to the same purpose were
proved, as may be seen in the Depositions, and Informations before the
Committee in the House of Commons in Sept. 1666. of which Sir Robert Brokes was
Chairman.

6. The Benedictines boasted to Mr. Bedloe, that they had a hand in it, and
showed him several Letters about it, and told him, that they resolved to Burn
it again; and tampered with Mr. Bedloe about it.

7. Groves with Three Irish-men Fired Southwark.

8. Does any man begin to doubt (said the Lord Chancellor in his Speech at the
Lord Stafford's Condemnation) how London came to be Burnt? And is it not
apparent by those Instances, that such is the Frantic Zeal of some Bigoted
Papists, that they resolve no means (that may serve to advance the Catholic
Cause) shall be left unattempted, though it be by Fire and Sword?

9. If all this will not serve to convince my Incredulous Reader, I refer him
to the Monument in London, Erected in Perpetuam hujus Neferie actionis
Memoriam. Where the dead Stones witness the Truth of it, with a voice loud
enough to be heard to the utmost parts of the World.

POSTSCRIPT.
3. A third Plot in King Charles the II. Reign, was that which is commonly
known (and called by some in way of Derision) Oates's Plot: which yet, I am
persuaded in my own breast was no sham, for these Reasons following.

1. Because March 25. 1679. it was resolved, nemine contradicente, by the Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons, in Parliament Assembled, That they do
declare, that they are fully satisfied by the Proofs they have heard, that
there now is, and for diverse Years last past, has been a Horrid and
Treasonable Plot, and Conspiracy, continued and carried on by those of the
Popish Religion, for the Murdering of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and
Subverting the Protestant Religion, and the Ancient and Established Government
of the Kingdom.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parliament.

2. Because, hereupon 'the King himself Issued out two several Proclamatins for
a general Fast, the first in these words.

CHARLES, R.

WHereas the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this Parliament
Assembled, being deeply sensible of the Sad and Calamitous Condition of this
our Kingdom, occasioned chiefly by the Impious and malicious Conspirary of a
Popish Party, who have not only Plotted, and intended the Destruction of our
Royal Person, but the total Subdersion of our Government, and of the true
Protestant Religion, etc. -- have -- besought Us, that a Day might be set apart
--, we have to this their humble Request most readily inclined,

Given at White Hall, Mar. 28, 1679.
3. Because several Persons gave Testimony to the Truth thereof, who were of
their own party, as Dr. Oats, Capt. Bedloe, Mr. Jennison of Gray's Inn, Mr.
Lewis, Mr. Smith, Edmund Everard, Esquire; (who was kept four Years close Prisoner
in the Tower, by the contrivance of some English Subjects, whom he had five
Years before discovered as plotting against us in France.)

4. Because several Letters were produced relating to the fame thing, as that
of the Lord Stafford's, to the Lord Aston, -- My Lord, the Plot is discovered,
and we are all undone -- etc. Coleman's, -- Our prevailing in these things,
would give the greatest Blow to the Protestant Religion here, that ever it
received since its first Birth, etc. Petre's Letters Found among Harcourt's
Papers, etc.

5. The Actions that were done after the Discovery, to Persons concerned in the
Discovery, are a strong Argument to create suspicion of the Authors, and their
Guilt, as the Barbarous Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, (who took the first
Depositions) Mr. Arnold, and Mr. Pie.

V. In King James the II. Reign.
But this was nothing else but Plot from the beginning to the end of it: For no
Man of good sense could believe, that ever he intended to perform that fine
Promise which he made, of maintaining of the Protestant Religion, and the
Rights of the Subjects, etc. without straining Courtesy with his Religious
Principles, and natural Temper; and indeed, though he appeared very plausible at
first, and our credulous People seemed very willing to construe him in a
favorable Sense, yet when they had resigned their Charters, and themselves,
and Estates to him in a Complement (which the King took well enough) and saw
the Laws dispensed with in a gross manner, and Arbitrary Power, put up its Head
at Court, with much Confidence, and the Visitors sent down to Oxford, to purge
the University, and Roman Catholics made Justices of Peace, and put in other
places of Trust, and Masse-Houses opened publicly, and the Interceding Bishops
(who had done nothing in the World to merit his disfavour) sent to the Tower;
then, I say, these People began to open their Eyes, and were resolved not to
shut them any more (if they could help it) till they had somewhat better to
trust to, than the Promise of a King, whose Word was as inviolable as his Oath,
and who was never known to be in the least matter unfaithful in his Life; (for
such a Mask was put upon his Face, by his Friends, and he wore it a while very
willingly, till the time, that he thought he might safely take it off, and
appear boldly in his Features, and in the Head of a standing Army; who had
promised (as stoutly as he) to stand by him, till they thought it convenient to
stand no longer. But of this enough, and perhaps too much; for I do with Pity
and Grief of Mind, reflect upon the Errors of that unhappy Prince.

VI. In the Reign of King William the III.
This Prince was the happy Instrument, under God, of our Deliverance; but
neither was He warm in his Throne before he was called to Battle, first in
Ireland, where he contested with extraordinary Difficulties, and escaped
extreme Dangers from a Cannon-Bullet afterward in Flanders, where his Labors
are hardly at an end yet. But the most secret and villainous Contrivance of all
was, the late Barbarous Plot, the Scheme whereof was first laid in France, but
the Scene of the bloody Tragedy was to be in England. Here the King was to be
Assassinated, in a base and cowardly manner, as he went a hunting, on a
Saturday, Feb. 22. 1695/6. in a narrow Lane, between Brentford and
Turnham-Green; Sir George Berkley, with seven or eight more, to Attack the
King's Coach, and Assassine him, whilst two other Parties, to the number of 40,
attacked the Guards; and two more persons, Chambers and Durance, a Flemming,
were to be placed at Kensington, to give speedy Notice to the Conspirators,
when the King went abroad. At first it was agreed to be put in execution, Feb.
15. But the King not going abroad then, it was deferred till Feb. 22. The
French were to make a Descent into England, and had got Transport Ships ready,
and Soldiers, 20000, who were to Embark at Callis, Bulloign, Dunkirk, etc. The
French had at St. Germans, Feb. 7. caused 100000 Lewid'ores to be delivered
to the late King James, and desired him to hasten his Departure; a considerable
Body of his old Friends were to meet and join the French at their landing. All
things in appearance were in great forwardness, Mortars, Fieldpieces, and
heavy Cannon for Land-Service; Monsieur de Nesmond, Gabaret, and Dubart, were
to command the Men of War that were to convoy the Transport Ships; the Conduct
of the Land-Army was in the Marquess de Bevron Arcourt, as Chief, and under him
Pecontal, and Albergoti, as Mareschals de Camp; and for Brigadiers, the Duke de
Humieres, Monsieur de Biron, and Monsieur de Monray, etc. and Lapara, the chief
Engineer. The Men being Embarked the day before it was discovered here, 300
Sail, or thereabouts, weighed Anchor, and stood to Sea; but the Wind shifting,
they were obliged to return into the Ports, and disembark some part of them.
These were designed to land in Kent, Sussex, or the Mouth of the River; and the
Providence is the more remarkable, since had they gone forward, we might have
been under some surprise, as not being ready at so short a Warning, to oppose
them. At Kensington, the day being come, viz. Feb. 22. Ke^es (one of the Spies)
being sent out to see what he could learn, brought word, the Guards were
returned from Richmond, foaming. The People much wondered the King did not go a
hunting for two Saturdays together, and the Bravoes began to flag their
Courage. It seems Capt. Pendergrass discovered the bottom of the Design on Feb.
13. to Captain Porter, and he to my Lord Portland, and my Lord to the King, on
Feb. 14. the very day before the Design was to be put in Execution. After
which, several of the Conspirators have been themselves Executed, witness the
City-Gates, where now their Heads and Quarters are to be seen; and this, after
a free and fair Trial of their Cause. So that our Church may say, and our Kings
may say, as well as that excellent Queen Elizabeth, as Psalm. 129.1, 2. etc.
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth up, may Israel now say, Many a
time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet they have not prevailed against
me. The Plowers plowed upon my Back; they made long their Furrows. The Lord is
righteous; he has out asunder the Cords of the wicked.

CHAP. XXIII. The Innocent strangely cleared.
WHEN Joseph 's Brethren were constrained to go into Egypt, and buy Food of,
and make Obeisance to that very Person they had thrown into a Pit before, and
sold into Slavery; how their Conscience flew in their Faces, with sharp
Reflections of Guilt! The three Children in the fiery Furnace, and Daniel in
the Lions Den, saved so miraculously, and contrary to all Expectation, easily
extorted a Confession of their Innocence from their very Enemies. The Prodigies
of our Savior's Crucifixion procured a free Confession from some of his
Enemies, that certainly he was the Son of God. See more Instances.

1. Polycarp, when first apprehended, was pitied by many of his Enemies, that
so holy, honest, and aged a Man should be put to death: After his Prayer at the
Stake, the flame framed it self in manner of a Vault, or Sail of a Ship, with
the blustering Blasts of Wind, so that it touched not the Holy Martyr's Body,
which sent forth a fragrant Smell, like Frankincense; but the cruel Persecutors
thereupon called for a Tormentor, to thrust him through the Side with a Spear;
which being done, Blood issued out so abundantly, that it quenched the Fire, to
the Astonishment of all Beholders. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Dionysius, the Areopagite, being aimed at by the Idolatrous Priests, who
envied his Success in the Ministry, with his gracious Luster and Radiancy of
Countenance, abashed, and so affrighted his Adversaries, that they fled away.
Ibid. Some say, that by the order of Sisinnius, the Prefect of Gaul, being
thrown to wild Beasts, they would not tear him; put into a hot Oven, it would
not burn him; at last was condemned to Decollation. Ibid.

3. Justin Martyr seems accomplished by the Divine Providence, to make a stout
Apology to the Heathen Emperors, for his Christian Brethren, by passing first
through all the famous Schools of the Heathen Philosophers; by which means he
was enabled and fitted to attack them with their own Weapons; which he did
ingeniously, and courageously, and effectually, in his Plea to Antoninus, Pius,
etc. Ibid.

4. Tertullian was raised in a seasonable time by God Almighty, to plead the
Cause of his Church against their Adversaries, and slanderous Accusations; for
he ingeniously showed them, that they never intended any Stirs or Rebellions
against the Empire; it being the Frinciple of the Christians to pray for all
Men, and render Good for Evil; and whereas they were slandered for murdering
Infants, how can that be (says he) when their Custom is to abstain from all
things strangled, and from Blood, etc. Ibid. -- By his excellent Apologies he
prevailed with Severus to favor the Christians.

5. Cyprian vindicates the Christians from the Scandals charged upon them in
his time, by telling them, that the Public Calamities were not owing to the
Christians, but to the Idolatry of their Enemies, that they were long before
prophesied by Christ, and the Heathens had no reason to expect any better than
Famine, Wars and Pestilences for their Wickedness and Cruelty, in shedding so
much Blood of the Christians. Ibid.

6. Lactantius wrote seven Books of Institutions in the Behalf of the
Christians, against the Gentiles.

7. Athanasius being accused by the Miletians to the Emperor, that he had
imposed a Tribute of Linen Garments upon the Egyptians, and had gathered the
same; it pleased God, that Alipprius and Macarius, two Presbyters of Alexandria
happened to be present, who easily wiped off this false Charge; afterward he
was accused, that he had sent a Sum of Gold to one Philumenus, to take away the
Emperor, but he easily cleared himself of this too. At last he was taxed, that
he had broken the sacred Chalice, and cut off the Arm of one Arsenius that was
slain, and kept it for an Instrument in Magic. ( Arsenius was a Presbyter, who
for some great Fault had hid himself) Athanasius finding it difficult to clear
himself in this Case, employed one of his Deacons to enquire out this Arsenius;
who, with some difficulty, found him out; which so satisfied the Emperor,
Constantine, that he cleared him, and sent him back with Commendations to his
Office, requiring that this Epistle which he wrote upon this Score, might be
read in the Church, to the Terror of his Adversaries: Yet he was, after some
time, effectually prosecuted by his Restless Adversaries, and injuriously
deposed. Ibid.

8. The Arians prevailing for the Banishment of Basil, Bishop of Caesarea, and
the writing being brought to Valens, the Emperor, to sign, the Pens would not
write the least tittle, though often tried; and when the Emperor, being mad with
rage, endeavored still to confirm the Edict, his Right Hand was struck with a
great Trembling; so that at last, being terrified with these Judgments, he tore
the Writing in pieces. Ibid.

9. Mr. John Husse, who was condemned by the Council of Constance for Heresy,
was acquitted in a solemn Letter from any such fault in his Doctrine, by the
Bishop of Nazareth, who was appointed and deputed by the Sea of Rome to be
Inquisitor of Heresy in the City of Prague. Martyrol. p. 549. and more than
that, was commended for his Life and Conversation, by the Testimony of no less
than 54 of the Nobles of Moravia, in a Letter, written by them in his Behalf to
the Council of Constance. Which Letter, and the Names of the Peers, See
Martyrol. p. 386, 387.

10. Edwond Everard, Esquire; being an Agent in the French Court for the English
Militia, (by Acquaintance and Discourse with the Lady Gourdon, Sister to the
Marquess of Huntley in Scotland, then in a Popish Convent at Paris, and with
Colonel Richard Talbot, and Peter his Brother, Titular Archbishop of Dublin)
got some small glimmerings of a grand Design on Foot, for the public Settling
of Popery in England, dissolving the Parliament, or at least raising a
Misunderstanding between them and His Majesty, for Relieving the Catholics in
Ireland, for killing His Majesty, and setting up the D. of Y. coming over into
England, and making an Essay toward the Discovery of it at Court, was by
Malice, and Arts of his Enemies, fal^ly Accused, and sent to the Tower, and
there kept a close Prisoner four Years, and never in all that time called to a
fair Hearing; yet at last, when the Plot broke out by other Instruments and
Means, which God in his Wisdom produced, and made use of; He was Released from
his illegal Confinement, and brought upon the Stage as an Innocent Person, and
had Liberty granted him to Accuse his Accusers. Anno Christi 1679.

It were an endless Task to recount over the many Instances that are in the
World, even within ken of the present Generation, of Persons who have been one
while Afflicted, Disgraced, Fined, Imprisoned, etc. as Persons not fit for
common Society among their Fellows, who have been afterward received into
Favors, preferred to Places of Trust and Honor, dandled upon the Knee of a
benign Providence, and died in the Vogue of the World, good and honest Men.

11. Dr. Usher wanted not Enemies, who sought to scandalize him to King James,
under the Title of a Puritan, which was very odious to the King in those Days,
hereby to prevent his further Preferment; but God so ordered it, that it proved
an occasion of his Advancement. For King James being jealous of him upon that
score, by reason of the Eminency of his Learning, fell into Serious Discourse
with him, and thereby was so well satisfied in the Soundness of his Judgment
and Piety, that notwithstanding the Opposition made by some great ones, without
his own seeking, he was made Bishop of Mead in Ireland, which just then fell
void while he was in England; and the King often boasted, That he was a Bishop
of his own making. Clark, in his Life.

12. The Papists very rashly and hastily had Published a Libel against Luther,
(supposing he was de^d, because he was constrained for his own safety, to use
caution in appearing abroad, by r^^on of his many Enemies that laid wait for
him) signifying, How the Devils had carried away his Body, etc. Which Libel
came to Luther's hands, two Years before he died; and he reading of it, thanked
God, that the Devil and his Instruments were such Tools, that they could not
stay till his Death. Pref. to Luther 's Sermons.

I pass over the Story of Queen Emma, Mother to King Edward the Confessor, who
is said by our Historians to be causlesly suspected of too much Familiarity
with Alwinus, Bishop of Winchester; of which Suspicion she purged herself, and
him, by the Fire-Ordeal, walking bare foot over nine red-hot Plough-shares,
without any hurt; in thankfulness for which, it is said, they gave each of them
nine Manours to the Church of Winchester. Dugdale Monast. Angl. Vol. 1. inter
Addenda, p. 980.

13. A. C. 1650. Anne Green, a Servant-Maid to Sir Tho. Read, of Duns-Tew in
Oxfordshire, being with Child by some one of the Family, through over-working
her self, in turning of Malt, fell in Travail, about the fourth Month of her
time; but being but a young Wench, and not knowing how it might be, repairs to
the House of Easement, where after some Straining, the Child (scarce above a
Span long, and of what Sex not to be distinguished) fell from her unawares. She
was three Days after conveyed to the Castle of Oxford, and there Sentenced to
be Hanged. She hung half an Hour, was pulled by the Legs, and struck on the
Breast by diverse of her Friends; and after all, had several Strokes given her
on the Stomach, with the But-end of a Soldier's Musket. Afterward being cut
down, and put in a Cossin, and brought away to a House to be dissected, though
the Rope still remained strait about her Neck, they perceived her Breast to
rise; whereupon one Mason, a Tailor, in Charity to her, set his Foot upon her
Breast and Belly; and as some say, one Orum, a Soldier, struck her again with
the But-end of his Musket. After a while they perceived a small Rattling in her
Throat, and then they used means for her Recovery, by opening a Vein, laying
her in a warm Bed, and causing another to go into Bed to her, and using other
Remedies with respect to her Senselesness, Head, Throat, and Breast; insomuch
that within 14 Hours, she began to speak, and the next Day Talked and Prayed
very heartily. In the mean time, her Pardon was sued out from the Powers then
in being, and Thousands of People came to see her, magnifying the just
Providence of God, in thus asserting her Innocence of Murder. She affirmed,
that she neither remembered how the Fetters were knocked off, how she went out
of the Prison, when she was turned off the Ladder, whether any Psalm was sung,
or not; nor was she sensible of any Pains that she could remember; but, which
is most observable, she came to her self, as if she had awakened out of her
Sleep; not recovering the use of her Speech by slow degrees; but in a manner
altogether, beginning to speak just where she left off on the Gallows. She
lived afterward, and was Married, and had three Children, not dying till 1659.
Dionysius Petavius takes notice of it in his Continuation of the Hist of the
World; so does Mr. Heath, and Dr. Plot, in his Natural Hist. of Oxfordsh. p.
193.

14. I shall only take notice further, of an awful Example mentioned by A. B.
Spotswood, in his History of Scotland, p. 449. His Words are these: This Summer
(viz. Anno 1597.) there was a great Business for the Trial of Witches, amongst
others, one Margaret Atkin being apprehended on Suspicion, and threatened with
Torture, did confess her self Guilty; being Examined touching her Associates in
that Trade, she named a few, and perceiving her Delations find Credit, made
offer to detect all of that sort, and to purge the Country of them; so she
might have her Life granted: For the reason of her Knowledge, she said, That
they had a secret mark all of that sort in their Eyes, whereby she could surely
tell, how soon she looked upon any, whether they were Witches, or not: And in
this she was so readily believed, that for the space of three or four Months
she was carried from Town to Town to make Discoveries in that kind; many were
brought in question by her Delations, especially at Glasgow, where diverse
Innocent Women, through the Credulity of the Minister, Mr. John Cowper, were
condemned and put to Death. In the end she was found to be a mere Deceiver, and
sent back to Fife, where she was first Apprehended: At her Trial she affirmed
all to be false that she had Confessed of her self or others, and persisted in
this to her Death, which made many fore-think their to great forwardness that
way, and moved the King to re-call his Commission given out against such
Persons, discharging all Proceedings against them.

15. There was in the Year 1649. in a Town called Lauder in Scotland, a certain
Woman accused and imprisoned, on Suspicion of Witchcraft, when others in the
same Prison with her were Convicted, and their Execution ordered to be on the
Monday following, she desired to speak with a Minister, to whom she declared
freely, that she was guilty of Witchcraft, acknowledging also many other Crimes
committed by her, desiring that she might die with the rest: She said
particularly that she had Covenanted with the Devil, and was become his Servant
about Twenty Years before, and that he kissed her, and gave her a Name, but
that since he had never owned her. Several Ministers who were jeasous that she
accused her self untruly, charged it on her Conscience, telling her, That they
doubted she was under a Temptation of the Devil to destroy her own Body and
Soul, and adjuring her in the Name of God to declare the Truth: Notwithstanding
all this, she stiffly adhered to what she had said, and was on Monday Morning
Condemned, and ordered to be Executed that Day. When she came to the place of
Execution, she was silent until the Prayers were ended, then going to the Stake
where she was to be burnt, she thus expressed her self; All you that see me
this Day, know ye that I am to die as a Witch, by my own Confession; and I free
all Men, especially the Ministers and Magistrates, from the guilt of my Blood,
I take it wholly on my self; and as I must make answer to the God of Heaven, I
declare I am as free from Witchcraft as any Child; but being accused by a
Malicious Woman, and Imprisoned under the Name of a Witch, my Husband and
Friends disowned me, and seeing no hope of ever being in Credit again, through
the Temptation of the Devil, I made that Confession to destroy my own Life,
being weary of it, and choosing rather to Die than to Live. This her lamentable
Speech did astonish all the Spectators, few of whom could refrain from Tears.
The Truth of this Relation, says my Author, is certainly attested by a worthy
Divine, now living, who was an Eye and an Ear Witness of the whole Matter.

16. Mr. Showers, in his Discourse of Tempting of Christ, says; Many Instances
might be named of a sinful limiting the Power of God. One, among others, is
that of rash Appeals to Heaven, expecting that God by his powerful Providence
should interpose to the Decision of doubtful Cases. And this Men do, in the use
of such things, unto which some notable Effects are ascribed, which they were
never enabled or appointed, by Nature or Divine Institution, to produce: As
when a Person was Indicted upon Suspicion, or for a Fault that was secretly
committed, or upon the Testimony but of one Witness, he was to purge himself by
Ordeal, Fire or Water; that is, to put himself upon GOD, and Appeal to Him.

This was allowed by some of the Laws of Charles the Great, and was in frequent
use in this Nation in the Saxons time. Many Instances in the ninth and tenth
Century may be given of this, as a common Practice in the Christian World; when
there was not sufficient Evidence of a Man's Guilt, to put him on such
Extraordinary Trials, expecting some miraculous Appearance of God, to vindicate
his Innocence, or conclude against it. In such doubtful Cases they said they
would go ad Juaicium Dei, they would Appeal to Heaven. Many ways they had of
this, in different Forms, and several Ceremonies, and particular Prayers, with
Fasting, and Adjurations in the Names of God, to the particular Element;
various, according to the Quality of the Person, whether a Freeman, or a Slave;
that is, one of a mean and base condition; the former was to be tried by Fire,
and the latter by Water, hot or cold.

But what Ground have we to think, that if Men are Innocent, the Power of God
will this way preserve them; or if they be Guilty, that He will leave them to
suffer by it? It is true, He appointed under the Law a draught of bitter Waters
for the Woman suspected of Adultery, to discover her Innocence, or Guilt; this
was peculiarly enacted by God himself, who doubtless would assist such
extraordinary Procedure, as was of his own Institution. But it is not for us to
use such Methods of our own devising, and expect the like success.

Philip de Comines tells us of Two Franciscan Friars at Florence, who offered
themselves to the Fire to prove Savonarola to be a Heretic: But a certain
Jacobine offered himself to the Fire, to prove that Savonarola had true
Revelations, and was no Heretic. In the mean time Savonarola preached, and
made no such confident Offer: nor durst he venture at that new kind of Fire
Ordeal. But if all Four had past through the Fire, and died in the Flames, what
would that have proved? Had he been an Heretic, or no Heretic, the more or
the less for the Confidence of two or three Zealots. Thus far Mr. Showers.

17. The Persians had a Law, That if a Man were accused and found guilty, he
should not straitway be Condemned, but after a diligent enquiry of his Life and
Conversation: And if the number of his praiseworthy Deeds did countervail the
contrary, he was fully quit of the Trespass. Chetwind's Hist. Collect.

18. Eustathius, a Man famous for Preaching and Holiness of Life, opposing the
Arrian Heresy: the Arrians suborned a naughty Strumpet to come with a Child in
her Arms, and Accuse Eustathius of Adultery, and She Swore that he begat that
Child of her Body; which though he constantly denied, yet he was put out of his
place. Howbeit, his Innocence ever long was made known; for the Strumpet being
struck with Sickness, She was in such horror of Conscience, that She confessed
the whole Practice, and how She was hired to slander this holy Man, and that
yet She was not altogether a Liar, for Eustathius the Handicrafts Man begat the
Child, though not Eustathius the Preacher. See Mr. Nathanael Vincent 's Child's
Catechism.

CHAP. XXIV. Doubts strangely Resolved, and the Weak Confirmed.
SAint Peter was resolved concerning the Divinity of our Savior by a Miracle,
which so startled him, that he ^ell down at Jesus Feet, saying, Depart from me,
for I am a sinful Man, O Lord! Thomas, doubting of his Resurrection, was
resolved to accept no Satisfaction in the case, but by his own Senses, and it
was granted him, as a special favor. And it is strange to observe, how low God
stoops many times in condescension to Human Infirmities on this Score, to help
their Faith, and clear their Doubts, meeting his Children in their own way, and
sometimes Surprising them, when their Doubts are at full tide, and they least
expect them.

1. That good Gentlewoman, Mrs. Honeywood, under a deep and sad Desertion,
refused and put off all Comfort, seeming to Despair utterly of the Grace of
God. A worthy Minister being one Day with her, and Reasoning against her
desperate Conclusions, she took a Venice-Glass from the Table, and said, Sir, I
am as sure to be Damned, as this Glass is to be broken; and there with threw it
forcibly to the Ground, but to the Astonishment of both, the Glass remained
whole and sound, which the Minister taking up with admiration, rebuked her
Presumption, and showed her what a VVonder Providence had wrought for her
Satisfaction, and it greatly altered the Temper of her Mind. O how unsearchable
are all his ways, and his paths past finding ou^! Lo, these are part of his
ways, but how small a portion do we know of him! Flavel's Divine Conduct, p. 73.

2. Mrs. Joan Drake of Emersham, in her great Temptations, had a custom of
turning over the Bible, to put her Finger suddenly upon some Verse, saying, Now
whatsoever my Finger is upon, is just my Case, (whatsoever it be) and my Doom.
But the Lord did so order it, that looking upon the Verse, it was always found
encouraging and comfortable. She was much entreated to desist, but she prayed,
that she might do it once more, promising faithfully to leave off; afterward
being permitted, she opened the Bible, and put her Finger upon that excellent
Text, without looking, or reading a word, Isa. 40.27, etc. Why say thou, O
Jacob, and speak, O Israel; my way is hid from the Lord? etc. which being
read and considered of, so crossed her hopes, that it made her blush. Clark.
Exam. vol. 2. p. 357.

3. In the Life of Archbishop Usher, we are told of a Lady wavering in her
Religion, who was resolved by occasion of a Jesuit's being disabled to proceed
in a Disputation with the Bishop, and leaving the place with shame. See his
Life by Mr. Clark, p. 296. And another Lady, Wife to the Lord Mordant,
confirmed by occasion of the Jesuit's absenting from the Disputation, and
sending his excuse, that he had forgot all his Arguments, though he had them
before as ready, as his Pater N^ster, as he believed through the just Judgment
of God, because, he had undertaken to Dispute with so worthy a Man without
License of his Superior. Ibid. p. 278.

4. One Mr. Charles Langford, in a Book Published by him, called, God's
wonderful Mercy in the Mount of woeful Extremity. A. C. 1672. Tells us, that for
near Forty Years he had been Buffeted severely by Satan, who had left no Stone
unturned to do him all the mischief that he could. For the space of Forty
Years, (says he) or thereabouts, has it pleased the Hand that took me out of
my Mother's Womb, to train me up, and lead me along in this uncomfortable
Wilderness of Temptation, though I cannot say, that in all these Years, he has
left me to the violence of Spiritual Conflicts; for then the Burden had been
too heavy for Flesh to stand under so long. Yet must I needs say, my clearest
Day all that time was but clark, and however I seemed to others in point of
Comfort outwardly, sure I am, my Soul enjoyed not her rest, nor could I ever
say, I was all that while more than a Prisoner of hope, still subject unto
Bondage, and not discharged of the Debt, nor delivered from my Fears. It was
but a hard shift that I made to hold up my head, when I was at best, my worst
cannot be expressed, until now at last, that God for whom I waited in the way
of his Judgments, and from whom were my Expectations in the use of appointed
means all this while, came and was found of me when I looked not for him, and
delivered me from my strong Enemy, set my Feet upon a Rock, and Established my
goings. -- I can say by experience, Now I know there is a God, and now I know
there is a Devil: Such have been the Delusions, cursed Injections of
Blasphemous Thoughts, and dreadful Temptations wherewith he has endeavored to
^ll my Soul till the day the Lord by his great power delivered me out of his
Hands; That I have cause to know him, and to make him known, as I am able to
the World. -- In short, though he had been tempted to Murder his Wife, and made
Provision for it, and she knew it, yet she still performed the duty of a
faithful Yoke Fellow; and upon April 16. 1669. (a day for ever to be Solemnized
as Glorious and Honorable by me his poor Creature) They are his own words: she
going on in her constant course of Prayer, after she had given the Lord his
Holy and Reverend Titles, using Moses's Arguments, brake forth into these
words, My Father, my Father! What will thou do with my Husband? He has been
speaking and acting still in thy cause: Oh! Destroy him not for thine own
Glory. Oh! What dishonor will come to thy great Name if thou do it. Oh! Rather
do with me what thou will. On Rather Do what thou will. But spare my Husband,
etc. -- He that is pleased to style himself a God hearing Prayer, and in most
of his great works delights to advance his own power, by using small and
unlikely means, after long tarrying, and in a time when I looked not for him,
came now and owned his own Ordinance, crowned the Cries, and Faith, and
Patience of a poor Woman with such success, that my praise shall be continually
of him. The proud may scorn, but the humble shall hear thereof and be glad.
That roaring Lion, mine Adversary the Devil, that old Serpent, that red Dragon,
that unclean Spirit that Liar, that false Accuser, -- Murderer, -- Appollyon --
Abaddon -- even now, when he thought himself almost settled in the Possession
of his long sought Dominion) and that there was no casting him out of my Soul,
which he had abused, making it his Dunghill, whereon he laid all the fifth of
Hellish Thoughts, and Abominations that he could; now was sent to his own
place, by my dear Lord Christ, who broke the Doors of Brass, and rescued me
from the Rape of Hellish Furies, etc. See the Book writ by his own Hand, p. 53,
54. etc.

5. When I was Minister of Shipley in Sussex, a certain Man of another Parish
on a Lord's Day after Evening Service, came to me, and desired to speak with me
about some particular Case of Conscience, (I think it was concerning the Sin
against the Holy Ghost; after some discourse upon the point, he told me, that
he had for many Years been haunted with doubts, and great fears about his
Salvation, and could enjoy no comfort; but at last unexpectedly as he was at
his Loom, (for he was a Weaver by Trade a certain Text of Scripture was
suggested to his mind, by he knew not what secret Impulse, and thereupon all
the thick Fog, which he had so long labored under was scattered, and the Room
was filled with Light, and he enjoyed a great Serenity, and Peace, and Comfort
afterward.

6. Mrs. Polsted, of Bednel Green, for a great while was in great Darkness, and
Deserted. It prevailed, even to the uttering of words dreadful to her Friends:
But drawing near to her end, she desired my Sister Dunn to stay with her that
Night she died, and to close her Eyes. She lay by her upon the Bed, when she
spoke to her thus, O Mrs. Dunn, it is a dreadful thing to be separated from
Christ for ever, for ever! Yes, so it is, says her Friend, but I am persuaded it
shall never be your Portion. She fell into a kind of a Slumber, and a little
after spoke Mrs. Dunn, Christ is come let us haste to meet him, let us haste to
meet him. She asked her, if she had now closed with Christ, yes, said she, I
stick to my first choice, I stick to my first choice. What shall I render to
the Lord? What shall I render to the Lord? And so died praising the Lord.

7. Mrs, Charlton once told me, That after a Desertion of about Eight Years,
she had such a Flood of Spiritual Joy, that when she walked in the Streets they
seemed to her Paved with Gold, for a Fortnights time; and she was fain to beg
of God to stay his Hand, Her Body being not able to bear it.

8. Mr. Nutkin of Okingham, told me, That once after near Fifty Years
Profession, upon a Day of Thanksgiving, observed by himself upon a recovery
from Sickness, and to beg a Sanctified use of Health restored; on a sudden a
dark Cloud fell on him, that all his Profession had been Hypocrisy. That Day,
and the Night after, which he passed without Sleep; it continued, and he was so
held down by the Temptation, he had not power to look into his Bible. The next
Day he thought thus, Have I been so long acquainted with the Lord, and shall
not I dare to look into his word? Opened his Bible, and it opened in the 10.
Heb. and the first word he cast his Eye on, was that Text, If a Man Sin
willingly, etc. He reflected on himself by Examination, and Conscience answered
for him; upon which the Cloud began to scatter presently, and e're Night, came
he was comforted.

These Three Relations concerning Mrs. Polsted, Mrs. Charlton, and Mr. Nutkin
of Okingham, were all sent me by the Reverend Mr. Singleton, now living in
Hogsdon-Square, near London, and are Printed as I received them from him.

9. Melancthon going onoe upon some great Service for the Church of Christ, and
having many doubts and fears about the Success of his business, was much
cheared up, and confirmed by a Company of poor Women and Children, whom he
found together Praying for the laboring Church, and casting it by Faith into
Christ's everlasting Arms. Clark's Examp. vol. 1. c. 119. out of Seluccer.

10. Andronicus, the Emperor of Constantinople, finding that all things went
cross with him, took a Psalter in his Hand to resolve his doubtful Mind; and
opening the same, as it were to resolve his Doubts thereby, and ask Counsel of
the Oracles of God, the first Verse he fixed his Eye upon, was Psalm. 68.14. When
the Almighty scattered Kings, etc. whereby he was comforted, and directed what
to do for his greater safety. Turk Hist. p. 164.

11. S. Augustine being in Trouble on the hinge of his Conversion, and retired
into his Garden, pouring forth his Tears plentifully, and not knowing what to
do, was warned by a Voice from Heaven, saying, Toll, Lege, Take and Read. And
immediately, having S. Paul's Epistles by him, he opened the Book, and the
first Text he turned to was Romans 13. etc. Not in riotting and Drunkenness, etc.
with which he was satisfied; and giving the Book to his dear friend Alipius, he
read on, Him that is weak in faith receive, but not to doubtful Disputations;
which gave a sufficient Direction to Alipius too. August. Conf. lib. 8.

12. Sarah, Daughter of Mr. Tho. Wight, sometime of the Auditor's Office in
London, (about the Year 1643.) was for four Years often in great Doubt and
Despair, and tormented with diverse Temptations, viz. to believe that there was
no God, Devil, Heaven nor Hell, but what she felt in her own Conscience. One
day, being violently assaulted with that Temptation, that there was no Hell,
but what she felt within her self; having a little white earthen Cup in her
Hand, she said, that she was as sure to be damned, as that was to break; and
therewithal threw it from her to break it, but it brake not. Again, she said,
as sure as this Cup will break, there is no Hell; and threw it more violently
against the f^rther side of the Chamber, and yet it brake not. Her Mother took
it up, and said, See, Child, it is not broken. She got it again, and said, and
did the like four or five times, only the fifth time a little nip brake out.
After her Recovery, she still desired to drink out of that Cup, to put her in
Mind of God's Goodness toward her. Notwithstanding, she continued comfortless
till April 10. 1647. About Midnight, when all humane Help failed, and former
Means could not do it; yet, when she was made utterly incapable of receiving
Comfort that way: For now the was stricken both blind and deaf, her Eyes being
fast closed up; her first Speeches were, My Soul thirsts for the Water of Life,
and I shall have it. This, with great Ardency of Spirit, she repeated over four
times, then drank three or four little Cups of Water, and then sitting up, with
a lowly cheerful Countenance, much Brokenness (...) Heart, and Tears trickling
down her Cheeks, she spoke with a low Voice, Ah! that Jesus Christ should come
from the Bosom of his Father, and take the Nature of Man upon him, and come in
such a low Estate, and lie in a Manger! -- Christ came to the lowest Soul! he
lay is a Manger, in a contemptible place! Do you not see an Excellency in him?
I tell you. There is more Excellency in Him, in lowest State, that in a World;
yea, than in Ten Thousand Worlds? (...) Do you not see an Excellency in Him,
who came here to die for, even for Sinners; yea, for the greatest of Sinners;
for the chiefest Sinners: A dying Christ for a denying Peter! (this she
repeated three times) Peter denied him, yet he died for him! Go tell Peter --
(here she ^^wsed^ and admired) For a Peter! for a Mary Magdalen! for a Theif on
the Cross, that none should despair! etc. Thus she continued till April 13.
blind and deaf; neither eating nor drinking any thing but a little Water, nor
speaking, till at last, starting up suddenly, she said, The Devil fights with
me, as with Michael and his Angels, but the Angel shall prevail, etc. -- Nay,
she took nothing till May 19th. except a little Water, and once a little Broth,
which she cast up immediately, and yet looked better, than for seven or eight
Weeks before. And at last, after long Weakness, and many gracious Expressions,
June 11th. that Text came into her Mind, Mark 5. v. last. Damsel, I say unto
thee arise, etc. and was fully persuaded, that so in should be to her self. And
accordingly it was; for she eat heartily with Joy before them all; called for
her Clothes; rose up, stood on her Feet. Many Persons, of all Ranks, visited
her in this time of her Visitation, and were Ear and Eyewitnesses of these
things, at the time of her Recovery; she was not full 16 Years old. Clark's
Examp. Vol. 2. p. 436.

CHAP. XXV. The Modest and Humble strangely advanced.
BEfore Honor is Humility, says Solomon, Prove. 15.33. and though the Lord be
high, yet has he respect unto the lowly. Ps. 138.6. It Is certain, humble Men
are best qualified for the favors of Heaven, and that they have of oftentimes
an Earnest given them here of the good things of this Life, appears plainly in
the Examples of the Primitive Disciples and Christians.

1. Athanasius, upon occasion of examining other Boys at Play, and preparing
them for Baptism, was by Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, observing the Sport,
first set to School, afterward made Deacon, and at last, when Alexander lay
dying, wished by him to be his Successor, which he afterward (though
unwillingly) was.

2. Dr. Usher was noted for his Humility, in stooping to the Capacity of the
meanest, in his high Thoughts of others, and low of himself; and when the
Provostship of the College of Dublin's as offered him, he refused it, at 30
Years of age; yet was afterward without any (...) of his own, by King James,
made Bishop of Mead, and afterward Archbishop of Armagh, etc. See his Life.

3. Cardinal Pool was a learned, humble, prudent and moderate Man, and
accordingly preferred to the Archbishopric of Canterbury; upon receiving of
the Pall, he made a cold Sermon concerning the beginning, use and virtues of
the Pall, without either Learning or Eloquence; and tho he stood fair for the
Pontifical Chair, upon the death of Pope Paul III. and the Party for him had
gained almost a sufficient number of Suffrages, he seemed little concerned at
it, and did rather decline, than aspire to that Dignity. Yea, and when a full
number had agreed, and came to adore him, according to the ordinary Ceremony,
he received it with his usual Coldness; and that being done in the Night, he
said, God loved Light, and therefore advised them to delay it till Day came;
upon which, the Italians, among whom, Ambition passes for the Character of a
great Mind, looked on this as an unsufferable piece of Dullness; so the
Cardinals shrunk from him before day, and chose de Monte Pope, who reigned by
name of Julius the III. His first Promotion was very extraordinary, for he gave
his own Hat to a Servant that kept his Monkey; and being asked the Reason of
it, He said, He saw as much in his Servant, to recommend him to be a Cardinal,
as the Conclave saw in him, to choose him to be Pope. See Abridgment of the
Hist. of the Reform. l. 2. p. 121.

And it is remarkable, that notwithstanding he had such an humble Opinion of
his own Parts, yet he behaved himself so wisely at the Council of Trent, that
it raised his Esteem much; and moved the Conclave of Rome to a Design of
promoting him to the Popedom, Ibid. See more in the Chapter of present
Retribution to the Humble and Modest.

CHAP. XXVI. Persons strangely admonished, of Sins, or Dangers.
WE have to deal with so gracious a God, and one so concerned for our Welfare
and Salvation, that he seldom lets his Children run into Dangers, without
giving them a previous Notice and Admonition of it. Thus the Persecution,
designed by Herod against our Savior, was notified to Joseph in a Dream, and
withal, a way directed for his Escape. S. Peter was told plainly beforehand of
Satan 's Defire to sift and winnow him. Judas o his Temptation, and all the
rest of the Apostles of their stumbling and Offense. And indeed all the
Christian Disciples had fair warning of the Dangers that awaited them in the
World, after our Savior's Ascension into Heaven; and therefore they were to
fore-arm themselves with Prudence and Innocence, etc. How S. Paul was
admonished by Agabus of his being bound at Jerusalem. See Act. 21.11, 12.

1. We do elsewhere relate in this Book how a Gentleman in London, whenever
he was drunk, was continually molested with a Noise over his Head as he lay in
his Bed, etc.

2. Some few Days before the Duke of Buckingham's going to Portsmouth (where he
was stabbed by Felton) the Ghost of his Father, Sir George Villiers, appeared
to one Parker, (formerly his own Servant, but then Servant to the Duke) in his
Morning-Chamber-Gown; charged Parker to tell his Son, that he should decline
that Employment and Design he was going upon, or else he would certainly be
murdered. Parker promised the Apparition to do it, but neglected it. The Duke
making Preparations for his Expedition, the Apparition came again to Parker,
taxing him very severely for his Breach of Promise, and required him not to
delay the acquainting his Son of the Danger he went in. Then Parker the next
day told the Duke, that his Father's Ghost had twice appeared to him, and had
commanded him to give him that warning. The Duke slighted it, and told him, he
was an old doting Fool. That Night the Apparition came to Parker, and said,
Thou have done well in warning my Son of his Danger; but though he will not yet
believe thee, go to him once more however, and tell him from me by such a Token
(naming a private Token) which no Body knows but only he and I, that if he will
not decline his Voyage, such a Knife as this is (pulling a Knife out from under
his Gown) will be his Death. This Message Parker also delivered the next day to
the Duke, who when he heard the private Token, believed that he had it from his
Father's Ghost, yet said that his Honor was now at Stake, and he could not go
back from what he had undertaken, come Life, come Death.

This Passage, Parker, after the Duke's Murder, communicated to his
Fellow Servants, Henry Ceely, who told it to a Reverend Divine, a Neighbor of
mine, from whose Mouth I have it, says Mr. Glaenvil, in his Sadducism.
Triumph. p. 410.

3. A Gentleman in Ireland, near to the Earl of Orory's, sending his Butler one
Afternoon to buy Cards; as be passed a Field, he to his wonder, espied a
Company of People sitting round a Table, with a deal of good Cheer before them,
in the midst of the Field. And he going up toward them, they all arose, and
saluted him, and desired him to sit down with them: But one of them whispering
these Words in his Ear, Do nothing this Company invites you to do: He thereupon
refused to sit down, and immediately the Table, and all that belonged to it,
were gone; and the Company are now playing and dancing. And the Butler being
desired to join himself with them; but he refusing, they fall all to work; but
he refusing to work with them, they all disappeared. The Man runs strait home,
and was no sooner entered his Master's House, but down he falls, and lay some
time senseless; but coming to himself again, he related to his Master what had
happened.

The Night following there comes one of this Company to his Bedside, and tells
him, that if he offered to stir out of Doors the next day, he would be carried
away. Hereupon he kept within; but toward the Evening, having need to make
Water, he adventured to put one Foot over the Threshold, several standing by.
Which he had no sooner done, but the espied a Rope cast about his Middle, and
the poor Man was hurried away with great swiftness, they following after him as
fast as they could, but could not overtake him. At length they espied a
Horseman coming toward them, and made signs to him to stop the Man, whom he
saw coming near him, and both ends of the Rope, but no Body drawing. When they
met, he laid hold on one end of the Rope, and immediately had a smart Blow
given him over his Arm with the other end. But by this means the Man was stopped,
and the Horseman brought him back with him.

The Earl of Orory hearing of these strange Passages, sent to the Master to
desire him to send this Man to his House, which he accordingly did: And the
Morning following, or quickly after, he told the Earl that his Spectre had been
with him again, and assured him, that that day be should most certainly be
carried away, and that no Endeavors should avail to the saving of him. Upon
this he was kept in a large Room, with a considerable number of Persons to
guard him, among whom was the famous Stroker, Mr. Greatrix, who was a
Neighbor. There were besides other Persons of Quality, two Bishops in the
House at the same time, who were consulted touching the use of a Medicine the
Spectre or Ghost prescribed; of which, mention will be made anon, but they
determined on the Negative. But this by the by.

Till part of the Afternoon was spent, all was quiet, but at length he was
perceived to rise from the Ground. Whereupon Mr. Greatrix and another lusty Man
clapped their Arms over his Shoulder, one of them before him, and the other
behind, and weighed him down with all their Strength. But he was forcibly taken
up from them, and they were too weak to keep their hold, and for a considerable
time he was carried in the Air to and fro over their Heads; several of the
Company still running under him, to prevent his being hurt, if he should fall.
At length he fell, and was caught before he came to the Ground, and had by that
means no hurt.

All being quiet till Bedtime, my Lord ordered two of his Servants to lie with
him, and the next Morning he told his Lordship, that his Spectre was again with
him, and brought a wooden Dish with gray Liquor in it, and bad him drink it
off. At the first sight of the Spectre, he said he endeavored to awake his
Bedfellows, but it told him, That that endeavor should be in vain, and that he
had no cause to ear him, he being his Friend, and he that at first gave him the
good Advice in the Field, which had he not followed, he had been before now
perfectly in the power of the Compan he saw there. He added, that he concluded
it was impossible, but that he should have been carried away the day before,
there being so strong a Combination against him. But now he would assure him
that there would be no more Attempts of that Nature; but he being troubled with
two sorts of sad Fits, he had brought that Liquor to cure him of them, and bid
him drink it. He peremptorily refusing, the Spectre was angry, and upbraided
him with great disingenuity, but told him, That however he had a kindness for
him, and that if he would take Plantine Juice he should be well of one sort of
Fits, but he should carry the other to his Grave. The poor Man having by this
time somewhat recovered himself, asked the Spectre, whether by the Juice of
Plantain he meant that of the Leaves or Roots? It replied, The Roots.

Then it asked him, whether he did not know him? He answered, No. He replied, I
am such a one. The Man answered, He has been long dead. I have been dead (said
the Spectre or Ghost) seven Years, and you know that I lived a loose Life; and
ever since have I been hurried up and down in a restless condition with the
Company you saw, and shall be to the day of Judgment. Then he proceeded to tell
him, that had he acknowledged God in his ways he had not suffered such severe
things by their means. And further said, You never prayed to God that day
before you met with this Company in the Field, and also going about an unlawful
Business; and so vanished. Mr. Glanvil's Sadducism Triumph. p. 423.

4. Mr. Alexander Clogie, Minister of Wigmore, in the County of Hereford, aged
Fourscore Years, published a Set of Sermons, A. 16^4. under this Title, Vox
Corvi, or the Voice of the Raven, that thrice spoke these Wards distinctly,
viz. Look into Colossians the 3d. and 15th. Licensed according to Order.
London, Printed by W. B. etc. The occasion of it was, as we are told in the
Epistle to the Reader: On the 3d. of Feb. 1691. about Three in the Afternoon,
this Reverend Divine, a Persons of the Venerable Age of Eighty Years, and Forty
of those a laborious Teacher of God's Word, in the Parish of Wigmore, being in
the Hall of his own House, with his Wife, some Neighbors and Relations,
together with two small Grandchildren of his, in all, to the number of eight
Persons; Thomas Kinnersley, one of the said Grandchildren, of 10 Years of Age,
starting up from the Fireside, went out of the Hall-door, and sat himself
down upon a Block, by a Wood-pile, before the Door, cutting of a Stick, and in
ress than a qu^^ter of an Hour returned into the Hall, in great Amazement, his
Countenance pale and affrighted, and said to his Grandfather and Grandmother,
Look in the 3d. of the Colossians, and the 15th. with a great Palsion and
Earnestness, repeating the Words no less than three times, telling them with a
mighty Ardency, that a Raven had spoken them three times from the Peak of the
Steeple, and that it looked toward W. W.'s House, and shook its Head
thitherward, directing its Looks and Motions still toward that House. All
which Words he heard the Raven distinctly utter three times, and then saw it
mount and fly out of Sight. The Grandfather turning to the Text in the Bible,
and reading the Words, Let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts, etc. The Child
was fully satisfied, and his Countenance composed again. The Family to which
the Raven seemed to direct her Voice, were by means hereof perfectly
Reconciled. I doubt not, but this Relation will seem incredible in an Age of so
little Faith; but I have not time to plead for the Credibility of every
particular and strange Story that I relate. Sure I am, Mr. Clogie does not
Preach or Write like a Man fallen into his Dotage, or like a weak and unskilful
Divine.

5. Dwelling at Leeds in Kent, says Mr. Batman, Professor in Divinity, a
glowing Light, like unto a quick Cole, appeared at my Bed's Feet, at the sudden
sight whereof, I was as well in doubt, as afraid, taking view thereof twice or
thrice, to the end I would not be deceived of that Appearance, and desiring
God's Assistance from Evils, it vanished away. Shortly after I was in present
danger of being Slain in the House of him, whom I took to be my Friend, etc.
Not many Years after I fell into the Hands of Inconstant Men, whose double
De^lings I referred to God; and one of them was struck Blind, another fell into
a Dropsy, a Third asked Forgiveness, etc. There happened to me in Kent also, a
sudden Fire in the House wherein I then dwelt, so that the House was consumed
to the Ground; whether because before that time I greatly reproved Witchery, of
those that then were Suspected, or for my secret Sins against God, from the
which no Flesh is clear, I appeal before the Throne of thy most magnificent
Grace, etc. Do^n's Warning to the Judgment, p. 410.

I could add many more Instances of this kind, but having already mentioned
some others in other Chapters, I shall forbear, lest I cloy my Reader, and
provoke him to a nauseate or loathing. Nequid nimis.

CHAP. XXVII. Remarkable Faith.
THE Graces of the Spirit of God found to be Sincere (but especially in an
excellent degree) in Christians, are called frequently in the Gospel, The
Earnest of the Spirit, and the Earnest of the Future I^heritance; as if God
never bestowed these Qualities upon any but as Dispositions to Eternal Glory,
and a Token of special Love, and everlasting Favor. I shall therefore in the
next place proceed, to enquire after a few Remarkable Instances of this Nature,
and first of all of Faith, that Grace that is so mightily commended under the
Economy of the New Testament.

1. Luther was a Man of great Faith and Resolution, as appears by these
Passages in his Sermons: Sir Devil, I gear not thy Threatenings and Terrors,
for there is one whose Name is Jesus Christ, in whom I believe; He has
abolished the Law, condemned Sin, vanquished Death, and destroyed Hell. And
again: Good Mrs. Death, Do thou know this Man Christ? Come and bite out his
Tooth; Have thou forgotten how little thy Biting prevailed with him once? --
Faith kills Reason, that Beast and Monster, that all the World cannot kill, --
and Laughs at all the Iniquiry, Rage and Fury of the World, etc.

2. Archbishop Usher, though he foretold in the time of his greatest
Prosperity, that he should die in Poverty, yet made little Provision for the
Storm; and though his Losses in Ireland (upon the turn of the Times) were
great, and his Straits in England very considerable, yet when two several
Offers were made him from Foreign Nations, the one from Cardinal Richlieu, in
relation to his great Learning, with a promise of large Maintenance, and
Liberty to live where he listed in France among the Protestants; the other from
the States of Holland, who proffered him the Place of Honorarius Professor at
Leyden, which had an ample Stipend belonging to it; yet he refused both, and
chose rather to put himself upon Divine Providence in his own Country. Cl^rk,
in his Life.

3. Mr. Heron, on his Deathbed, being minded of his young Children, whom he
had made but slender Provision for, made this Answer, (which my Author says,
was Censured for too light by some Persons) That he did not fear, but He that
fed the young Ravens, when they cried unto him, would likewise take care of,
and provide for the young Herons. Dr. Fuller, in his Meditations.

4. Mr. Lancaster, being by Birth a good Gentleman, and sometime Fellow in
King's College in Cambridge, he was but little of Stature, but eminent, as for
other things, especially for his living by Faith. His Charge being great, and
his Means so small, his Wife would many times come to him, when she was to send
her Maid to Banbury Market to buy Provision, and tell him that she had no
Money; his usual Answer was, Yet send your Maid, and God will provide; and
though she had no Money, yet she never returned empty, for one or other that
knew her to be Mr. Lancaster's Maid, either by the way, or in Banbury Town
meeting her would give her Money, which still supplied their present wants. Mr.
Clark, in the Life of Dr. Harris.

5. Mr. Edw. Lawrence, formerly Minister of Basckarth in Shropshire, but
refusing to comply with the Act of Uniformity, and thereupon being in danger of
being turned out of his Living, being asked, How he would maintain his Wife,
and so many small Children as he had? Made Answer, I intend to live and
maintain my Family upon the Fifth Chapter of Saint Matthew.

CHAP. XXVIII. Remarkable Courage, and Boldness.
FEar not thou, them says our Savior, that can destroy the Body, and after
that have nothing, that they can do, etc. certainly a good Christian Courage in
a good Cause, and under the Conduct of an humble Prudence, is the Gift of God,
and Blessing of Heaven, and one of those Graces, that bespeak the person
endowed therewith to be somewhat more than common Man. Our dear Savior was
taken notice of, for one that Preached with Authority; and the Apostles with a
(...) a liberty of Speech, and boldness of Spirit, which their Adversaries were
not able to resist. And sometimes we may pick up such Examples of boldness in
succeeding Ages of the Church, as these that follow.

1. Ignatius being required to be present at the Gratulatory Sacrifices
appointed by Trajan after the Parthian War, which were to be offered in every
City, before Trajan's Face, did justly and sharply reprove the Idolatry; for
which cause he was delivered to ten Soldiers, to be carried to Rome. Clark's
Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Polycarp would not fly, when in danger of Persecution and Martyrdom,
saying, The will of the Lord be done; and coming to the Searchers, he communed
with them very cheerfully, and commanded that the Table should be spread for
them, entreating them to eat and dine well, requesting but one Hours space for
his Prayers, which was granted him. Ibid.

3. Origin was in his early Years desirous of Martyrdom, and would have
thrusted himself into the Persecutors Hands, had not his Mother in the Night
time privily conveyed away his Clothes on purpose to restrain him; and when he
could do no more, he stoutly Exhorted his Father then ^^^^rison, by Letters,
that he would not alter his purpose of Suffering for his Son's sake. Dr. Cave,
Prim. Christ. Clark Marrow of Eccl. Hist. etc.

4. Valentinian Jun. compassing the Church where Ambrose was (in a great rage)
with a great number of Armed Soldiers, commanded him to come forth; but he
nothing terrified, answered, That I will never willingly do, neither will I
betray the Sheepfold of my Sheep, to the Wolves, nor deliver up the Temple of
God to the Authors of Blasphemy; but if thou please to kill me, here is my
Breast, pierce it as thou please, with Spear or Sword; I am willing to
embrace such a Death. Upon which resolute Answer. the Emperor withdrew. ibid.

5. Luther's Courage and Boldness is well known; when dissuaded from going to
Dispute at Worms, for fear of his Enemies, If I thought, says he, there were
danger of our Cause, I would go, though there were as many Devils in Worms, as
Tiles upon the Houses: And another time to his Friends, quaking for fear of
future troubles, Come, says he, let us sing the 46th. Psalm. and let all the
Devils in Hell do their worst. Pref. to his Sermons.

6. John Frith to certain Messengers sent by the Archbishop to bring him
before him, and they dissuading Frith from stiffness in his Opinion about the
Sacrament, made answer, I most heartily thank you for your Good Will and
Council, whereby I see your Good Will to me, yet my Cause and Conscience is
such, that in no wise I may or can without danger of Damnation, start aside,
and fly from the Truth whereof I am convinced, and which I have Published
concerning the Lord's Supper; so that if I be asked what my Judgment is about
it, I must needs declare my Judgment, and Conscience therein, as I have
formerly written, though I was sure to lose Twenty Lives, if I had so many.
Clarks Eccl. Hist. p. 158.

7. King Arthur, to increase the Courage of his Soldiers, Instituted the Order
of Knights of the Round Table, that he might reward the well deserving with
Titles of Honor. None were admitted into this Order, but such of the Nobility,
as were in all, the number of 150. the chiefest of them being Sir Lancelot, Sir
Tristram, Sir Lamrock, Sir Grawine, and others. These were all Recorded for
Knights of great Renown; and had not King Arthur's Valor been most
transcendent, each of them might have passed fpr no less than a Worthy, though
they must fall short of the Deeds of King Arthur, of whom it is written, that
in one Battle against the Saxons with his own Sword named Callibourn, he slew
800 of them. England's Worthies, by William Winstanley, p. 10.

8. Lucius Hiberius, the Roman Legate, demanded of him a Tribute for Britain,
which he not only denied but also threatened to have a Tribute from Rome, as
appears in his Letter sent unto the Senate, where I find it thus written in
an old Manuscript. Understand among you of Rome, that I am King Arthur of
Britain, and freely it hold and shall hold, and at Rome hastily will I be, not
to give you Truage, but to have Truage of you: For Constantine, that was
Hellen's Son, and other of my Ancesters Conquered Rome, and thereof were
Emperors, and that they had and held, I shall have yours. God's grace. And
accordingly he set forward against Lucius Hiberus, who with great Power, and
vain Confidence, came Marching against him, where after a long and Bloody
Fight, the Romans were Discomfited, their General killed, and his slain Body
sent to the Senate for the Tribute of Britain. ibid

9. Mr. Broughton was exceedingly Courageous and Bold, and free in inveighing
against Popery, Jesuitism among the Papists, and Jesuits, and also Judaism
among the Jews. As once more, especially at the B. of Mentz's Table, where also
diverse Jesuits were present, with whom he Discoursed so freely, and sharply
against the Papacy, as Antichristian, and against the Blindness and Wickedness
of the Romanists, that the Protestants, who were present with him, were afraid
that would have endangered both himself, and them. At another time, being in
one of the Jews Synagogues, at the time of their Servce, where their public
Minister Read and Prayed in a strange and uncouth Tone; one of the Jews, as he
came out, said unto him, Did not our Minister Sing like an Angel? No, (says
he) he Barked like a Dog; and so called for a Dispute with him, where they had
long and much tugging.

10. He was once Traveling here in England, and being in his Inn, a Royster in
the Room next to him was Swearing horribly, and at no measure; in went, he
boldly to him, and, Who art thou, (says he) thou Wretch, who dare thus to
Blaspheme, and Profane the Glorious Name of the great God? And some other like
words, which he set on with so great an awe and boldness that the Roarer became
calm, and took his sharp reproofs especially when he came to understand who he
was,) in very good part. In his Life, p. 4.7.

11. It was the saying of one who suffered in Queen Mary's Regn. -- I was an
honest poor Man's Daughter, never brought up at the University as you have, but
I have driven the Plow before my Father many a time, I thank God; yet
notwithstanding, in defense of God's Truth, and in the cause of my Master
Christ, by his Grace, I will set my Foot against the Foot of any of you all in
the maintenance of the same and if I had a Thousand Lives they should go for
payment thereof. Fox Matyrol.

12. If I had a Hundred Bodies, said Mr. Hawks, I would suffer them all to be
torn in pieces rather than Abjure, or Recant. ibid.

13. Mr. Rothwel, (called afterward by the Devil in a posessed Person, Bold
Rothwel,) being recommended to the Lady Bows, for a fit Minister to be
employed in the North, in the Bishopric of Durham; after his first Days Labor
there for Trial, being well liked of by the People, and returning afterward to
the Lady Bows, he told her, he would go; she replied, though for their sakes she
was glad, yet she was afraid to send him, understanding that they were of a
fierce Disposition, and having never heard the Gospel, might deal unkindly with
him. He answered, Madam, if I thought, I should never meet the Devil there, I
would never come there, he and I have been at odds in other places, and I hope,
we shall not agree there. See his Life, by Mr. Clark, p. 70.

14. King Charles the I. spending one Sunday in a serious debate of the Lord
Strafford's Case, in the Morning with the four Bishops, of London, Durham,
Lincoln, and Carlisle; the Archbishop of Armagh not being there, but Preaching
in the Church of Covent Garden, as he used to do; was sent for by a particular
Order from his Majesty; The Bishop descended from the Pulpit, and told the
Messenger, that he was then, as himself saw, employed in God's business, which
ass^on as he had done, he would attend upon the King to understand his
Pleasure. See his Life by Mr. Clark, p. 297.

15. In like manner, Sir Thomas Moor sent answer to King Henry 8th. when a
Messenger came to call him from Mass; as is elsewhere spoken of in this Book.

CHAP. XXIX. Remarkable Patience.
THE Patience of Christian Confessors and Martyrs in the early Ages of the
Church, was a Potent Argument to persuade many of their Adversaries, that they
were bore up with somewhat more than the Principles of mere Philosophy, or the
stiffness of a depraved Nature; and that the Christian Religion furnished them
with a better Assurance, and a clearer ground of Confidence in their Cause,
than was obvious to a common Age, or to be found in any other System of
Religion in the World; and therefore it cannot be amiss to enquire, what
Examples of this kind we can meet with.

1. Ignatius, to the Church of Trallis, exhorting them not to refuse Martyrdom,
uses these Expressions. From Syria to Rome, I had a Battle with Beasts, as
well by Sea as by Land, Night and Day, being bound by Ten cruel Leopards
(Soldiers) which the more Benefits they receive at my hands, became so much the
worse to me; but I being exercised, and now well acquainted with their
Injuries, am taught every Day more and more to bear the Cross, yet hereby am I
not Justified. Would to God I were once come to the Beasts prepared for me,
which I wish also to fall upon me with all their violence, etc. Vid. Dr. Cave's
Prim. Christ. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. etc.

2. S. Hierom Reports of Melania, That her Husband lying dead by her, she lost
two of her Sons at the same time; but she, instead of bursting into a Passion,
fell down, and said; Lord, I shall serve Thee more nimbly and readily, by being
eased of this weight which thou have taken from me. Dr. Cave's Prim. Christ.

3. When Lucius, one of the Primitive Martyrs, for speaking in behalf of one of
the Christians, that he had very hard measure, was Condemned forthwith; he
heartily thanked his Judge for it, that by this means he should be delivered
from such unrighteous Governors, and be sooner sent home to his Heavenly
Father. Justin M.

4. John Picus Mirandula was of a cheerful Countenance, and of so composed a
Mind, That he was scarce ever seen angry. Clark in his Life.

5. By reason of our strange and wonderful Courage and Strength (says
Lactantius) new Additions are made to us; for when the People see Men with
infinite variety of Torments torn in pieces, and yet maintain a Patience
unconquerable, and able to live out its Tormentors, they are convinced (what
the Truth is) that the Consent of so many, and the Perseverance of dying
Persons, cannot be in vain; nor that Patience it self, were it not from God,
could hold out under such Racks and Tortures: Thieves, and Men of a robust
Body, are not able to bear such tearing in pieces, they groan and cry out, and
are overcome with Pain, because not endued with Divine Patience; but our very
Children and Women (to say nothing of our Men) do with Silence conquer their
Torments; nor can the hottest Fire force the least groan from them. Dr. Cave,
out of Lactant.

6. Justin Martyr, by the force of such Arguments, turned from being a Platonic
Philosopher to be a Christian. I thought, says he, it was impossible for such
Persons to live in Vice and Luxury, etc. Apo^. 1. c. 50.

7. Li^s^^^, to (...) of his Friends, who minded him on his Deathbed of his
Stoical Philosophy, whose Principle of Patience was Fate and Necessity, made
Answer, De mihi Christianem Patientiam, Give me the Christian Patience.

8. Reproaches, said Luther, are my Meat and Feeding; I am afraid of Praises,
glad of Slanders and Reproaches.

9. Socrates was observed, Semper eodem incedere vuleu, to go Abroad, and
return Home, with the same composed Countenance; he bore the outrageous
peevishness of his Wife with great Patience, calling her his School Mistress,
etc.

10. Dr. Sands his Stable being Robbed, and an Inventory taken of all his
Goods, and he set on a lame Jade, and carried through London in scorn, at
Bishopsgate a Woman throwing a Stone at him, hit him so full on the Breast,
that he was near falling from his Horse, to whom he mildly said, Woman, I pray
God forgive thee. See his Life by Mr. Clark Page 8.

11. Cassianus tells of a Devout Gentlewoman desirous to exercise the Virtue of
Patience, that came to Athanasus upon that score, to advise with him; who, at
her Request, placed a poor Widow with her so VVayward, Choleric, Peevish and
Insolent, that she gave sufficient occasion for the practice of Patience. S.
Franc. Sales Introd.

12. Bishop Bonner gave this Testimony of Cuthert Sympson's Patience: I say
unto you, That if he were not an Heretic, he is a Man of the greatest Patience
that ever came before me; for I tell you, he has been thrice Racked in one Day
in the Tower, and in my House he has felt some Sorrow, yet I never saw his
Patience broken. Fox Martyrol.

13. It Is said of Calvin and Vrsin, that they were both Choleric by Nature,
yet had so learned the Meekness of Christ, as not to utter one Word under the
greatest Provocation, unbeseeming Religion. Joh. Flavel.

14. Greenham (that Saint of ours) can lie spread quietly upon the Form,
looking for the Chyrurgeons Knife, binding himself as fast with a resolved
Patience, as others with strongest Cords, abiding his Flesh carved, and his
Bowels rifled; and not stirring more, than if he felt not, while others tremble
to expect, and shrink to feel the pricking of a Vein. Bish. Jos. Hall Medit.
etc.

15. I never heard, says Dr. Walker, speaking of the late Countess of Warwick,
That she was blamed for more than two Faults, by the most curious Observers of
her Disposition and Behavior, viz. Excess of Charity, and Defect of Anger; --
For as to the latter, though I confess (says he) she could not rage and storm,
and discover her Anger, as some Persons do, who verisie the Saying, Anger is a
kind of Madness; for her sedate, composed, serene Mind, and sweet and amicable
Disposition, was scarce forcible to what was so conttary to her Nature; yet
would she make deeper Impressions of her Displeasure for great Faults, than
those who appeared most furious; like a still soaking Shower, which will wet
more than a driving Storm; and therefore it was observed, that if any Servant
had been faulty, they had rather have passed the Gantlet of their Lords most
furious Expressions, than have once been sent for to their Lady's Closet, whose
Treatment was soft Words, but hard Arguments against their Faults, and like
that silent Lightning, which without the Noise of Thunder, melts the Blade, and
sings not the Scabbard; her Reproofs were neither the frightful hissing, nor
the venomed Sting, but the penetrating Oil of Scorpions. Dr. Walker, in her
Life, Page 114.

16. Bishop Cowper's Wife, being a froward Woman, she, lest her Husband should
prejudice his Health by his over much Study, when he was Compiling his famous
Dictionary, one Day (in his Absence) got into his Study, and took all the Notes
he had been for Eight Years a gathering, and burned them, whereof when she had
acquainted him, he only said, Woman, thou have put me to eight Years Study
more. See the Treatise called, Mankind Displayed.

CHAP. XXX. Remarkable Prudence. THough the Simplicity of the Dove be an
excellent Grace in Christians, yet we are required to join with it the Wisdom
of the Serpent; the one removes away our Gall and Sting, and makes us
inoffensive to others, the other gives us Brain and Prudence to save our
selves; and this is the more necessary, because of the Enemies and Dangers we
have to encounter with. And in Truth, though the Divine Providence is
sufficient to Guide, and Protect, and Provide for us, yet we are no where
commanded to lay a side the Man, to illustrate the Christian. Piety makes us
shifty for the Honor of God, Charity for the good of our Neighbors, but
Prudence tells us, We must not be quite careless at home; nay, the very
Substan^e of our Religiou requires us to love our Neighbors as our selves; and
therefore presupposes a Care of our own Preservation, before our Care for the
welfare of others: But yet so, that Self alone must give place to a Society of
Men, which is made up of many particular Selves; and the Glory of God is not to
truckle to our Temporal Felicity. See some Instances:
1. Mr. Tindal, living with one Mr. Welsh, in Gloucestershire, as Tutor to his
Children, Discoursing about Matters of Religion sometimes in the House, and
being answered by Mrs. Welsh, -- Such a Doctor is worth 100 l. per Annum, and
such a one 200, and such a one 300. And is it Reason, think you, that we should
believe you before them? He replied nothing at that time, because he saw it was
in vain to make a personal Answer, where the Authority of his own Person was of
so little value; and therefore fell upon Translating a Book called, Enchiridion
Militis Christiani; and when he had finished it, he presented it to the Lady,
that he might with more Advantage to the Cause, convince her that it was not
his only Sentiment, but the Doctrine of others also; and accordingly he
succeeded in his purpose; and afterward, when he had Composed a Book of his
own, about the Sacrament, and against the Mass, he kept it by him for some
time, because he could not bear it, but waited for a fitter Season for the
Publication of it. Clark's Eccl. Hist. p. 166.

2. Mr. Henry Alting was so Prudent, that his Answers were accounted Oracles,
yet he would never refuse to hear the Judgment of others; and in cases of
Difficulty, he would never rest till he had searched out, and made the Truth
plain: And in the Government of his Family, he kept all so in Peace, Order, and
Concord, that this only was known, That none knew what was done therein. Ibid.
p. 496.

Archbishop Usher's Prudence appears excellent, by this Story which follows:

3. A Lord's Eldest Son, who from his Cradle had been trained up in Popery, but
was of excellent Parts and Learning, was at last prevailed with by his Father,
to Sojourn for a while with the Learned Prelate in Drogheda. The Prudent
Prelate studied nothing more than how he might take him by Craft, as the
Apostle did the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.16. And therefore did not presently fall
into Discourse with him about his Religion, but recreated himself for a time in
Discoursing with him about some Philosophical Questions, and School-Points, in
which Studies he perceived the Gentleman was well versed, and took much delight
in them. This he continued, till at last he gained so far upon his Affections,
that of his own accord he moved some Discourse about Matters of Religion; and
then finding him Studious, he did not presently go about to instruct him in
that Truth, but sought to puzzle him with Doubts about Religion: By this means
the Gentleman's Conscience began to be awakened; nor were his Scruples removed,
though he had recourse to a Monastery hard by, where it was Debated; so that at
last he came with Tears to the Learned Primate for Satisfaction, and he
promised to deal Faithfully with him; But, says he, those whom you trust do
not so; for they will not suffer you to see with your own Eyes, nor to
understand the Scriptures, but according to their Churches Commentaries. Then
did he advise him to go amongst them, and to ask them, Whether he that
understood the Originals might Examine their Interpretations? And to bring him
word what they said. Accordingly he did so, and brought him word, That they
were divided in their Judgments. Mr. Clark, in the Life of Dr. Usher, p. 294.

4. Bishop Babington had a little Book, containing only Three Leaves, which he
turned over Night and Morning; the first Leaf was Black, to mind him of Hell,
and God's Judgments due to him for Sin; the second Red, to mind him of Christ
and his Passion; the third White, to set forth God's Mercy to him, through the
Merits of his Son, in his Justification and Sanctification. Clarks Exampl. vol.
1. p. 540.

5. Rodulph, the Emperor of Germany, being at Noriberg, there came a Merchant
to him, and complained, That having left a Bag with 200 Marks in it, with a
Citizen with whom he had Lodged, the Man now denied the same. The Emperor asked
him for his Proofs; he takes his Oath of it, but could produce no other
Witness. The Emperor bids him stay in another Room, and asks what manner of Bag
it was; and the Man unexpectedly coming to Salute the Emperor, the Emperor
begins to him with the Admiration of his Hat, and prayed him to give it Him.
The Citizen gave it, and took it for an Honor, that so great a Personage would
accept of it. Upon this the Emperor with-draws, sends a Servant to this Man's
Wife, desiring from her Husband to send him such a Money-Bag, and withal, the
Hat for a Token. The Woman sent it; the Emperor shows it the Merchant, who knew
it, and rejoiced at the sight. Then the Emperor calling the Citizen, tells him
the other Man's Complaint, of a Sum of Money delivered into his Custody: The
Citizen denies and Forswears it. The Emperor produces the Bag; upon which the
Citizen was confounded obliged to pay the Merchant the full Sum, and
sufficiently Fined besides. Lips. Exempl. Pol. p 135. Item Lips. Monit. l. 2.
c. 9. p. 259, etc.

CHAP. XXXI. Remarkable Justice. Justice is so necessary a Virtue in the World,
that no Commerce, or comfortable Conversation could be maintained without it;
it is a Dictate of the Law of Nature, and writ is as fair and legible
Characters, as any other whatsoever. Yet it is imprinted in a more Capital
Letter, by the Laws of Christianity, so that now, he that runs may read it. And
blessed be God, though we have many that love the ways of Unrighteousness, and
consequently are tempted to pervert Justice, yet many worthy Examples may be
found of such, who had rather choose (according to the old Symbo^) to do
Justice, than Save the World. Fiat Justitia and pareat Mundus.
1. When Theodosius was at Rome, after he had overcome Maximus, he reformed two
most abominable Wickednesses: the first was this: There was in Rome a huge
House of Ancient Building, where all the Bread that served the City was baked,
and most of the Rooms were under Ground; round about it were Taverns and
Victualling-Houses, full of Harlots; so that many that resorted thither, either
to satisfy their Hunger or Lust, were by these Whores spoiled of all they had,
and usually so made away, that their Friends could hear of them no more: For by
private Conveyances, they were thrown into these Back-Houses, and there kept to
Grinding and Drudgery all their Life after. It chanced, that one of the
Emperor's Soldiers was thus thrown into this Hole, who, when they would not
suffer him to depart, drew his Dagger, and slew some that hindered his Escape,
so that the rest, being afraid, let the Soldier go; and the Emperor being
informed by him, sent for the Millers and Bakers, punished the Masters with
extreme Torments, overthrew those blind Houses, and so rid the Princely City of
that shameful doing. The other Abuse which he reformed, was this; If a Woman
were taken in Adultery, they shut her up in a narrow Stew, and compelled her
beastly, and without all shame, to play the Harlot, ringing a Bell, whilst the
thing was doing, that all the Neighbors might be acquainted with it; which was
so far from removing the Sin, that it rather increased it: The good Emperor
being informed hereof, caused the Stews to be pulled down, and wholly
Suppressed, and made other Laws for the punishment of Adultery. Clark, in the
Life of Theodos.

2. Charles, the bold Duke of Burgundy, and Earl of Flanders, had a Noble Man
in special Favor with him, to whom he had committed the Government of a Town
in Zealand; where living in a great deal of Ease, he fell in Love with a Woman
of a Beautiful Body, and a mind and manners no whit inferior. He passed and
repassed by her Door, soon after grew bolder, entered into Conference with her,
discovers his Flame, and beseeches a Compassionate Resentment of it; he makes
large Promises, and uses all the ways by which he hoped to gain her, but all in
vain. Her Chastity was proof against all the Batteries he could raise against
it; falling therefore into Despair, he converts himself unto Villainy. He was,
as I said, a Governor, and Duke Charles was busied in War; he causes the
Husband of his Mistress to be Accused of Treachery, and forth with Commits him
to Prison, to the end that by Fear or Threats he might draw her to his
pleasure, or at least quit himself of her Husband, the only Rival with him in
his Loves. The Woman, as one that loves her Husband, goes to the Goal, and
thence to the Governor to entreat for him, and if she was able, to obtain his
Liberty. Do thou come, O my Dear, to entreat me, said the Governor? You are
certainly ignorant of the Empire you have over me: Render me only a mutual
Affection, and I am ready to restore you your Husband; for we are both under a
Restraint, he is in my Prison, and I am in yours. Ah how easily may you give
Liberty to us both! Why do you refuse? As a Lover I beseech you, and as you
tender my Life, as the Governor, I ask you, and as you tender the Life of your
Husband; both are at stake, and if I must perish, I will not fall alone. The
Woman blushed at what she heard, and withal, being in Fear for her Husband,
trembled and turned pale. He perceiving she was moved, and supposing that some
Force should be used to her Modesty, (they were alone) throws her upon the Bed,
and enjoys the Fruit which will shortly prove bitter to them both. The Woman
departed Confounded, and all in Tears, thinking of nothing more but Revenge;
which was also the more enflamed by a Barbarous Act of the Governor; for he
having obtained his desire, and hoping hereafter freely to enjoy her, took care
that her Husband, and his Rival, should be Beheaded in the Goal, and there was
the Body put into a Coffin ready for Burial: This done, he sent for her, and in
an Affable manner, What, (said he) do you seek for your Husband? You shall have
him, and (pointing to the Prison) you shall find him there, take him along with
you. The Woman suspecting nothing, went her way, when there she sees, and is
astonished, she falls upon the dead Corpse, and having long lamented over it,
she returns to the Governor with a fierce Countenance and Tone: It is true
(said she) you have restored me my Husband, I owe you Thanks for the Favor,
and will pay you. He endeavors to retain and appease her, but in vain; but
hasting home, she calls about her most faithful Friends, recounts to them all
that had passed. All agree that she should make her Case known to the Duke; who
amongst other of his excellent Virtues, was a singular Lover of Justice. To
whom she went, and was heard; but scarce believed. The Duke is angry and
grieved, that any of his, and in his Dominions, should presume so far: He
commands her to withdraw into the next Room, till he sent for the Governor,
who by chance was then at Court; being come, do you know (said the Duke) this
Woman? The Man changed color; do you know too, added he, the Complaints she
makes of you? They are sad ones, and such as I would not they should be true:
He shakes, faulters in his Speech, says and unsays; being urged home, he
confesses all, frees the Woman from any fault; and casting himself at the
Duke's Feet, said, he placed all his Refuge and Comfort in the good Grace and
Mercy of his Prince; and that he might the better obtain it, he offered to make
amends for his unlawful Lust, by a Lawful Marriage of the Person whom he had
injured. The Duke, as one that had inclined to what he said, and now somewhat
milder; You Woman, (said he) since it is gone thus far, are you willing to have
this Man for your Husband? She refuses; but fearing the Duke's Displeasure, and
prompted by the Courtiers, that he was Noble, Rich, and in Favor with his
Prince, was overcome, at last she yields. The Duke causes both to join Hands,
and the Marriage to be lawfully made; which done, You Mr. Bridegroom, (said he)
You must grant me this, that if you die first without Children of your Body,
that then this Wife of yours shall be the Heir of all that you have; he
willingly granted it; it is writ down by a Notary, and witness is to it. Thus
done, the Duke turning to the Woman, Tell me, said he, is there enough done for
your satisfaction? There is, said she; But there is not to mine, said he: And
sending the Woman away, he commanded the Governor to be led away to that very
Prison, in which the Husband was slain, and dead, to be laid in a Coffin
headless, as he was. This done, he sent the Woman thither (ignorant of what had
passed;) who, frighted with that unthought of Misfortune of two Husbands almost
at once, and the same time, lost by one and the same Punishment, fell sick
speedily, and in a short time died; having gained this only by her last
Marriage, that she left her Children by her former Husband very rich by the
Accession of this new and great Inheritance. Lips. Monit. Lib. 2. Chap. 9. P.
240, 241.

3. Sir John Fitz-James was so fearful of the very Shadow and Appearance of
Corruption, that it cost his chief Clerk his place but for taking a Tankard,
after a signal Cause of 1500 l. a Year, wherein he had been serviceable, tho
not as a Bribe, but as a Civility. Caesar would have his Wife without Suspicion
of Lewdness, and Fitz-James his Servants, without the appearance of Corruption.
What way Law always, was then a Resolution; neither to deny, nor defer, nor
sell Justice. When our Judge came upon the Bench, he knew no more than
Melchisedeck or Levi, Father or Mother, neither Friend nor Interest: For when
his Cousin urged for a kindness, Come to my House (says the Judge) I will deny
you nothing; come to the King's Court, and I must do you Justice: And when the
Attorney General bespake his Favor in a public Cause, Troble not your self
(said he) I will do the King Right: The King is cast, the Attorney
expostulates; the Judge satisfies him, That he could not do his Majesty Right,
if he had not done Justice. Lloyd 's State Worthies, p. 115.

4. Sir Matthew Hale would never receive private Addresses or Recommendations
from the greatest Persons in any matter, in which Justice was concerned. One of
the first Peers of England went once to his Chamber, and told him, that having
a Suit at Law to be tried before him, he was to acquaint him with it, that he
might the better understand it, when it should come to be heard in Court. Upon
which the Lord Chief Baron interrupted him, and said, He did not deal fairly to
come to his Chamber about such Affairs, for he never received any Information
of Causes but in open Court, where both Parties were to be heard alike; so he
would not suffer him to go on. Whereupon his Grace (for he was a Duke) went
away not a little dissatisfied, and complained of it to the King as a Rudeness,
that was not to be endured: But his Majesty bid him content himself that he was
no worse used; and said, He verily believed he would have used himself no
better, if he had gone to solicit him in any of his own Causes.

Another passage fell out in one of his Circuits, which was somewhat censured,
as an Affection of an unreasonable Strictness; but it flowed from his Exactness
to the Rules he had set himself. A Gentleman had sent him a Buck for his Table,
that had a Trial at the Assizes; so when he heard his Name, he asked if he was
not the same Person that had sent him Venison: And finding he was the same, he
told him, he could not suffer the Trial to go on, till he had paid him for his
Buck: To which the Gentleman answered, That he never sold his Venison, and that
he had done nothing to him, which he did not do to every Judge that had gone
that Circuit; which was confirmed by several Gentlemen, then present; but all
would not do, for the Lord Chief Baron had learned from Solomon, that a Gift
perverteth the ways of Judgment! and therefore he would not suffer the Trial to
go on, till he had paid for the present; upon which the Gentleman withdrew the
Record: And at Salisbury the Dean nnd Chapter having, according to the Custom,
presented him with six Sugar-Loaves in his Circuit, he made his Servants pay
for the Sugar before he would try their Cause. Dr. Burnet in his Life.

CHAP. XXXII. Remarkable Temperance in Meats.
THE Use of a sober and moderate Diet is none of the least Virtues commended to
us by our Religion. The ancient Hebrews summed up their Victuals in that short
Bill of Fare, Bread and Water; Flesh and Milk, Wine and Oil, were
extraordinary. Daniel fed upon Pulse, and so did the three Children, and did
well, and appeared plump, and in good liking with such Food. Solomon advises
us, when we were set down at the Table of Great Men, and see Dainties before
us, to direct our Knife, not to the Trencher, but to our Throat, especially if
we have not got a Habit of Temperance, but are Persons of a greedy Appetite;
and our Savior bids us beware of Surfeiting; and some Christians we may find
not unskilful this way.

1. Ambrose was very Abstinent, full of Watchings and Prayer, never dining but
on the Sabbaths. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Chrysostom seldom went to Feasts, when invited. Ibid. Luther grudged at the
Expense of his time upon the same Score. Fuller.

3. S. Augustine's Diet was usually Broth and Roots; using to say, that he
feared not the Uncleanness of Meat, so much as the Uncleanness of Appetite; for
for his Guests and Kinsfolk he had better: His Dishes for his Meat were of
Earth, Wood or Marble; his Table was more for Disputation, than rich
Banqueting. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

4. Gregory the Great was very abstenious in his Diet, frequent in Fasting and
Prayer; and so studious of the Sacred Scriptures, that he could scarce find
leisure to eat his Food, till necessity urged him thereunto; and indeed his
Abstinence was so great, that he much impaired his Health thereby; yet would he
not give over his Employments, of Praying, Reading, Writing, or Dictating to
others. Ibid.

5. Philippus Nerius, at Nineteen Years of Age, made it a Law to himself, that
he should refresh his Body but once a day, and that only with Bread and Water,
and sometimes he would abstain even from these cold Delights unto the third
Day: Being made Priest, his manner was to eat some small thing in the Morning,
and then abstain till Supper, which never consisted of more than two poched
Eggs, or instead of these, some Pulse or Herbs. He would not suffer more Dishes
than one to be set upon his Table; he seldom eat of Flesh or Fish, and of white
Meats he never tasted; his Wine was little, and that much diluted with Water,
and which is most wonderful, he seemed never to be delighted with one Dish more
than another. Drexel. Oper. tom. 2. de Jejun. and Abstin. Part. 1. Chap. 11.
Sect. 8. P. 796.

6. Cardinal Carolus Borromoeus was of that Abstinence, that he kept a daily
Fast with Bread and Water, Sundays and Holydays only excepted; and this manner
of Life he continued till his Death: He kept even Festivals with that
Frugality, that he usually fed upon Pulse, Apples or Herbs. Pope Gregory the
Thirteenth sent to him, not only to advise, but to command him to moderate
these Rigours: But the Cardinal wrote back to him, that he was most ready to
obey, but that withal he had learned by Experience, that his spare-eating was
conducing to Health, and that it was subservient to the drying up the Phlegm and
Humors, wherewith his Body did abound: Whereupon the Pope left him to his
Pleasure. He persisted therein therefore with so rigid a Constancy, that even
in the heat of Summer, and when he had drawn out his Labors beyond his
accustomed time, he would not indulge himself so far as to taste of a little
Wine, nor allow his Thirst so much as a drop of Water. Ibid.

7. The Meat upon which Mr. Eliot lived was a Cibus Simplex, an homely but a
wholesome Diet; rich Varities, costly Viands and Poinant Sawces, came not upon
his own Table; and when he found them upon other Men's, he rarely tasted of
them. One Dish and a plain one was his Dinner; and when invited to a Feast, I
have seen him sit magnifying of God for the Plenty which his People in this
Wilderness were within a few Years risen to; but not more than a Bit or two of
all the Dainties did he take into his own Mouth all the while. And for a Supper
he had learned of his Loved and Blessed Patron, old Mr. Cotton, either wholly
to omit it, or make but a small Sup or two, the utmost of it. Cotton Mather in
the Life of Mr. Eliot, p. 32, 33.

8. Fulgentius, tho he had been tenderly and delicately brought up in his
Youth, yet after he entered into a Monastery, he wholly abstained from Wine and
Oil, and was so rigorous in Fasting, that it much debilitated, and weakened his
Body, and brought some Diseases upon him: But his Heart being wholly set upon
the working forth his Salvation with Fear and Trembling, he committed himself
to God's Providence, saying, The daintiest Feeders cannot prevent Sickness; and
having a while habituated himself to this course of Life, he recovered his
former Health and Beauty. See Mr. Clark 's Lives of the Fathers, p. 160.

9. Philip Melancthon was very sparing in his Diet: In his Apparel he had
Respect only to his Health, and was well content with a small Stipend. On a
time, Prince Maurice, Elector of Saxony, asked him if he wanted any thing for
the Supply of his Necessities? He said, No. The Elector bad him ask what he
would; he answered, That he had his Stipend, with which he was well content:
The Elector wondered that he was so well pleased with so small Means, Ibid. p.
571.

10. Dr. William Whitaker was always very Temperate in his Diet from his
Childhood, and afterward he drank very little Wine, and in the Summer time he
mixed it with water. He never overloaded his Stomach with Meat, no not in the
greatest Feasts, but always used a sparing and moderate Diet. Ibid. p. 815.

11. Dr. Harris was exactly Temperate, confining himself to hours for Diet,
Sleep etc. He would often say, That he would rather pour Liquor into his Boots,
than into his Mouth between Meals. He was a strict observer of those Laws of
Sobriety, which St. Paul had Pressed upon Ministers, and which himself (in his
Drunkards Cup) had taught to others. He used to Eat seasonably, and sparingly,
which (without question) was one great means of preserving such vigourous
Spirits to so great an Age. See his Life in Mr. Clark's 3 vol. of Lives.

12. Bishop Joseph Hall, says thus of himself, If I see a Dish to tempt my
Palate, I fear a Serpent in that Apple, and would please my self in a wilful
denial.

13. Dr. Hopkins, late Bishop of Londonderry, in his Discourse of the Vanity
of the World, tells us, That Epicurus himself, the great Master and Servant of
Pleasure, who made it the highest Good. and chiefest Happiness of Man, set
himself certain Days of Abstinence in course, wherein he would but niggardly
satisfy his Stomach, well knowing that the pleasure of Gluttony could never be
so much enhanc'd as an Interval of Hunger, for that (continues the same Author)
is a furnished Table to him whose constant Meals overtake one another, but only
the heaping of Food upon Crudities and Indigestion. What the Titles of Honor
to a Person Born Noble? They signify no more to him than it does to another
Man when he hears himself called by his ordinary Name. What is Respect and
Honor to a Man long accustomed to it? It brings him no great content when he
has it, but torments him when he fails of it, give these things to those that
are unacquainted with them. If you would have them valued, Bring a poor Man to
a Table of Delicates; Invest an Ignoble Person with Honors, and Dignities;
give Respect to a despised Person, and for the present you bless him; but Time
and Custom will wear of this Content, and Tediousness even of such a Life as
this, will make them willing at least for their Divertisment and Recreation, to
retire to their homely Cells and Station; For as it is with those that are
accustomed to strong Perfumes, they themselves cannot scent those Odours, which
to others that use them not are most Sweet and Fragrant: So it fares with us in
the long continuance of Worldy Engagements; our Senses are so stuffed, and even
Soffocated with them, that we cannot perceive them; and unless we purchase
Pleasure by Alternate Sorrow, they are but lost upon us. Now how vain must the
World needs be, whose Comforts are not valuable while we have them, but while
we have them not? And how vain are those Joys for which we must pay down as
much Grief as the Joys themselves are worth? So that upon Ballancing the
Account, there remains nothing to us: And it had been altogether as good to
have enjoyed nothing. Thus far Bishop Hopkins.

14. It Is said of Martin Luther, though he was big of Body, and in very good
Health, that he would usually continue four Days together without Eating or
Drinking any thing at all; and that for many Days together, he would content
himself with a little Bread, and one single Herring. Melanchton in Vita Lutheri.

CHAP. XXXIII. Remarkable Temperance in Drinks.
DRunkenness is a Vice not fit to be Named, much less Practiced among
Christians; nay, we are forbid so much as to look upon the Wine, when it is
Red, when it sparkles in the Cup; or to rise early in the Morning to follow the
Strong Drink; and as to the Quantity, these Sinners are marked with a Note of
Infamy, that drink Wine in Bowls. (When at the same time they are Incurious,
as commonly such Persons are, about the Poverty and Afflictions of their
Brethren) And we have frequently in Sacred Scriptures the ill Effects of
Intemperate Drinking intimated to us; for which reason we find all along that
the best Christians are generally the Soberest Persons.

1. Pontanns writes, that in his time there was a Woman, who in all her Life
time did never drink either Wine or Water; and that being once enforced to
drink Wine by Command of Ladislaus, King of Naples; she received much hurt
thereby. Marcel. Donat. Hist. Med. Mira. l. 6. c. 3. p. 306. But this seems a
natural Infirmity, rather than a Christian Virtue: and the next has some
Affinity with it.

2. A Noble Man of Piedmont, being Sick of that kind of Dropsy which is called
Ascites, sent for Dr. Albertus Roscius, who finding the Dropsy confirmed, and
the Patient averse from all kind of Remedies, he said thus to him, Noble Sir,
if you will be cured and perfectly freed of this mighty Swelling, that is, if
you desire to live, there is an absolute necessity, that you Determine with
your self to dye of that Thurst wherewith you are so Tormented; if you will do
this, I hope to cure you in a short time, The Noble Man at the hearing of this,
did so command himself, that for a Month he refrained not only all kind of
Drink, but not so much as tasted of any thing that was liquid; by which means
he was restored to his former Health. Fabi Obs. Chirurg. Cent. 4. Obs. 41. p.
319.

3. Paul the Hermit, St. Anthony, St. Hierom, Patroclus, drank Water;
Alcibiades, Martyr, Water with Salt; Amodeus, the Spaniard, Simeon of Antioch,
Sisinnius, the Monk, Serapion, Nicolaus, Torlentinas, Maxentius, the Abbot,
etc. all drank Water.

4. The Drink which Mr. John Eliot still used, was very small; he cared not for
Wines or Drams; and, I believe, he never, once in all his Life, knew what it
was to feel so much as a noxious Fume in his Head from any of them. Good clear
Water was more precious, as well as more usual with him, than of those Liquors
with which Men do so frequently spoil their own Healths, while perhaps they
drink those of other Men. When at a Stranger's House, in the Summer time, he
has been entertained with a Glass, which they told him was of Water and Wine;
he has with a Complaisant Gravity replied unto this purpose, Wine is a noble,
generous Liquor, and we should be humbly thankful for it; but, as I remember,
Water was made before it. -- Yet he lived till near 90 Years of Age. Cotton
Mather in his Life. p. 33.

5. Abraames, Bishop of Carras, says Theodoret, lived with that rigorous
Abstinence, that Bread and Water, Bed and Fire seemed superfluous to him. It is
said of this great Man, that he drank not, nor made use of Water, wherein to
boil his Herbs, or any other thing; but his manner was, to feed upon Endive and
Lettice, and Fruits, and such other things as were to him both Meat and Drink;
and from these also he used to abstain till the Evening. Yet he was a Person of
great Liberality to such as were his Guests; these he entertained with the best
Bread, the most generous Wines, the better sort of Fishes, and all such other
things as a generous Mind, and a real Love, could produce, and himself would
take upon him to be the Carver, and to distribute to every Man his Portion.
Drexel. oper. tom. 1. p. 796.

6. Pittacus made a Law, that whosoever committed any Crime, when drunk, should
be punished double. Laert.

7. Solon made another, That if any Prince were taken Drunk, he should die for
it. Idem.

8. Plato's Suppers were Frugal to a Proverb: He despised delicate Banquets and
sumptuous Feasts, being himself content with his Academical Olives, and Bread
and Water. Text. Offic.

9. Zeno drank Water instead of Wine, and by his own Example invited his
Scholars to Temperance, insomuch, that it became a Proverb, More sober than
Zeno. Idem.

10. (About Zurich) notwithstanding their Neighborhood to the Switzers,
Drinking is very little known amongst them. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

11. A. C. 1606. Mr. George Coldwel, Mayor of Northampton, having assembled the
Aldermen of the said Town, declared to them his Purpose to ordain these Acts,
That no Inhabitants should enter into any Alehouse to drink together, upon
pain of forfeiting, the Inholder 3 s. 4 d. and Imprisonment, during the Mayor's
Pleasure, the Tippler, or Person offending 3 s. 4 d. and Imprisonment in like
manner. The Scourging of Tipplers, by R. R.

CHAP. XXXIV. Remarkable Frugality and Humility in Clothes, Household Stuff, etc.
NAture is content with a little, Grace with less. How many things are there (
said Diogenes, standing in the Market, and observing the Abundance of fine
things and Knick-knacks that were to be sold there) which I have no need of! In
truth it is an excellent Lesson, which S. Paul had learned, in what State soever
he was, therewith to be content. And when we consider our Savior's Birth in a
Stable, and a Manger served him for a Cradle, and that he had no settled
Dwelling where to lay his Head; and that his Coat was all of a piece, woven
from the top to the bottom; and John Baptists Apparel, made of Camels Hair, and
that girt about him with a piece of Leather; it is enough to mortify our Pride,
and make us Frugal and Humble about these things. The Reverend Mr. Alsop, in
his Sermon of Strange Apparel, advises his Readers not to come near those
Fashions, whose numerous Implements, Trinckets and Tackling, requiring much
time in dressing and undressing; no Cost of Apparel is so ill bestowed, as that
of precious time in Apparelling. And if common time be so ill spent, what is
the solemn sacred Time laid out in such Curiosity? how many Sabbaths, Sermons,
Sacraments, Prayers, Praises, Psalms, Chapters, Meditations, has this one
vainly devoured? -- Let me recommend the Counsel of Holy Mr. Herbert to you.

Church Porch -- be dressed.
Stay not for the other Pin! why have thou lost
A Joy for it, worth Worlds! Thus Hell does jest
Away thy Blessings, and extremely flout thee,
Thy Clothes being fast, but thy Soul loose about thee.
O ye wanton Folly of our times, when (as one expresses it) it is almost as
easy to enumerate all the Tackling of the Royal-Soveraign, as the
Accoutrements of a capacious Lady! And perhaps it requires not much more time
to equip and rig out a Ship for the Indies, as a whimsical Madam, when she is
to sail in State, with all her Flags, Streamers, Pennons, bound for a
Court-Voyage. With less Labor did Adam give Names to all the Creatures in
Paradise, than an Attire-Herald shall give you the Nomenclature of all the
Trinkets that belong to a Ladies Closet: And yet all this is but to consume a
whole Morning to put on, which must waste the whole Evening to put off. -- But
(adds this Author in another place) they that spend unmercifully, must gain
unconscionably. The Mill will not grind, unless some Lust brings grist unto it.
-- A Gentleman anticipates his Rents in the Country; he comes up to Town to
vamp his fine Lady and Daughter with the newest Fashion. -- He ransacks the
Court and City for the Fashion; searches the Shops for Materials to furnish out
the Pomp; he retnrns home, and then his poor Tenants go to rack; the sweat is
squeezed out of their Brows, the Blood screwed out of their Veins, the Marrow
out of their Bones, that they may pay the unconscionable Reckonings, and
monstrous Bills, that his own Prodigality has drawn upon him: -- Nor is it one
single Sin that fills the Train of Pride. -- Pride drinks the Tears of Widows
and Orphans, revels with the hard Labors of the Indigent, feeds on the Flesh
of Thousands. Elegantly Tertullian -- A vast Estate is enclosed in one small
Locket; a Necklace hf almost 8000 l. hangs on one single String; a slender Neck
carries Lordships and Manors, and the thin Tip of the Eaer wears a Jewel or
Pendent that would defray the Charges of Housekeeping for a Twelvemonth. Thus
far Mr. Alsop. But I shall prcceed now to give Instances of Remarkable
Frugality and Humility in Clothes.

1. Holinshed says, that he knew some old Men, who told him often times in
England, that if the good Man of the House had a Matris, or a Flock Bed, and a
Sack of Chaff, to rest his Head on, he thought himself as well lodged as the
Lord of the Town: For ordinarily they lay upon Straw Pillars, covered with
Canvas, and a round Log of Wood under their Heads, instead of a Boulster; (and
why not that as well as a Stone, which was Jacob's Pillow?) they said, that
soft Pillows were fit only for Women in Childbed; and in a good Farmer's House
it was rare to find four pieces of Pewter. And it was counted a great Matter,
that a Farmer should show five Shillings, or a Noble, together, in Silver.
Clark's Mirr. V. 2. P. 1.

2. John Duns Scotus, Dr. Subtilis, was noted as for his Meager Countenance,
and homely Aspect, so for his mean and course Apparel, and going barefoot.

Dr. Subtilis, Nomen subtilia donant,
Quem vestis vilis, pes nudus corda coronant.
Leigh in his Relig. and Learning.
3. Primislaus, King of Bohemia,, kept his Country Shoes always by him. Dr.
Jer. Tailor.

4. Willigis, Bishop of Mentz, being the Son of a Wheelright, caused Wheels to
be painted on the Walls of his House, and in his Bedchamber these Words,
Willegis, Willegis, Memento unde veneris. Camerar.

5. Lesco, the second King of Poland, being the Son of a Farmer, kept his old
Coat by him, as a Monument of his poor Descent. Idem.

6. Dr. Prideaux kept his Leathern Breeches by him, which he wore at his first
coming to Oxford, and used to show them young Scholars for their Encouragement
in studying.

7. Sir Matthew Hale, when at the Inns of Court, used such a Plainness in his
Apparel, that he was impressed once for a common Soldier. See his Life.

8. Mr. Bernard Gilpin could never away with any (...) Apparel. See his Life,
by Bishop Carleton.

9. Mr. Eliot's Apparel was without any Ornament, except that of Humility,
which the Pope elegantly compares to a Knot of Ribbons, in the Text, where he
bids us be clothed with it; any other flanting Ribbons in those that came in
his way, he would ingeniously animadvert upon; and seeing some Scholars once,
as he thought, a little too gaudy in their Clothes, Humiliami, Juvenes
Humiliamini, was his immediate Complement unto them. Had you seen him with his
Leathern Girdle, (for such a one he wore) about his Loins, you would almost
have thought what Herod feared, that John Baptist was come to Life again. In
short, he was in all regards a Nazarite indeed; unless in this one, that long
Hair was always very loathsome to him. Cotton Mather in his Life, p. 36.

10. Mr. John Carter, sometime Minister of Belstead, in Suffolk, for his own,
and his Wives Habit, used that which was plain and homely, retaining their old
Fashion, yet always very cleanly and decent: And in all his House there was
nothing but honest Plainness. He was such another as Jacob, a plain and sincere
Man; a true Nathaniel, in whom was no Guile. He never used any Plate in his
House, but Vessels of Wood and Earth: Brass and Pewter were the highest Metals
for his Utensils: All the time of his Housekeeping he constantly used at his
Table a wooden Salt, which, with Age, was grown to be of a Nutmeg color. See
his Life in Mr. Clark 's Thira Volume of Lives, p. 8.

11. Of Lewis the XI. King of France, may ye find in the Chamber of Accounts, a
Reckoning of Two Shillings for Fustion, to new-sleeve his Majesty's old
Doublet, and Three Halfpence for Liquor, to grease his Boots, which was Anno
Christi 1461.

12. Cato, though a great Man in Rome, when the was in all her Glory, never wore
a Gown that cost him above 100 pence when he was Consul and General of the
Army. He never drank better Wine than his Hinds and Workmen drank; and his
Caterer never bestowed in Meat for his Supper above 30 farthings of the Roman
Money. Being made Heir to one of his Friends that died, who had a piece of
Tapistry, with a broad Border, called then the Babylonian Border, he caused it
to be sold, as being too costly for him. Of all the Houses which he had in the
Country, not one of them was well Plaistered, or Rough Cast. He never bought
Bondman or Slave, that cost him above One Thousand Six Hundred Pence, not
seeking for fine made Men, and goodly Personages, but for strong Fellows that
could take pains, etc. To conclude, he used to say, That a Man bought any thing
too dear that was for little purpose, though he gave but one Farthing for it,
thinking it much to bestow so little for that which was needless. He advised
Men to purchase Houses that had more Arrable Land and Pasture belonging to
them, then fine Gardens, and Orchards. Plut. in Vita ejus.

13. Charles the V. Emperor of Germany, was very frugal through the whole
course of his Life, especially in his Apparel; which the Italians wondered at,
and some jeared him for it. Once being to make a Royal Entrance into Millain,
there was great Preparation for his Entertainment: The Houses and Streets were
beautified and adorned, the Citizens dressed in their richest Apparel; a golden
Canopy was prepared to be carried over his Head; and great expectation there
was to see a Great and Glorious Emperor. But when he entered the City, he came
in a plain black Cloth Cloak, and an old Hat on his Head; so that they which
saw him, not believing their Eyes, enquired which was he? laughing at
themselves for being so deceived in their expectation. Lip. Exemp. Pol. 184.

14. Bishop Latimer at his last Examination before the Commissioners in Queen
Mary's Days, appeared thus; he bowed his Knee down to the Ground, holding his
Hat in his Hand, having a Handkerchief on his Head, and upon it a Night Cap or
two, and a great Cap (such as the Townsmen use) with broad Flaps to button
under the Chin, wearing an old Bristol Frize, threadbare Gown girded about his
Body with a penny Leather Girdle, at which hanged, by a long string of Leather,
his Testament, and his Spectacles without case, depending about his Neck upon
his Breast. Fox Martyrol.

15. S. Augustin's Apparel, Shoes and Bedding were but mean, not over Fresh,
nor over homely. Bishop Jewel out of Posidonius.

16. Serapion wore only one poor Linen Garment, never any other.

17. There may be a Case put, wherein in some exigency it may be Lawful for the
Woman to wear the Apparel of the Man, and Asterius gives one. I know a Woman,
(says he) that Polled her Hair, and put on Man's Apparel, and a Flowered
Garment too, that she might not be separated from her dear Husband that was
forced to fly and hide himself. See Mr. Alsop's Sermon of strange Apparel

CHAP. XXXV. Remarkable Humility in Behavior.
SHould any one, says St. Augustine, ask me concerning the Christian Religion,
and the People of it, I would answer, that the First, Second, and Third things
therein, and All, is Humility; Sure I am, our Savior has made it the First,
when he has assigned Self-denial for the Test of his Disciples; If any one
will be my Disciple, let him deny himself. And it is so requisite for all the
consequent Duties of a Christian, that a Man is neither qualified to be Taught,
nor Obey, nor Suffer without it: Nay, there is no Ascending to Glory unless we
are first Clothed with Humility; for before Honor is Humility; for God will
exalt the Humble and Meek, but Behold the Proud a far off; as they behold
others. No wonder then if this Grace be owned as a sure Characteristick of
those that belong to the Retinue of an Humble Jesus.

1. Ignatius was so Humble, that he Disdained not to learn of any. Clarks
Marrow of Eccl. Hist. Nicephorus Reports, that when he was a Child, our Savior
took him in his Arms, and showed him to his Disciples. It may be, he was one of
those little Children, that were brought to Christ, that he should touch them;
or that little One, whom Jesus took, and set in the midst of his Disciples for
a Pattern of Humility. Ibid.

2. Gregory the Great, was so Exemplary in his Humility, that though he was Born
of Noble Parents, yet he had so little respect to his Descent, that he would
often say with Tears in his Eyes, That all Earthly Glory was miserable, if the
owner of it did not seek after the Glory of God. Ibid. p. 96.

3. S. Bernard, called himself, an unprofitable Servant, a dry Tree, from whom
no good had come either to himself or others, a Man naked of Merits. Ibid, p.
105.

4. Pope Innocent, about the Year of Christ, 1207. sent with one Peter his
Legate, twelve Abbats of the Cistercian Order, against the Albigenses, to
Reduce them to Obedience by their Preaching. They having called a Council of
Archbishops, and Bishops, and Others to Deliberate upon the Case, in came the
then Bishop of Oxford, bringing in his Company of Retinue belonging to his
Lordship, and being akt his Opinion, he answered, That there was no need of
that outward Pomp that the Bishops were set out with, but rather Preaching of
the Word, and Integrity of Life: And that he might Instruct them with his own
Example, as well as his Doctrine; he dismissed all his Retinue, with Horses,
and Chariots, and all the Provision which they had brought, and sent them home.
He himself with a few Clergymen running on Foot, and performing the Office of
Preaching stoutly. Cent. Hist. 13. c. 9. de Synod. Vinc. l. 29. c. 93. Anton.
Tit. 19. c. 1. Sect. 3.

5. Constantine the Great, when a Flattering Presbyter told him, That he was a
Blessed Man, and worthy to be Emperor over the whole World, and to Reign with
the Son of God in Eternal Glory; he manifested his dislike, and commanded him,
that he should not dare hereafter to use any such Speeches; but rather pray
earnestly for him, that he might Live and Dye God's faithful Servant. Clark's
Hist. Eccl. in the Life of Constantine, p. 10.

6. Maude, Daughter to Malcolm Camoir, King of Scots, and Wife to King Henry I.
went every day in Lent-time to Westminster-Abbey bare Foot, and bare Legged,
wearing a Garment of Hair; she would wash and kiss the Feet of the poorest
People, and give them bountiful Alms: For which, being Reprehended by a
Courtier, she gave him a short Answer, which I have out of Robert of Gloucester.

' Madam for Gods love is this weli do,
' To handle sich unclene Lymmes, and to kiss so.
' Foul would the King thynk if that hit he wiste,
' And right well Abyse him er he your mouth kiste.
' Sur, surqd the Queen, be stille, why sayeste thou so,
' Our Lord himself ensample yaf so for to do.
She Founded (as I said before) the Priory of Christ Church within Aldgate, and
the Hospital of St. Giles's in the Fields. She Builded the Bridges over the
River of Lea, at Stratford, Bow; and over the little Brook, called
Chanelsbridge; She gave much, likewise to the Repairing of the Highways.
Weaver's Funeral Monuments, p. 454.

7. Bishop Usher was so Humble, that in Practical Subjects, he would apply
himself to the Capacity of the poorest, and weakest Christian that came to him
for Information, and satisfactioo of their Doubts. Nay, sometimes he was more
propense to Communicate himself to such, than to others more Learned; which
Strangers have wondered at, as the Disciples Marvelled at our Savior talking
with the poor Woman of Samaria, John 4.27. and answered her Questions, rather
than taking notice of them. See his Life by Mr. Clark.

In his Demeanor and Behavior, he had high thoughts of others, and as low of
himself, and that in every condition of his Life, both in Prosperity and
Adversity. Godly Persons of what Rank soever had great power over him, he would
put them into his Bosom, Visit them in their Sickness, supply their wants, beg
their Prayers, and countenance their Cause and Persons. See his Life. Ibid.

8. Wickliffe and his Followers are reported to go barefooted, and in simple
Russet Gowns, and in Gesture and Behavior, to show much Humility. Ex. Hist.
Monast. D. Alban.

9. Mr. Bradford was so Humble, that in several of his Letters, he expresses
himself thus, Alas! I am worthy of nothing but Damnation, I have clean forgot
God; I am all Secure, Idle, Proud, etc. I am a very stark Hypocrite, not only
like my Words and Works, but even in these my Letters, which I write to you
Alas! I write this but to put my self in Remembrance; but I am without all
Sense; I do but only write it, etc. For God's sake pray for me. And in a Letter
to Sir T. H. he Subscribes himself, a very Painted Hypocrite, John Bradford.
And elsewhere, pray for me, (what should I call me?) a most miserable and
blaspemous Sinner. And again, by way of Subscription, -- the Sinful John
Bradford. Fox Martyrol.

10. Luther, calls himself a sack of Worms-meat, a lump of Earth, a bundle of
Wickedness, an unworthy Minister of the Gospel. Pref. to his Sermons.

11. Mr. Rich. Capel, could refuse Honors, (as Musculus did) and content
himself with plain and mean things. Clark in his Life.

12. Melancthon, would not disdain to do that, which his meanest Servants would
scare put their Hands to. Ibid.

13. Mr. Herbert, (the Divine Poet) assumed this for his Motto, Less than the
least of all thy Mercies.

14. Dr. Jo. Reinolds. is Recorded to be as Learned as any Man in the World, as
Godly as Learned, as Humble as Godly. Clark in his Life.

15. Lord I am Hell, Thou art Heaven, said Bishop Hooper.

16. I am the unmeetest Man for this high Office of Suffeting for Christ, that
ever was appointed to it, said Mr. Saunders.

17. Oh! that my Life, and a Thousand such Wretches more might go for yours,
says Jo. Careless, Martyr, to Mr. Bradford: Oh why does God suffer me, and
such other Caterpillars to live! etc. Fox Martyrol.

CHAP. XXXVI. Remarkable Veracity and Love of Truth.
BUY the Truth and sell it not, ( says Solomon) that is, be willing to
purchase it at any Rates, for it is a precious Commodity, viz. the Knowledge of
things as indeed they are and will be, in spite of all Opposition from Men or
Devils; for Truth will be the same when Men's Faces and Intellectuals change,
and the Scenes of humane Concerns vary, and the pillars of the World shake and
tremble: And those People that walk in the Truth need not fear, though the
Heavens should vanish away like Smoke, and the Earth wax Old like a Garment,
for not one Jot of Truth shall perish.

1. Polycarp was honored with this Character, that he was a Faithful Witness,
and constant to the Truth; so detesting Heretics, and those that oppugned the
Truth of the Gospel, that he quitted the Bath at Ephesus, when Cerinthus the
Heretic was there; and when Marcion (one of his old Acquaintance) met with him
at Rome, and wondering, that he took no notice of him, answered, do thou not
know me Polycarp? to whom Marcion replied, Yes, I know you well enough, that
you are the eldest Son of the Devil. Nay, he used to stop his Ears at the ill
Speeches of Heretics, and shunned the Places where they were uttered. Clark's
Mar. of Eccl. History.

2. Origin was sometimes necessitated to frequent the Lectures of one Paulus a
famous Heretic at Antioch, being both kindly entertained by the same
Gentlewoman in the same House; yet would he never be persuaded to join with him
in Prayer, detesting his Heretical Doctrine, ibid.

3. Athanasius was so great a Lover of Truth and Orthodoxy, that he alone
resisted stoutly all the Devices and malicious Contrivances and Opposition of
the Arians; insomuch, that it was said of him, One Athanasius stood firm
against all the World. He was often falsely Accused, often forced to Fly, often
Deposed, and as often Escaped. The Magicians and Soothsayers in Alexandria, in
Julian's time, acknowledged, that they could do nothing in their Art, except
Athanasius were removed out of the City, ibid.

4. Basil being attacked by fair Speeches and Promises of Preferment from
Valens the Emperous, to turn Arian, answered the Messenger; Alas! Sir, These
Speeches are fit to catch little Children, that look after such things; we are
otherwise taught by Sacred Scripture, and are ready to suffer a thousand
Deaths, rather than suffer one Syllable or Tittle of Scripture to be altered;
when Modestus the Prefect asked, Know ye not who we are that command it? No
Body, said Basil, so long as you require such things; to which he answered,
Know ye not that we have Honors to bestow upon you? whereunto he replied. They
are but Changeable like your selves: Upon this the Prefect in a Rage threatened
to Confiscate his Goods, to Torment, Banish or Kill him; Basil answered, As for
Consiscation he had nothing to lose, for Banishment, Heaven only was his
Country; and for Torments, one Blow would dash his Body in pieces; and for
Death, that was the only way to set him at Liberty. The Prefect told him, He
was Mad; "I wish, said he, that I may be ever so Mad. The Emperor being
acquainted with this Carriage of Basil, went to Church next Morning with Design
to disturb him; but seeing his Reverend Carriage, he was so convinced, that he
made a large Offering, which yet Basil refused, as coming from an Heretic,
ibid.

5. Epiphanius was semper acerrimus Hereticorum oppugnator, i.e. always a very
brisk Opposer of Heretics, ibid.

6. St. Augustine was called Hereticorum Malleus, i.e. the Hammer of Heretics:
Disputing often with the Manichees, Donatists, Arians and Pelagians; and
commonly in his Disputations making use of Notaries to write down the Arguments
and Answers on both sides, to prevent mis-reports, and herein was very
successful. So many things were dictated and published by him, so many
Disputations held in the Church, so many things written against Heretics, and
so many Books of Sacred Scripture Expounded by him, that a Studious Man all his
life long can scarely know and read over, ibid.

In his latter Days he looked over all his Books, and wrote two Volumes of
Retractations, and complained, that some Ministers had gotten and divulged some
of his Books, before he had perfected them, ibid.

7. Theodosius, senior, having called a Council upon occasion of the Arian
Heresy, the Emperor retired into his Closet, fell down upon his Knees before
God, humbly beseeching him to reveal the Truth unto him, and to assist him in
finding it out, then perusing every ones Opinion, and seriously weighing it in
the Balance of the Sanctuary, he condemned and tore in pieces all those Creeds
that derogated from the Unity that is in the Blessed Trinity, allowing and
highly commending the other. Clark in vita Theodosii.

8. Pomponius Atticus neither would tell a Lie, nor could endure one. Text.
Officinum, 1138.

9. Bericus the Abbot, that dwelt in the Wilderness of Thebais, was never heard
to swear an Oath, never to tell a lie, never to be angry, never to speak an
idle word, ibid.

10. Hor the Abbot, is said never to have told a lie, never to have spoken evil
to any Man, ibid.

11. The late Countess Dowager of Warwick, was exact in Word and Deed; she
never forfeited her Title, to the Privilege of Peerage, to be believed upon the
honor of her Word, which was as Sacred as any Oath, and as good Security as
many Bonds. No inconvenience to her self would make her Recoil or Flinch from
the Obligations she had brought her self under, by her own Mouth: Yea, she had
such an abhorrence of a dishonorable Recess, from express, or but intimated
promises, that it would render her esteem of such Persons exceeding cheap and
mean, who by little Arts and Shifts would lose and free themselves from their
Engagements, and disappoint the Expectations they had raised in others, to save
the Charges, accounting their Money spared, a very poor and base redemption of
their Reputation.

She abhorred a Lie, and used modesty to give this Testimony to her self; You
know I dare not, I will not Lie. And her Lord knew this so well, that though he
were positive enough, yet would never persist, if there happened any contest,
against whatever she affirmed peremptorily.

And a Lie was the foulest blemish any could stain themselves with, in
Converting with her, and the most unpardonable fault a Servant could contract,
to whom she used to say, Tell me the Truth* and I can forgive you any thing.

Yea, she feared the very shadow of a Lie. Dr. Walker in her Life, p. 90.

12. Sir William Fitz-Williams was a Man of so great Veracity, that that grand
Word, On mine Honor, was Security enough for a Kingdom, and the only
Asseveration he used. It was his privilege, that he need not swear for a
Testimony, and his renown, that he would not for his Honor. Lloyd's Worthies,
p. 549.

CHAP. XXXVII. Remarkable Friendship.
A Young Gentleman, with whose Father I had held an uninterrupted
Correspondence for near thirty Years, but was lately Deceased, wrote yesterday
a Letter to me, challenging as heir to his Father, the Inheritance of his
Correspondence, though at a great distance; building upon that Text, Thy own
Friend, and thy Father's Friend forsake not. And in Truth, a solid Friendship
founded upon Virtue and sincere Religion, is one of the greatest sweetnesses of
this Life, and rarely to be found in the World. A David and Jonathan, a Gregory
and Nazianzen, a Cranmer and Cromwell; a pair of true Friends, among Men, are
seldomer to be found then a Club of Knaves, or a herd of Bruits agreeing
together.

1. Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea for his great Love to Pamphilus, was Surnamed
Pamphilus.

2. Basil the Great, at Athens fell into acquaintance with Gregory Nazianzen,
and joining Studies together, they continued in firm amity all their Life
after. Clark's Mar. of Ecclesiastical Hist.

3. Theodoret and Cyril after a breach healed between them, were mighty loving
each to other ever after. Ibid.

4. S. Bernard seeing a want of Ministers in his Country, and burning with a
Zeal to Save Souls, resolved to set on the Work, and seeking one by whom he
might be Ordained, he pitched upon the Bishop of Catalonia, to whom, when he
came, and had Conversed a while with him, there grew a very strict Bond of
Friendship between them. Ibid. p. 105.

5. Under the Seventh Persecution Theodora, a godly Virgin, for her Religion
was condemned to the Stews, where her Chastity was to be a Prey to all Comers:
which Sentence being executed, many wanton young Men were ready to press into
the House, but one of the Brethren called Didymus, putting on a Soldier's
Habit, would have the first turn, and so going in persuaded her to change
Garments with him; and so she in the Soldiers Habit escaped, and Didymus being
found a Man, was carried before the President, to whom he confessed the whole
matter, and so was condemned. Theodora hearing of it, thinking to excuse him,
came and presented her self as the guilty Party, desiring that she might Die
and the other be Excused; but the Merciless Judge caused them both to be put to
Death. Clark Genesis Martyr. p. 82.

6. In Queen Elizabeth's Reign, in a Fight between the Earl of Kildare, and the
Earl of Tir-Owen, two of the Earl of Kildair's Foster Brethren were Slain,
whose Death he took so heavily, that himself shortly after Died for Grief; For
there is no Love in the World, comparable by many degrees to that of
Foster-brethren in Ireland. Camb. Brit. Irel. p. 116.

7. Dr. Cranmer was a Faithful Friend to the Lord Cromwell, even in his
Disgrace; insomuch that he ventured King Henry VIIIth's Displeasure to excuse
for him; and absented from the Parliament when he was condemned. Church Hist.
by Dr. Burnet.

8. Minutius Faelix says, that he and his Friend Octavius did both will and
will the same things.

9. Humphry Duke of Gloucester, being Wounded and Overthrown by the Duke of
Alenzon, at the Battle of Agincourt in France, was rescued by his Brother King
Henry Vth, who bestriding him, delivered him from the Danger. Speed. Chron.
Clark's Mirror, c. 56. p. 231.

10. Pelopidas and Epaminondas were singularly noted, and commended for the
perfect Love and Friendship that was ever inviolable kept between them even
till their Deaths, having been joined together in so many Wars, Battles,
Charges of Armies, and in Government of the Commonwealth: They were both alike
born to all Virtue, only Pelopidas took most pleasure in the Exercise of his
Body, and Strength; and Epaminondas in the Exercise of his Wit, and Learning:
the Recreation of the one was to wrestle, hunt, and exercise his Strength: of
the other to hear, study, and always to learn something in Philosophy. Their
great Love each to other was showed in a Journey they made together unto
Mantinea to aid the Lacedaemonians, who were now in League with the Thebans:
wherein they being both set in the Battle near together amongst the Footmen
against the Arcadians, it fell out that that point of the Lacedemonian Army
wherein they were, retreated, and many of them run away: But these two gallant
young Men resolved rather to die than to fly, and standing close together they
courageously resisted the many Enemies that assaulted them, till such times as
Pelopidas having received seven dangerous Wounds, fell down upon a heap of dead
Bodies, as well of their Friends as of their Foes; then Epaminondas thinking he
had been slain, stepped notwithstanding before him and defended his Body, and
Armor, and he alone fought against many, desiring rather to die than to
forsake Pelopidas lying amongst the Dead: but himself at last being thrust
through the Breast with a Pike, and receiving a sore Cut on his Arm with a
Sword, was even ready to sink, when Agesipolis King of the Lacedaemonians came
with the other point of the Battle in an happy hour, and so saved both their
Lives when they were even past hope. Plut. in vita Pelop.

11. Audamidas a Corinthian by Birth, had two Friends, Aretaeus and
Charixcenus, both wealthy, himself being very poor. This Man at his Death made
this his last Will and Testament: viz. I bequeath my Mother to be nourished and
cherished by him in her Old Age. Item. I bequeath my Daughter to Charixcenus to
be placed out by him with as big a Portion as possibly he can give her. The
Girl was at that time Marriageable. The Heirs, as soon as they heard of the
Will, came forthwith, and accepted those things that were given in charge; but
Charixcenus dying within five days, Aretaeus undertook the whole Charge,
maintained the old Woman during Life, and married the Man's Daughter together
with his own, on the same day; allowing them out of five Talents, two Talents
apiece for their Portion. Lucian. in Toxar. Dial.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Remarkable Hospitality.
BY a Hospitality I mean a Charitable Disposition of Soul to entertain and
relieve such as are in real Distress: And the Apostle enforces this as a Duty
upon Christians with a good Argument, when he bids us, Not to be forgerful to
entertain Strangers; because that some by so doing formerly had received Angels
into their Houses unawares: And who knows, till after some time of Conversation
with them, what Graces may be lodged in the Breasts, or what Commissions may be
put into the Hands of those Persons that, Lazarus- like, wait at our Gates?

1. A religious and rich Matron at Anticch entertained Origin, together with
his Mother and his Brethren, after the Death of his Father, and the
Confiscation of his Goods.

2. Gregory the Great was much given to Hospitality; so that when many
Inhabitants from diverse parts fled from the barbarous Cruelty of the
Longobards, and came to him, he entertained and relieved them, inviting daily
to his House many of those Exiles: He made also large Distributions unto
others, giving them Corn, Wine, Flesh, Cheese, and many other Refreshments in
their several Seasons; he sent often also large Relief to the Sick, Lame and
Impotent, not only in Rome, but in many other Towns and Villages round about;
insomuch that all that he had seemed to be a common Granary. Clark's Mar. of
Eccl. Hist. p. 98.

3. Mrs. Margaret Corbet was eminent for a charitable and bountiful Spirit. She
was another Dorcas, Full of Good-Works, and Alms-Deeds. That high Elogium that
Solomon gives to a virtuous Woman, may properly be applied unto her; Many
Daughters have done virtuously, but she excelled them all, Prove. 31.19. Many
there are that come far short of her; but very few that went beyond her in Acts
of Charity. God gave her a liberal and plentiful Estate, and that was a great
Mercy: But it was a far greater Mercy, that he gave her a free and liberal
Heart to do good, and to distribute. To cast her Bread on the Waters and to
honor God with her Substance. That Protestation which Job makes for his own
Vindication. Job 31.16, 19. may fitly be applied unto her. He would not
withhold the poor from their desire, nor cause the eyes of the Widow to fail:
He would not see any to perish for want of Clothing, nor any poor without
Covering. The whole Country, round about where she dwelt, will bear her
Witness, that she visited and relieved the Sick, and clothed the Naked: She
fed the Hungry, and healed the Wounded. Her Purse, her Hand, her Heart, were
all open for their Relief. She bought many Precious Drugs, and Cordial Waters:
She made several precious Salves, and gave them all away to such as stood in
need of them. She spared not her best Pains, being never weary of well-doing;
insomuch that in the extremity of her great Sickness (such bowels of Compassion
yearned in her) she compounded several Medicines with her own Hands, and
applied them. Thus will her Works praise her in the Gate, and being dead she
yet speaks, Prove. 31.31. Heb. 11.14. for her precious Name lives. The Lord will
have the Name of the Righteous to be in everlasting Remembrance, Psalm 112.6.
and the Memory of the Just is blessed. Clark's Examp. Vol. 2. c. 15.

4. Mr. John Bruen of Bruen-Stapleford, for three years together whilst he
lived in Chester, maintained the Poor of his own Parish in the County, allowing
them all the Profit of his two Mills: He relieved the Poor in Chester both
daily at his Gate, and otherwise, Weekly, as he was rated. Ibid.

5. Mr. John Dod, though his Means was very small, yet was much given to
Hospitality: Scarce any Sabbath in the year, but he dined both Poor and Rich;
commonly three or four Poor, besides Strangers, that came to hear him. He had
so large a Heart, that, upon occasion, he has given to some three Shillings,
to some five Shillings, to some ten Shillings, yea to some twenty Shillings;
and when the Poor came to buy Butter or Cheese, he would command his Maid to
take no Money of them. Ibid.

6. Mr. Samuel Crook, of Wrington in Sommersetshire, was very bountiful to his
Kindred that needed it, and then he showed it most when their Necessities
swelled highest. He was very charitable and open-handed to the poor Members of
Jesus Christ. And albeit his Charity shined most to those of his own Flock, yet
was it not shut up from Strangers; but he was very liberal to them also upon
good Occasions: Yea when he went abroad to bestow the Gospel freely upon other
Congregations adjacent, such Poor as he found to be Hearers (unless they were
known to him to take up Hearing as a Cloak to cover their Idleness, and Neglect
of their Callings) never went home empty-handed; but he always warmed and
cheered them with his Bounty, as well as instructed them with his Doctrine.
Ibid.

7. Mr. John Carter, sometime Minister of Delstead, was very diligent in
Visiting the Sick, especily the poorer sort; and he never went to the House of
any poor Creature, but he lest a Purse-Alms as well as a Spiritual-Alms of good
and heavenly Advice and Prayer. No poor body ever came to his Door that went
away unhanded; his Wife also looking unto that as well as himself. Ibid.

8. Dr. William Gouge was very charitable, especially to the Household of Faith.
He maintained some poor Scholars in the University, wholly at his own Charge,
and contributed liberally toward the Maintenance of others. He set apart a
Sacred Stock, (as he called it) a Portion for the Poor, proportionable to his
Encoms, which also he faithfully distributed. Ibid.

9. Dr. Harris, in his Works of Charity to the Poor, was no less discreet than
private. When he met with fit Objects, his Hand was more ready to give then his
Tongue to proclaim it. Indeed he was no Friend to idle, lazy, canting Persons,
who live on the Sweat of other Men's Brows. Whosoever shall survey his Large
Bills of Weekly and Quarterly Allowances (besides considerable Sums given to
poor Ministers, and especially to poor Widows and Orphans, who never knew
whence it came) and shall add thereunto his Legacies bequeathed in his Will, to
charitable Uses, cannot but judge that his Charity exceeded the ordinary
Proportions of his Revenues. Ibid.

10. Mr. Ignatius Jordan of Exeter, was famous for his Charity both in his Life
and at his Death. In his Life he was a free-hearted and open-handed Man. He was
a great Patron of the Poor; another Job in that respect. He could truly say
with him, as Job 30.25. Was not my Soul grieved for the Poor? No doubt it was,
and did earnestly plead for them; and especially for God's Poor, honest poor
Persons, whose Hearts and Faces were set Godward and Heavenward, and his
Hands were very open to relieve them. He did that for them which many that had
far greater Estates had not Hearts to do. Ibid.

He would often say, That he wondered what rich Men meant, that they gave so
little to the Poor, and raked so much together for their Children. Do you not
see (quoth he) what comes of it? And hereupon he would reckon up diverse
Examples of such as heaped up much for their Children, who, within a short
time, had scattered and consumed all. And, on the Morth-side, he often spoke of
such as had small beginnings, and afterward became rich, or of a competent
Estate; giving a particular Instance in himself: I came (said he) but with a
Groat or Six pence in my Purse, Had I had a Shilling in my Purse, I had never
been Mayor of Exeter. Therefore leave Children but a little, and they (by God's
Blessing upon their Labors and Industry) may become Rich; but leave them a
great deal, and they are in danger to become Beggars.

His Care for the Poor was most remarkable, in the time of a great Plague in
that City, which was Anno Christi, 1625. For in the absence of the Mayor he was
chosen his Deputy; and he, seeing the sad and deplorable Condition of the City,
accepted of it, and wrote his Letters to diverse Towns in Devonshire, and to
some in Dorcet and Somersetshire, by which means he procured several Sums of
Money, for the Supplial of the Wants of many Hundred of Poor, that in that time
were in a distressed Condition. One that was an Eyewitness Related, that he
had seen Morning after Morning, coming to his Door, sometimes Thirty, sometimes
Forty, yea Fifty, Sixty or more, wringing their Hands: Some crying that their
Husbands are Dead; others, that their Wives were Dead; others that their
Children are Dead; and all, that they had not wherewith to Bury them: Some
again cried, that their Families are Sick, and they had not wherewithal to
Relieve them; others, that they had diverse Children, but had neither Bread nor
Money to Buy it for them. Some cried for Bread, some for Physic, others for
Shrouds for their Dead; and he not only heard them patiently, but his Bowels
yearned toward them, and his Hands were stretched out for their Relief. For,
standing in his Shop, with his own Hands he ministered Supplies unto them all,
and so dismissed them for the present. The next Morning, when there was a
renewal of their sad Complaints, his charitable Care of them was renewed also.
And thus he continued, Morning by Morning, even for the space of near three
Months, till the return of the Mayor into the City.

Besides his great Care to supply the Want of such as came to him for Relief,
he had a special Respect to poor Housekeepers and Tradesmen; such as were
unwilling and ashamed to make their sad and necessious Considition known.

He bequeathed thus his Will; I give to all the Poor of this City and Country,
that receive Pay of Parishes, and also to those that dwell in Almshouses, five
Shillings to each of them, to be paid at my Burial. I give to one hundred more
of poor People ten Shillings apiece, to be given to such as my Overseers shall
think to have most need, the honest Poor to be chiefly regarded. I give to the
Poor of Lime, where I was born, and to tho Poor of Guernsey, where I was
newborn, five Pounds to each place. I forgive all the Moneys owing to me, if
it be under the Value of twenty Shillings to each. I give more to fifty poor
People of this City and County, twenty Shillings each, to be appointed by my
Overseers. Ibid.

11. Mr. Richard Greenham was eminent for his Charity to the Poor. In a time of
Scarcity, when Barley was at ten Groats the Bushel, (which in those days was an
extraordinary Price) he, by his Prudence brought it to pass, that the Poor had
it sold to them for four Groats the Bushel by every Husbandman in the Town; and
thus he effected it. There were about twenty Plough-holders in the Town, all
whom he drew to Agreement among themselves, to hire a common Granary, and
therein to lay up Corn for the Poor, some more, some less: So that some laid up
one Coom, some a quarter, some three Cooms, and himself laid in five Cooms; all
which was delivered out to the Poor at a Groat a Peck. One day in the Week was
appointed for all the Poor to come, and served in, at which time every one
received according to their Charge. Where there were but two in a Family, they
received one Peck a Week, and so more according to that Proportion: Only no
Family had above three Pecks a Week. He kept but two Beasts himself, that the
Poor might have his Straw: and when other Men sold their Straw for two
Shillings a days thresh, he sold his for ten Pence: Though his Bushel was bigger
than other Men's, yet he would often charge his Man not to strike off all the
Corn. Yea, his Charity was not only extended to the Poor of his own Parish, but
to others also. As he rode abroad, if he had seen a poor Boy at a distance from
him, he would send him some Money by his Man. Whenever he rode by the Castle
of Cambridge, the Prisoners would never ask him for any thing; for if he had
any Money in his Purse, they were sure to have part of it.

12. The Right Honorable Mary Countess Dowager of Warwick as a Neighbor, was
so kind and courteous, it advanced the Rent of adjacent Houses to be so near
situated to her, nor only her House and Table, but her Countenance and very
Heart were open to all Persons of Quality in a considerable Circuit; and for
the inferior sort, if they were sick, or tempted, or in any distress of Body
or Mind, whither should they go but to the good Countess, whose Closet and
Still-house was their Shop for Chyrurgery and Physic, and her Self, (for she
would visit the meanest of them personally) and Ministers whom she would send
to them, their Spiritual Physicians.

But as her Love to God was the Soul of her Religion, so the Exuberancy of her
Charity toward those who needed her abundant Liberality, was the conspicuous
Crown which beautifie^ all her Sweetness and Goodness toward Men: for in this
she was forward, I bear her Record, to her Power, yea and beyond her Power; for
she would even anticipate her Revenue and Encoms, rather than want wherewith to
be liberal. S. Jerome placed in the highest rank of the Praises of his admired
Paula, that she not only made her self poor to relieve, but died in magno Aere
alieno: And I am sure it used to be said of our Excellent Lady; That was the
Lady that would borrow Money to give away. She would not live poor (in good
Works) to die rich; yea, though she had chosen Executors, in whom her Heart
could trust as safely as ever her Husband's did in her; yet she would make her
own Hands her Executors, and they were very faithful, to her enlarged Heart.

But to be more particular, When she had in her Lord and Husband's lifetime, a
separate Maintenance or Allowance, settled by Marriage-Articles, she was
pleased to ask me my Opinion concerning the quota part: What Proportion one is
obliged to consecrate to God of our Estates: And when I told her it was hard,
if not impossible, to fix a Rule which might hold universally; but the
Circumstances must be considered in which Persons stood, their Qualities, their
Encoms, their Dependences, necessary and emergent Occasions, inevitably
occurring. But she persisting to urge a more particular Answer as to her self,
what would be fit and becoming her to do, I not being ignorant of her
Circumstances, (I must bear my own Shame in acknowledging the Straitness of my
own Heart, told her) I supposed a seventh part: But before I could suggest the
Reasons; she preventingly replied, She would never give less than the third
part: And she kept her Resolution to the full, and with Advantage; laying aside
constantly the third part for charitable uses, and would sometimes borrow of
that which remained to add to it, but never defaulk from that to serve her own
Occasions, though sometimes pressing enough.

When she came to the Possession of so large an Estate as her Lord bequeathed
her for her Life, she in good measure made it true, what a great Person was
reported to say; That the Earl of Warwick had gave all his Estate to pious
Uses: Meaning thereby, that he had given it to this Noble Lady, who would so
convert it.

And it is a great Truth, which I have had from her own Mouth, that all the
Satisfaction she took in it, was the Opportunity it afforded her of doing Good.
And I have heard her earnestly aver, that she should not accept of, or be
encumbered with the greatest Estate in England, if it should be offered her,
clogged with this Condition, not to do Good to others with it.

But some may say, were her Eyes as open as her Hands; did she not scatter it
as carelessly as prosusely? Nothing less, her liberal Soul devised liberal
Things: I will point at some few of many.

There are some Objects of real Charity, which are not so to vulgar Eyes or
Purses; on whom she would confer, and whom she would surprise, with noble and
suitable Assistances; thus she struck deep, drew an whole Bag at once, but made
no noise.

Some scarcely to any but my self; and it may be had not been to me but to ask
my Judgment, whether it might be reduced to the account of Charity, to give to
such and such, being in such Circumstances: For she was never less tender of
their Modesty than compassionate of their Necessity, and was more sollicitous
for their Pardon, than their Thanks for helping them.

Foreigners who fled either to preserve their Religion, or to embrace what they
were convinced of to be the Truth.

A great many young Scholars of hopeful promising Parts, whom she wholly, or in
good measure, educated at the University, allowing some thirty, some twenty,
some ten, some eight, many five Pounds per Annum, and some others who had more
assistance, less.

Abundance of young Children which she put to School in the Neighboring Towns,
I cannot say how many, but a very great number, all that were poor and willing
to learn: Nay, that could be persuaded to it, whose Schooling she did not only
pay for, but gave them both Books, and often Clothing; and not only near home,
but as far as Wales, contributing nobly to that pious Design, of that good old
Man and indefatigable Promoter of it, Mr. Gouge, so amply attested by a Cloud
of Witnesses, beyond Exception, to rescue Wales from its remaining Ignorance
and Demi-Barbarism.

Many Ministers of both Denominations, as well Conformists whose Livings were
so small as not to yield them a Subsistence, as those who had none at all.

Many occasional Objects of Charity, which you may surely conclude, failed not
to ply at those Stairs where 'twas seldom Low Water: And though she was
sometimes imposed upon, and deceived by those that neither needed nor deserved
that she gave, yet this did not discourage her from giving again; for she said,
She had rather relieve ten that only appeared meet Objects and were not, than
let one go unrelieved that was so indeed: For though they deceived her in her
giving, God would not deceive her in accepting, what was sincerely done for his
Name sake.

Lastly, the Poor which she fed in great numbers, not only with Fragments and
broken Meat, but with liberal Provision purposely made for them. She was a
great Pitier, yea a great Lover of the Poor, and she built a covenient House on
purpose for them at her London-Seat, (as they had one at Leez) to sheluer them
from Rain and Heat whilst they received their Dole; and when she was at London
with her Family, had in her absence, whilst no House was kept at Leez, a kind
of House kept for their sakes alone: That is, twice a Week good Beef and Bread
provided for the Poor of four adjacent Parishes; and has taken order in her
Will to have the same continued three Months after her decease; and by the same
Will has given an hundred Pounds to be distributed to the Poor of Braintree,
Felsted, Little-leez and Much-Walthan, at or shortly after her Funeral. Dr.
Walker, in her Life, p. 108.

13 Sir Matthew Hale (as we have said already) gave the tenth Penny of all he
got to the Poor; but besides that, he took great care to be well-informed of
Proper Objects for Charitities: And after he was a Judge, many of the
Perquisities of his place, as his Dividend of the Rule and Box-money, were sent
by him to the Goals, to discharge poor Prisoners, who never knew from whose
hands their Relief came. It is also a Custom for the Marshal of the
King's Bench, to present the Judges of that Court with a piece of Plate for a
New-years-Gift, that for the Chief Justice being larger than the rest: This he
intended to have refused, but the other Justice told him it belonged to his
Office, and the refusing it would be a Prejudice to his Successors; so he was
persuaded to take it: But he sent word to the Marshal, That instead of Plate,
he should bring him the Value of it in Money. And when he received it, he
immediately sent it to the Prisons, for the Relief and Discharge of the Poor
there. He usually invited his poor Neighbors to Dine with him, and made them
sit at Table with himself: And if any of them were sick, so that they could not
come, he would send Meat warm to them from his Table: And he did not only
relieve the Poor in his own Parish, but sent Supplies to the Neighboring
Parishes, as there was occasion for it. And he treated them all with the
Tenderness and Familiarity that became one, who considered they were of the
same Nature with himself, and were reduced to no other Necessities but such as
he himself might be brought to: But for common Beggars, if any of these came to
him, as he was in his Walks, when he lived in the Country, he would ask such as
were capable of Working, Why they went about so idly? If they answered, It was
because they could find no Work; he often sent them to some Field, to gather
all the Stones in it, and lay them on a heap, and then would pay them liberally
for their Pains: This being done, he used to send his Carts, and caused them to
be carried to such places of the Highway as needed mending.

But when he was in Town, he dealt his Charities very liberally, even among the
Street-Beggars; and when some told him, That he thereby encouraged Idleness,
and that most of these were notorious Cheats: He used to answer, That he
believed most of them were such; but among them there were some that were great
Objects of Charity, and pressed with grievous Necessities; and that he had rather
give his Alms to Twenty, who might be perhaps Rogues, than that One of the
other sort, should perish for want of that small Relief which he gave them.

He loved Building much, which he affected chiefly, because it employed many
poor People. Dr. Burnet in the Life of Sir Matthew Hale, p. 90.

CHAP. XXXIX. Remarkable Charity and Liberality in Giving.
EVery Man is but a Steward under the Great Lord of Heaven and Earth of those
good things of this Life, which he enjoys; the best use we can of make them, is
to do good with them, either for the promoting of God's Glory, or our own and
others Benefit; and accordingly we are to give up our Accounts hereafter. To
spend all upon our own Lusts, is Folly and Impiety; To give all away without
Prudence and Discretion, is Madness; To give willingly and wisely, is good
Christianity. But in all our Givings we must have an especial care, that our
Intention be honest, and our Ends right; for he that gives only to get Praise
among Men, does but make an Idol of himself, and sacrifice to his own Vanity,
and for so doing shall receive no other reward; but our Religion does furnish
us with better Examples.

1. Cyprian immediately upon his Conversion distributed all his Goods amongst
the Poor, and afterward being Bishop of Carthage commanded the Care of the
Poor to his Presbyters, and was himself of a mighty liberal Disposition toward
the Exiled Brethren. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

Cyprian receiving joyfully the Sentence of Death, bids the Pro-consul
discharge his Office duly, and thereupon putting off his Apparel, he gave it to
his Deacons, wishing them to give to his Executioner 25 pieces of Gold in
testimony of his Love to him; and so kneeling down, covered his Eyes, and
submitted willingly to the stroke of the Sword. A. C. 259. Ibid.

2. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, when in a great Famine many poor People came to
him for Relief, gave them all he had, and sold the Vessels and Church-Ornaments
to relieve their Wants. Ibid.

3. Ephrem Syrus, upon a Famine happening at Edessa, assembling the Rich Men
together, complained that the Poor were almost starved, whilst they covetously
kept their Riches by them, to their future Hazard and Torment of their Souls;
and persuading them to a charitable Contribution, they chose him for their
Almoner; who thereupon took their Money, provided 300 Beds for the Sick and
Strangers, and relieved them all the time of the Famine. Ibid.

4. Basil the Great in a great Famine sold his Lands, and all his other Goods,
to relieve the Poor, and styled up other rich Merchants to contribute; and
caused public Places to be erected for their Maintenance; and would often not
only visit them, but administer to their Necessities. Ibid.

5. Epiphanius spent all his Estate in relieving the Poor. Ibid.

6. Theoderet was wonderfully charitable, visiting and refreshing the Bowels of
the Poor. Ibid.

7. Chrysotom when banished to Cucusus in Armenia, had much Money sent him by
his Friends, which he wholly employed for the Redemption of Captives, and the
Relief of poor Prisoners. Ibid.

8. S. Augustine was very careful for the Poor; and in case of great want,
would sell the Ornaments of the Church for their Relief; and when the
Church-Stock was spent, he used to declare to the People, that he had nothing
left wherewith to relieve the Poor; that thereby he might stir up their
Charity, to contribute to so good a work, ibid. He always kept Scholars in his
House, whom he Fed and Clothed, ibid. At his Death he made no Will, as having
nothing to bestow, ibid.

9. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria used to say, it is the best way for a Rich Man to
make the Bellies of the Poor his Barns, -- and thereby to lay up Treasure in
Heaven. Ibid.

10. Prosper Bishop of Rhegium in France, distributed his Goods freely to the
Poor, and was a Father to all Ages and Sexes in the City. Ibid. p. 89.

11. Fulgentius, just before his Death, called for a Sum of Money, which, as a
Faithful Steward he daily used to distribute a among the Poor, willing it all
to be presently divided; and recited by name the Widows, Orphans and Poor, he
allotted to every one his Portion. Ibid. p. 95.

12. Gregory the Great, after his Fathers Death, having more Liberty to dispose
of himself and his Estate, gave all his Estate toward the Relief of the Poor.
Ibid. p. 96.

13. S. Bernard, What Money he had given him whilst Young, he privately gave
away to the Poor. Ibid. p. 95.

14. Our late most Excellent Queen Mary distributed Annually to the distressed
French Protestants 40000 Pounds English. Spanhemius in his Funeral Oration. She
sent some Thousands of Pounds into this Land, to be distributed among the
Relics of those that were killed. Perizonius.

15. Luther was very liberal to the Poor; a poor Student asking him some Money,
he bid his Wife give him some; but she pleading Penury, he looked up a Silver
Cup, and gave that to him. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 144.

16. John Picus of Mirandula Relieved the Poor every Day; gave much Money to
poor Maids, to prefer them in Marriage; and employed an intimate Friend to
enquire out the Wants and Necessities of poor Housekeepers, whom he
bountifully Relieved. Clark in his Life.

17. Edward VIth. King of England, in a Sermon Preached by Dr. Ridley about
Charity, ordered Gray-Fryars-Church to be a House for Orphans, St. Bartholomews
to be an Hospital, and his own House at Bridewel, to be a place of Correction.
Hist. of the Reform.

18. Archbishop Cranmer laid out all his Wealth on the Poor, and pious Uses.
Ibid.

19. Queen Ann Bullen, ever used to carry a little Purse about her for the
Poor; thinking no Day well spent, wherein some had not fared the better at her
Hand. She kept her Maids, and such as were about her, so employed in Working,
and sewing Garments for the Poor, that neither was there seen any idleness
amongst them, or any Leisure to follow foolish Pastimes. Acts and Mon.

20. King Henry IId of England, Surnamed Beauclerk, was very Charitable and
Merciful to the Poor; and Anno Christi 1176. in a great Dearth, in his
Countries of Anjou and Maine, he fed every Day, with sufficient Sustenance Ten
Thousand Persons, from the beginning of April, till the time that new Corn was
inned: And whatsoever was laid up in his Granaries and Storehouses, he
employed the same for Relief of religious and poor People. Pet. Blesensis.

21. Francis Russel, Second Earl of Bedford of that Surname, was so bountiful
to the Poor, that Queen Elizabeth would merrily complain of him, that he made
all the Beggars: And sure it is more Honorable for Noblemen to make Beggars by
their Liberality, then by their Oppression. Holy State, p. 297.

22. Holy Master Bradford in a hard time, sold his Chains, Rings and Jewels, to
Relieve those that were in Want. Acts and Mon.

23. George Wiseheart a Scottish Martyr, forbore one Meal in three, or one Day
in four, that he might have wherewithal to Relieve the Poor. He lay also hard
upon Straw, with new coarse Canvas Sheets, which, whenever he changed he gave
away to the Poor. See his Life in Clark's General Martyrology.

24. Mr. John Eliot, went much beyond the Proportions of his little Estate in
the World, bestowing freely upon the poor many hundreds of Pounds; and he would
with a very forcible Importunity press his Neighbors to join with him in such
Beneficences. Cott. Mather in his Life, p. 39.

Roxbury (the Town where he lived) could not live quietly, without a Free
School in the Town; and the Issue of it has been one thing, which has made me
almost put the Title of Schola Illustris upon that little Nursery; that is,
that Roxbury has afforded more Scholars, first for the College, and then for
the Public, then any Town of its bigness; or if I mistake not, of twice its
bigness in New England. Ibid. p. 66.

25. Mr. Eliot learned the Indian Tongue with some Pains and Charge, Translated
the whole Bible into it, and several English Treatises; gathered a Church of
Converted Indians about Natick, and another about Mashippang, and above these
Five Assemblies more, and set Pastors over them, who meet together twice every
Lord's Day; and sometimes solemnly set a part whole Days, either for
Thanksgiving or Humiliation, etc. Ibid. p. 97, 98.

26. Giles of Bruxels Martyr, gave to the Poor all that he had, that necessity
could spare, and lived by his Trade, which was of a Cutler: Some he refreshed
with Meat, some with Clothing, some with Shoes, others with Household Stuff. A
poor Woman being Delivered, and wanting a Bed to lie on, he brought her his own
Bed, contenting himself to lie on the Straw.

27. Dr. Taylour, Martyr, used at least once in a Fortnight to call upon Sir
Henry Doile, and others of the Rich Clothiers in his Parish, to go with him to
the Almshouses, and there to see how the Poor lived, what they lacked in Meat,
Drink, Apparel, Bedding, or other necessaries, Ministering to them himself,
according to his Power, and causing his Rich Neighbors to do the like.

28. Mary the Wife of Alexander Farnese, Prince of Parma, being Childless,
conceived an hope, that if she took up some Orphan, or Beggars Boy, and bred
him for Charities sake, God would bestow a Son upon her; she therefore took up
one in the Street, and bred him in her Court, and according to her Expectation,
at Nine Months end she was Delivered of a Son, whom she called Ranucio Strada.

29. Master Fox never denied to give to any one that asked for Jesus sake: And
being asked whether he knew a poor Man that had received Succor of him,
answered, I remember him well; I tell you I forgot Lords and Ladies to remember
such.

30. The young Lord Harrington gave the Tenth of his Allowance (which was One
Thousand Pounds per Annum, during his Minority) to the Poor, and good Uses;
besides what he gave in the way as he walked, which was often and much.

31. Master Whateley, the late painful and powerful Preacher of God's Word at
Banbury, for the space of many Years together, set apart the Tenth part of his
Revenues, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, which he used to give to the Poor.
Clark's Mar. c. 19. p. 66.

32. Dr. Hammond, Mr. Joseph Mede, and Mr. Jo. Parker of London, all gave the
Tenths of their yearly Incomes to the Poor; So did Judge Hales. See his Life by
Doctor Burnet. Doctor W. Gouge gave the Seventh part.

33. The late Countess of Warwick gave (and laid aside) the Third part of her
Estate constantly, for the Poor. For young Scholars, Ministers of both
Dominions, that had none or but small Preferments, Foreigners, etc. and
borrowed Money sometimes to give to the Poor. Dr. Walker.

34. Chrysostom tells of the Church of Antioch, though the Revenues of it were
small in his time, yet besides its Clergy, besides Strangers, Lepers and
Prisoners, it daily maintained above Three Thousand Widows and Maids. Hom. 67.
in Matt.

35. Cyprian upon his turning Christian, sold his Estate to Relieve the Wants
of others, and not be Restrained from it by Persuasions or Considerations.
After his Entrance on the Ministry, his Doors were open to all Comers, from
whom no Widow ever returned empty; to the Blind he would be a Guide to Direct
them, a Support to the Lame, and a Defense to the Oppressed. See my History of
all Religions.

36. The Jews have no Beggars, such as go from House to House; though (in
Barbary) many indigent Persons: With great Insulting they upbraid the Moor and
Christian with their Common Beggars. Their way of Relieving the Poor, is

By Copies of the Law bought and laid up in the Synagogue, till the Buyer's
Family, or any of them be in Poverty, and then sold for their Use.

By Legacies of dying Persons: For none Dye safely, say they, who Bequeath not
something to the Corban.

Contributions, out of which they raise Portions, and provide for Orphans. And
to avoid Sophistication, the poorer Females are provided for by Lot; those on
whom the Lot falls, are first placed in Marriage.

Private Alms on Fridays and Holy Days.

By Kibbus, or Letters of Collection from Synagogue to Synagogue. Dr. Addison.

37. Amongst the Chinese were a particular Judge in every City appointed for
the Poor; the first day of his Office Publishes an Order, that all that have
any Children Lame, Sick, etc. should come by a certain Day, and make their
Cases known: If able, they are put to Learning of a Trade, if not, to
Hospitals, where they are brought up at the King's Charge: None are permitted
to go abroad. The Blind are not accounted as unable for Work. Mandelslo.

Their good Works (which they believe Meritorious) are Building Monasteries and
Churches, and giving Alms; besides which, they do nothing whereby a Man may
Judge of their Faith by their Works. D. of Holstein 's Emb. Travel. No
Muscovite almost, but as he goes to Church, or about his occasions, buys Bread
to distribute among the Poor. Idem.

In China few or no Beggars are found; for a young Beggar has the Whip; the
Old, Lame and Blind are provided for in the Hospitals. Sir Th. Herbert.

The Baniams (or Priests of the Indians, Hindoes) have Spittles to Recover lame
Birds and Beasts.

The Mogut Relieves many poor People.

A Musselman will give the Seventh part of his Estate toward the Relief of the
Poor.

It Is one of Mahomet's five Precepts -- to give yearly to the poor the Fortieth
part of their Substance. M. de Thevenot.

38. Some of the Mahometans in their Life time Relieve the Poor with their
Goods; and others at their Death leave great Estates for the founding of
Hospitals, Building of Bridges, Kirvanseraies (Inns for the Caravans) bringing
Water to the Highways, etc. Others at their Death give their Slaves Liberty.
They who want Purses, employ themselves in mending Highways, filling the
Cisterns by the Road with Water, showing Travelers the foard, for God's sake;
refusing Money when offered; Some buy Birds to set at Liberty, others leave
confiderable Means to Bakers or Butchers, to distribute meat among so many Dogs
and Cats.

Sultan Amurah, seeing a Man one Day stoop at the Corner of a Street in
Constantinople, to Dine on a piece of Bread and bit of Roast, which he had
bought hard by, and held his Horse (that was loaded with Goods he had to sell)
by the Bridle; he ordered the Horse to be unloaded, and the load to be put on
the Master's Back, obliging him to continue so all the while that the Horse was
eating a Measure of Oats. M. de Thevenot.

At the chief Temple in Fez, the Priest takes charge of the Poor's Money and
Orphens, and deals to them Corn and Money every Holy Day. Rosse.

The Hospital at Milan is a Royal Building; I was told it had 90000 Crowns
Revenue. The old Court is large and would look Noble, if it were not for the
new Court that is near it, which is 250 Foot Square; and there are three Rows
of Corridors or Galleries all round the Court, one in every Stage, a Gallery
before every Door. It is true, these take up a great deal of Building, being
ordinarily Ten or Eight Foot broad; but then here is an open space, that is
exstream cool on that side where the Sun does not lie, for it is all open to
the Air; the Wall being only supported by Pillars, at the distance of fifteen
or twenty Foot one from another. In this Hospital are not only Galleries full
of Beds on both sides, as is ordinary in all Hospitals; but there are also a
great many Chambers, in which Persons, whose Condition was formerly
distinguished, are treated with a particular Care There is an Out-house, which
is called the Lazarette, that is without the Walls, which belongs to this
Hospital, it is an exact quarter of a Mile square, and there are 360 Rooms in
it, and a Gallery runs all along before the Chambers; so that as the Service is
convenient, the Sick have a covered walk before their Doors: In the middle of
this vast square, there is an Octangular Chapel so contrived, that the Sick
may, from all their Beds, see the Elevation of the Host, and adore it. This
House is for the Plague or Infectious Fevers; and the Sick that want a free
Air, are removed hither. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

The Annunciata in Naples is the greatest Hospital in the World; the Revenue is
said to be 400000 Crowns a Year; the Number of the Sick is not so great as at
Milan; Yet one convenience for the Sick I observe in these Galleries, which was
considerable, that every Bed stood as in an Acove, and had a Wall on both
sides. -- The young Children they maintain are so many, that one can hardly
believe the Numbers they boast of; for they talk of many Thousands that are not
seen, but are at Nurse. Idem.

At Venice are Seventy three rich Hospitals. St. Clark.

In Zurick they have many Hospitals well entertained in one (as I was told)
there was 650 Poor kept. Dr. Burnet's Letters, p. 50.

In Holland the Tuchthnis or Risphelhnis (or House of Correction for Debauched
young Men) in Amsterdam, has. at the entrance of the Gate two Lions bridled (a
proper Emblem) with this Inscription, Virtutis est domare qua cuncti pavent:
They who are put in, are forced to work and get their Bread with hard Labor. I
saw those who rasped Brazil, having a certain Task set them every Day, work so
hard, that being naked and in a Swear, and the Dust of the Brazil-Wood flying
upon them, they were all over painted of a beautiful Red Color. They told us,
That some that were committed to their Charge, and not to be brought to work by
blows, they placed in a large Cistern, and let the Water in upon them, placing
only a Pump by them for Relief, whereby they are forced to labor for their
Lives, and to free themselves from Drowning. One we saw put into a narrow
Dungeon, and kept from Meat. Some are put into this House for a longer time,
some for a shorter. This may seem severe to many, yet is not comparable to that
which is reported to have been used formerly at Cologne in the White-Tower,
where such Youths that were not otherwise to be reclaimed, were shut up: The
Height and Thickness of the Walls secured them from escaping, or from their
Complaints being heard; near the Top was placed out of their Reach, a Loaf of
Bread, the last Remedy against starving; which while their bold Necessity
forced them to reach at, they executed their last Sentence upon themselves, and
miserably brake their own Necks.

Somewhat like the Raspelhuis, is the Spinhuis for the young Women who live
loosly, that are taken in the night or can give no account of their Living:
Here they are bound to make Lace, Sew, or employ their time perpetually in some
honest Labor. Those of the better sort are permitted to have Chambers apart;
in one large Room I saw about 100 of them, and some very well dressed and fine,
which was an unexpected Sight to me, and would sure be more strange in France
or England.

The Weeshuts, or Hospital for Children, where there are 600 Orphans carefully
looked after, and well educated.

The Dobhuis is for such as are delirous, mad or melancholic.

The Gasthuis for the Sick, is large, and has great Revenues.

The Mannenhuis for old Men, and such as are no longer able to labor toward
their own Support.

Besides all these, there are great Sums of Money collected for the Poor, so
that there is not a Beggar to be seen in the Streets. And upon all Appointments
of meeting at the Tavern, or elsewhere, and upon many other occasions,
whosoever fails to come at the exact time, forfeits more or less to the use of
the Poor. Dr. Brown 's Travels.

40. Archbishop Parker's Works of Charity were very eminent: He gave to the
City of Norwich, where he was born, a Basin and Ewre, double gilt, weighing 173
Ounces; as also fifty Shillings a Year for ever, to be distributed among the
Poor of that City; and six Anniversary Sermons to be Preached in several parts
of Norfolk. To Bennet-Colledge he gave Thirty Scholarships, built them a
Library, and bestowed on it many excellent Books, and ancient Manuscripts;
besides 300 Ounces of Silver and gilt Plate; and the perpetual Parsonage of St.
Mary Abchurch in London. Clark 's Examples, Volume 2. c. 15.

41. Mr. Andrew Willet was eminent for his Charity, which will appear if we
consider Quantum exquantillo: How much out of how little Means he freely gave
to the Poor and Needy. He maintained two of his near Allies (being fallen into
want) many years, at his own Table; and maintained (for the fourth part) a Son
of either of them at the University; and though his many Children might have
restrained his Bounty, yet he was of Cyprian's Mind; The more Children, the
more Charity. He always gave double to the Poor, on the Coronation, and on the
Powder Treason Days. At Christmas he gave Corn to some, Money to others, and to
the rest of his Neigbours liberal and loving Entertainment. in Harvest-time he
would say to the Poor, as Boas did to Ruth, Go not to glean in another field,
etc. And when at any time himself came into the Field, he would scatter of his
heaps with a full-hand, so that the poor would be ready to leap for Joy at his
coming. When he set any at work, he paid freely and speedily: When the Poor
bought Corn of him, they were sure to gain both in Price and Measure: And yet,
as Wells when drawn spring more freely, so his Substance increased with his
Bounty. He was in a special manner careful to do Good to poor Ministers, his
Fellow Laborers. Some that lived near him tasted often of his Bounty, to whom he
sent Wheat or Malt, and that in no small Proportion. Ibid.

CHAP. XL. Remarkable Charity in Judging and Forgiving.
There Is no Religion in the World that obliges People to so much Candor and
Charity in Judging and Pardoning Wrongs, as the Christian; and upon such
excellent Considerations and Motives. For the Blood of Christ was the Ink with
which the Precept of Charity was writ last, and therefore it is called the New
Commandment; that is, an old one in new Clothes, and with a new Beauty: And
therefore if any pretend to be Christ's Disciple, and be not thus apparelled;
that is, if he does not love, 'and cannot forgive, he is none of his.

1. Upon St. Augustine's Table was engraven, Quisquis amat dictis absentem
rodere amicum,
Hanc Mensam indictam noverit esse sibi.
He that does love an absent Friend to jeer,
May hence depart, no room is for him here.
Which Rule one of his Fellow-Bishops upon a time forgetting, St. Augustine
sharply rebuked him for it, and told him, That he must either blot those Verses
out of his Table, or arise from his Dinner, and go to his Chamber. Clark 's
Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Crispin a Donatist Bishop, being fined in two Pounds of Gold, by the
Proconsul, for abusing one of Augustine's Society; the Catholic Bishops, and
especially Augustine, so prevailed with the Emperor, that the Rigor of the
Sentence was taken off from him: which Piety and Charity of theirs much
conduced to the increase of the Church. Clark 's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

3. It was Mr. Palmer's saying, (the Martyr) None are to be counted valiant,
but such as contemn Injuries. Fox.

4. It Is reported of St. Katherine, that she sucked the envenomed Wounds of a
Villain, who had wronged her most impudently. Dr. Tailor.

5. Anthony the Great was wont in his Exhortations to the People, to wish them
to keep in mind that of the Apostle, Let not the Sun go down upon thy Wrath.
Drexel. upon Eternity.

6. John, Patriarch of Alexandria, in a Controversy with one Nicolas a chief
Man of the City, to be tried by Law, ( John being for the Poor, Nicolas for his
Money) after a private Meeting for Peace-sake, and much Contention and Choler
used, till night and they were parted; the Good Bishop weighing with himself,
and arguing to this purpose, Can I think God will be pleased with his
Stubbornness? etc. could not rest till he had sent Messengers to Nicolas,
charging them to say no more to him, but only this, The Sun is going down? On
the hearing of which, there was such a sudden Alteration wrought in Nicelas,
that his high Stomach came presently down, he began to melt, and his Eyes stood
with Tears, and he had much ado to keep them in; out of doors he ran presently
after the Messengers, and making haste to speak with the Patriarch, he came to
him, and saluted him thus, Holy Father, I am willing to be ruled by thee in
this or in any other matter. So they embraced lovingly, and became good
Friends. Idem.

7. A Suit of Law is of it self lawful: But certainly he had need be an Angel
that manageth a Suit innocently; and he that has so excellent a Spirit as with
Innocence to run through the infinite Temptations of a Lawsuit, in all
probability has so much Holiness as to suffer the Injury, and so much Prudence
as to avoid the Danger. Idem.

8. I will rather suffer a 1000 Wrongs, than offer one; I will rather suffer a
100, than return one; I will suffer many, e're I complain of one; and endeavor
to right my self by contending; I have ever found that no Content with my
Superiors, is furious; with my Equals doubtful, with my Inferiors sordid and
base. Dr. Hall.

9. Deschartes is said to be no Detractor, nor injurious to any Person: never
committing Injuries to Memory, but to Oblivion. See his Life by Borellus, p. 23.

10. There was one who did Sir Matthew Hale a great Injury, which it is not
necessary to mention; who coming afterward to him for his Advice in the
Settlement of his Estate, he gave it very frankly to him, but would accept of
no Fee for it; and thereby showed both that he could forgive as a Christian,
and that he had the Soul of a Gentleman in him, not to take Money of one that
had wronged him so hainously. And when he was asked by one, How he could use a
Man so kindly that had wronged him so much? His Answer was, He thanked God he
had learned to forget Injuries. See his Life written by Dr. Burnet, p. 93.

CHAP. XLI. Remarkable Instances of Munificence.
WE are to do Good, and to distribure according to our Power, and the number of
those Talents which God has bestowed upon us. He that has little, ought to
give of that little; but to whom much is given, of him much is required. A pair
of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons, was a pretty reasonable Offering from
those who had but little for the support of their own. Families's the poor
Widow's Mite in the Gospel was accepted kindly, and interpreted favorably by
our Savior: But if those who have large Estates and heavy Purses, and no great
Necessities near home, do not build Synagogues, or Schools, or Hospitals, or
mend Highways, or disburse with a greater Freedom and more Generosity than
others; however their Estates may be great, their Souls are but little, and
their Spirits narrow, and their Accounts will not be easily made up hereafter.
For though Men may be deceived at the present, and their poor Fellow Creatures
may be put off with weak Pretensions, there is a God in Heaven that will not be
mocked; but will give them a Harvest in the other World according to their
Seedness in this; and They that sow sparingly, shall reap sparingly. But every
Body is not so stingy and close-fisted; there are those in the Church of God,
who are not willing to stand to the adventure and hazard of a cheap Seedness,
but give plentifully, with an open Breast full of Charity, and a Hand full of
Good-works and Alms-deeds. As for Instances.

1. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and in the Year 1596. Ralph Rokeby, one of
Her Majesty's Masters of Request, then dying, gave by his Will to Christ's
Hospital in London, One hundred Pounds; to the College of the Poor of Queen
Elizabeth, One hundred Pounds; to the poor Scholars in Cambridge, One hundred
Pounds; to the poor Scholars in Oxford, One hundred Pounds; to the Prisoners in
the two Compters in London, One hundred Pounds; to the Prisoners in the Fleet,
One hundred Pounds; to the Prisoners in Ludgate, One hundred Pounds; to the
Prisoners in Newgate, One hundred Pounds; to the Prisoners in the King's Bench,
One hundred Pounds; to the Prisoners of the Marshalsea, One hundred Pounds; to
the Prisoners in the White-Lion, Twenty Pounds: A liberal and pious Legacy, and
not worthy to be forgotten.

2. Richard Sutton Esquire; born of Gentile Parentage, at Knaith in Lincolnshire,
sole Founder of the Charter House Hospital, which he called the Hospital of
King James, for the Maintenance thereof he settled these Manors in several
Counties. 1. Dasham-Mannor in Cambridgeshire. 2. Bastuogthorp-Mannor in
Lincolnshire. 3. Black grove-Mannor in Wiltshire. 4. Broadhinton-Land in
Wiltshire. 5. Castlecamps-Mannor in Cambridgeshire. 6. Chilton-Mannor in
Wiltshire. 7. Dunby-Mannor in Lincolnshire. 8. Elcomb-Mannor and Park in
Wiltshire. 9. Hackney-Land in Middlesex. 10. Hallinburg Bouchiers-Mannor in
Essex. 11. Missanden-Mannor in Wiltshire. 12. Much Stanbridge-Mannor in Essex.
13. Norton-Mannor in Essex. 14. Salthrope-Mannor in Wiltshire. 15.
Southminster-Manner in Essex. 16. Tottenham-Land in Middlesex. 17.
Vfford-Mannor in Wiltshire. 18 Watalescote-Mannor in Wiltshire. 19.
Westcot-Mannor in Wiltshire. 20. Wroughton-Mannor in Wiltshire. It was founded,
finished, and endowed by himself alone, disbursing Thirteen thousand Pounds,
paid down before the ensealing of the Conveyance, for the Ground whereon it
stood, with some other Appurtenances, besides Six thousand pound expended in
the Building thereof, and that vast yearly Endowment whereof heretofore; not to
mention the large Sums bequeathed by him to the Poor, to Prisons, to Colleges,
to mending Highways, to the Chamber of London, besides the Twenty thousand
Pounds left to the Discretion of his Executors. He died 1611. in the Ninth Year
of King James's Reign.

3. Anno Dom. 1552. King Edward the Sixth, in the Sixth Year of his Reign,
founded the Hospitals of Christ-Church in London, and of St. Thomas in
Southwark; and the next Year of Bridewel, for the Maintenance of three sorts of
Poor: The first for the Education of poor Children; the second for impotent,
and lame Persons; the third for idle Persons to employ, and set them on work. A
Princely Gift, whereby Provision was made for all sorts of poor People; such as
were poor either by Birth or Casualty, or else wilfully poor. Besides, by the
said virtuous Prince, were founded two Free-Schools in Louth in Lincolnshire,
with liberal Maintenance for a Schoolmaster and Usher in them both. Likewise
Christ's-Colledge, in the University of Cambridge, enjoys a Fellowship, and
three Scholars, by the Gift of the said Excellent Prince.

4. Sir William Cecil, not long since Lord Treasurer, in his Lifetime gave
thirty Pounds a year to ^t. John's-Colledge in Cambridge; he founded also an
Hospital at Stamford for twelve poor People, allowing to each of them six
Pounds per Annum: He also left great Sums of Money in trust in the hands of Mr.
John Billet one of his Executors, who has as carefully performed that Trust,
and partly by this Means, and partly out of his own Estate, has done those
excellent Works: He repaired, at the expense of diverse hundred Pounds, the
Great Church in the City of Bath; he enlarged the Hot and Cross-Bath there,
walling them about: He built an Hospital there to entertain twelve poor People
for a Month at the Spring, and three Months at the Fall of the Leaf, with
Allowance of Four Pence a day; he gave Two hundred Pounds to the Repairs of St.
Martins-Church, an hundred Marks to St. Clements to build a Window, five Pounds
to each of the four Parishes in Westminster for twelve years: Upon the Building
of the Market-House there, he bestowed Three hundred Pounds, whereof it made
ten Pounds a year for the Benefit of the Poor: He also gave twenty Pounds per
Annum to Christ's Hospital, till two hundred Pounds came out.

5. Robert Earl of Dorchester, Anno 1609. by his last Will and Testament,
ordained an Hospital to be built in East Green-street in Sussex, allowing to
the Building thereof a thousand Pounds, (to the which the Executors have added
a thousand Pounds more) and three hundred and thirty Pounds of yearly Revenue,
to maintain twenty poor Men and ten poor Women, to each of them ten Pounds by
the Year, and besides to a Warden twenty Pounds, and to two Assistants out of
the Town to be chosen, three Pounds six Shillings eight Pence a-piece per Annum.

6. John Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury, at his own proper Charge, caused
an Hospital to be built at Croyden, for the Maintenance of Thirty poor People,
with a Free School, having a Master and an Usher, and laid unto it Two hundred
Pounds per Annum, besides the Charge of the Building, which is supposed to have
cost Two thousand Pounds more.

7. William Lamb Clothworker, gave to these charitable Uses following: He built
the Conduit near Holborn with the Cock at Holborn-Bridge, bringing the Water
more than Two thousand Yards in Pipes of Lead, at the Charge of Fifteen hundred
Pounds: He gave also to these Uses following; To Twelve poor People of St.
Faiths Parish, Weekly, Two pence a-piece; To the Company of Clothworkers four
Pounds per Annum: For Reading Divine Service in St. James's Church, Sundays,
Wednesdays and Fridays; and for four Yearly Sermons, and for Twelve poor Men,
and Twelve poor Women, so many Gowns, Shirts, Smocks, Shoes, he gave Lands to
the Yearly Value of thirty Pounds; to each of the Towns of Ludlew and
Bridgnorth, One hundred Pounds; to Christ's-Hospital Yearly six Pounds, and to
purchase Lands ten Pounds; to St. Thomas's- Hospital Yearly, four Pounds; to
the Savoy to buy Bedding, ten Pounds. He erected a Free School at Sutton Valens
in Kent, with Allowance to the Master of twenty Pounds, to the Usher eight
Pounds. He built six Almshouses there with the Yearly Maintenance of ten
Pounds. He gave also toward the Free School at Maidstone in Kent; to set the
poor Clothiers on work in Suffolk, he gave One hundred Pounds.

8. Sir Wolston Dixy Mayor, free of the Skinners, gave as follows: To the
Maintenance of a Free School in Dosworth yearly, twenty Pounds; to
Christ's-Hospital in London yearly for ever, Forty two Pounds; for a Lecture in
St. Michael Bassings-Hall yearly, ten Pounds; to the Poor of Newgate, twenty
Pounds; to the two Compters of Ludgate and Bethlehem, to each of them ten
pounds; to the four Prisons in Southwark twenty pounds thirteen shillings four
pence; to the Poor of Bassing-Hall, ten pounds; to Emanuel-Colledge in
Cambridge to buy Lands, to maintain two Fellows and two Scholats, Six hundred
pounds; to the Building of the College, fifty pounds; to be lent unto poor
Merchants Five hundred pounds; to the Hospital of St. Bartholomew and St.
Thomas, each of them Fifty pounds; to the Poor of Bridewel. twenty pounds; to
poor Maids Marriages, One hundred pound; to poor Strangers of the Dutch and
French Churches, fifty pounds; toward the Building of the Pesthouse, Two
hundred pounds. The Sum of these Gifts in money amounted to more than Seventeen
hundred pounds, and the yearly Annuities to Seventy two pounds.

9. Sir John Gresham, Mercer and Mayor of London, Anno 1548. in the Second Year
of King Edward the Sixth, gave ten pounds to the Poor to every Ward in London,
(which was Twenty four within the City:) And to One hundred and twenty poor Men
and Women, to every one of them three Yards of Cloth, for a Gown of eight or
nine Shillings a yard; to Maids Marriages, and the Hospitals in London, above
Two hundred pounds: He also founded a Free School at Holt, a Market Town in
Norfolk.

10. Mr. Thomas Ridge Grocer, gave to charitable Uses One thousand one hundred
sixty three pounds, Six shillings and eight pence; viz. To the Company of
Grocers, to be lent to two young Men, free of the Company, an hundred pounds;
to his Men and Maidservants, Sixty three pounds six shilling eight pence; unto
the Hospitals about London, One hundred pounds; unto Preachers, Four hundred
pounds; to poor Tradesmen in and about London, Three hundred pounds; for a
Lecture in Grace-Church, One hundred pounds; and in Gowns for poor Men, One
hundred pounds.

11. Mr. Robert Offley Haberdasher, gave Six hundred pounds to the Mayor and
Commonalty of Chester to be lent to young Tradesmen; and for the relief of Poor
and Prisons, and other such charitable Uses, Two hundred pounds: He gave to the
Company of Haberdashers, to be lent to Freemen gratis. Two hundred pounds more;
to pay Ten pound yearly to the Poor of the Company; two hundred pounds more; to
give Ten pounds per Annum to two Scholars, in each University one; to
Bethlehem, One hundred pounds; to other Hospitals, Prisons and Poor, One
hundred and fifty pounds more. In toto, One thousand four hundred and fifty
pounds.

12. The Lady Mary Ramscy, who in the lifetime of Sir Thomas Ramsey, joining
with him and after his Death, assured in Land Two hundred forty three pounds
per Annum to Christ's-Hostital in London, to these Uses following: To the
Schoolmaster of Hawstead annually Twenty pounds; to the Master and Usher in
Christ's-Church by the year, Twenty pounds; to Ten poor Widows, besides Apparel
and Houses, yearly Twenty pounds; to two Poor, a Man and a Woman, during Life,
to each Fifty three shillings four pence; to two Fellows in Peter-house in
Chambridge, and four Scholars, yearly Forty pounds; to St. Bartholomew's
Hospital, Ten pounds; to Newgate, Ludgate Compters, Ten pounds; to Christ's
Hospital after the Expiration of certain Leases, there will come per Annum Ore
hundred and twenty pounds to St. Peter's, the Poor in London, St. Andrew
Undershaft, St. Mary W^olnoth, Ten pounds; to six Schools in Cambridge, Twenty
pounds; to six Scholars in Oxford, Twenty pounds; to ten maimed Soldiers,
Twenty pounds; for two Sermons, Forty shillings; to the Poor of Christ-Church
Parish. Fifty shillings; to the Poor of the Company of Drapers, yearly Ten
pounds; ten poor Women's Gows, ten poor Soldiers Coats, Shoes and Caps: All
these Gifts aforesaid are to continue yearly.

13. Mr. George Blundel Clothier of London, by his last Will and Testament,
Anno 1599. bequeathed as follows: To Christ's Hospital Five hundred pounds,
to St. Bartholomew's Two hundred and fifty pounds, to St. Thomas's Hospital Two
hundred and fifty pounds, to Bridewel yearly eight pounds, toward
Tiverton-Church fifty pounds, to mend the Highways there One hundred pounds,
to the Twelve chief Companies in London, to each One hundred and fifty pounds;
toward the relieving of poor Prisoners, and other charitable Uses, in toto,
One thousand eight hundred pounds: For poor Maids Martiages in Tiverton Four
hundred pounds, to the City of Exeter to be lent unto poor Artificers Nine
hundred pounds; toward the Building of the Free-Grammar School in Tiverton Two
thousand four hundred pounds, laid out since by his Executors, Sir William
Craven and others, One thousand pounds, to the Schoolmaster yearly fifty
pounds, to the Usher Thirteen pounds six shillings eight pence, to the Clark
forty shillings, for Reparations eight pounds, to place four Boys Apprentices
in Husbandry yearly twenty pounds, to maintain six Scholars, three in Cambridge
and three in Oxford, the Sum of Two thousand pounds. The Sum of all, counting
the yearly Pensions at a valueable rate, together with the Legacies of Money,
makes Twelve thousand pounds or thereabouts.

14. Mr. Rogers of the Company of Leather-sellers, gave by his Will as
follows: To the Prisons about London Twelve pounds, to the Poor of two Towns
in the West-Country Thirteen pounds six shillings eight pence; to the Poor of
the Town of Pool, where he was born, Ten pounds; to build Almshouses there
Three hundred thirty three pounds; to relieve poor Prisoners, being neither
Papists nor Atheists, that may be set free for twenty Nobles a Man, One hundred
and fifty pounds; to poor Preachers ten pounds a Man, One hundred pounds; to
poor decayed Artificers that have Wife and Children, One hundred pounds; to the
Company of Merchants-Adventurers to relieve poor decayed People, and for young
Freemen, Four hundred pounds; to Christ's-Hospital to purchase Land for the
relief of that House, Five hundred pounds; to erect Almshouses about London,
and to maintain Twelve poor People, threescore pounds; to the Parish where he
dwelt ten pounds, and for two dozen of Bread every Lord's Day to be
distributed, One hundred pounds; to Christ's-Church Parish fifteen pounds; to
the Poor in diverse Parishes without Newgate, Cripplegate, Bishops-gate, and St.
Georges in Southwark, Twenty six pounds thirteen shillings four pence, to each
alike. To St. Georges Parish in Southwark, St. Sepulchers, St. Olaves, St.
Giles, St. Leonards, to each thirty pounds, One hundred and fifty pounds; to
St. Botolphs without Aldgate and Bishops-gate, to each twenty pounds, forty
pounds: Given to maintain two Scholars in Oxford, two in Cambridge, Students in
Divinity, to the Company of Leather-sellers, which is carefully by them
employed and augmented, Four hundred pounds: The whole Sum amounts to Two
thousand nine hundred and sixty pound six shillings eight pence.

15. Mr. George Palyn by his last Will and Testament, gave unto these
charitable Uses: To erect an Almshouse about London, and to allow unto six
poor People yearly, Six pounds thirteen shillings four pence, he gave Nine
hundred pounds: Given to the Chime and Bow-Church, One hundred pounds: Gives to
St. John Baptists and Brazen-Nose College in Oxford to maintain four Scholars,
to each four pounds yearly, to each College three hundred pounds, in toto Six
hundred pounds; given to the like Use of Trinity and St. Johns-Colledge in
Cambridge, to each three hundred pounds, in toto Six hundred pounds: To fix
Prisons about London sixty pounds, to Christ's-Hospital to purchase twenty
pounds per Annum, Three hundred pounds; to St. Thomas-Hospital fifty pounds, to
Preachers at Pauls-Cross to bear their Charges, two hundred pounds; to divets
Parishes in London, to some ten pounds, to some twenty pounds, One hundred
thirty two pounds: To the Poor in Wrenbury in Cheshire, to purchase twenty
Marks per Annum, two hundred pounds; to the Use of the Church there thirty
pounds, for forty Poor, Gowns, forty pounds: The Sum is Three thousand two
hundred twelve pounds or thereabouts.

16. Mr. Dove gave unto the Company of the Merchant-Taylors, the Sum of Two
thousand nine hundred fifty eight pounds ten shillings, to pay One hundred
seventy nine pounds, to these Uses following: To maintain Thirteen poor
Alms-men, and six in reversion per Annum, One hundred and seventy pounds; to a
Schoolmaster eight pounds, to the poor of St. Botolphs Twenty pounds nine
shillings, to the Prisoners in both Compters, Ludgate and Newgate, twenty
pounds; given to St. John's-Colledge in Cambridge One hundred pounds, to
Christ's-Hospital to purchase sixteen pounds per Annum, for one to teach the
Boys to sing Two hundred and forty pounds, to tole the Bell at St. Sepulchers
when the Prisoners go to execution, fifty pounds.

17. Sir William Craven Alderman of London, has given a thousand pounds to
Christ's-Hospital in London, to purchase Land for the Maintenance of that
House: He has also been a worthy Benefactor to St. John's-Colledge in Oxford.
He has built at Burnsall in Yorkshire a Church, compassing it with a Wall, at
the charge of six hundred pounds. He has erected a School with the Allowance
of twenty pounds per Annum. He has built one Bridge that cost him five hundred
pounds, another two hundred and fifty pounds, a third two hundred marks, a
fourth twenty pounds; and caused a Causway to be made, at two hundred pounds
charge, and all this in his Lifetime.

18. Mr. Jones a Merchant abiding at Stood, of the Company of the Haberdashers,
has sent of late Six thousand pounds to the Company to be bestowed in Monmouth
in Wales, where he was born, in charitable Works; and that Worshipful Company
have already purchased two hundred pounds per Annum and more, allowing One
hundred and fifty pounds per Annum to an Hospital for twenty poor People, and
an hundred Marks to a painful Preacher, to preach twice on the Lord's Day.

19. Mr. Robert Johnson Archdeacon of Leicester, Pastor of Luffenham in the
County of Rutland, has been a worthy Instrument in this kind, who at his own
Charge has caused two Free-Schools to be built in two Marker-Towns in that
County; the one at Okeham, the other at Vppingham, with allowance to each
twenty four pounds to the Master, and twelve pounds to the Usher yearly. He
has also built two Hospitals, called by the name of Christ's-Hospital, in the
aforesaid Towns, with Provision for each of them; for Twenty four poor People,
he purchased Lands of Queen Elizabeth, which he has laid to those Hospitals,
and procured a Mortmain of four hundred Marks per Annum. Likewise be redeemed a
third Hospital, which had been erected by one William Darby, and was dissolved,
being found to be concealed Land. Besides, he has given the perpetual
Patronage of North-Luffenham to Emanuel-Colledge in Cambridge, that the Town
may always be provided of a sufficient Preacher. He has also made good
Provision in both Universities, for Scholars that shall be brought up in the
said Schools. He has given also twenty Marks per Annum, toward the
Maintenance of Preachers that are called to Paul's-Cross. He has also been
very beneficial to the Towns of Luffenham, Stamford, and other places in
Rutland, in providing for the Education of their poor Children, and placing
them Apprentices.

20. Mr. John Heyden Alderman of London, a Mercer, has given to a hundred
Poor, so many Gowns, a hundred pounds, and twelve pence a-piece in Money. To
the Company of Mercers six hundred pounds, to be lent to young Men at Three
pound six shillings eight pence the hundred, which makes twenty pound to be
given yearly to the Poor. Likewise four hundred pound more he gave to the same
Company, to be lent out at the same rate, and the yearly Annuity of Thirteen
pounds six shillings eight pence arising thereof, to go to the maintaining of
the Lecture in St. Michael's Pater Noster; to Christ's-Church Hospital five
hundred pounds; to the eleven Companies besides, Eleven hundred pound to be
lent out to young Men, at Three pound six shillings eight pence the hundred,
and out of the Annuity arising thereof, twenty pound per Annum to go to the
Hospitals, and sixteen pound to the Poor. To Exeter two hundred pounds. To
Bristol One hundred pound. To Gloucester One hundred pound, to be lent to young
Tradesmen at Three pound six shillings eight pence the hundred; to the use of
poor Prisoners, and poor People, to the Town of Wardbery six pound thirteen
shillings and four pence. To the Company of Mercers for a Cup forty pounds. To
his Servants Two hundred and forty pounds; out of the rest of his Moiety, he
gave to the aforesaid Companies fifty pound to each, to the uses aforesaid.

21. Mrs. Owen, Widow of Justice Owen, founded an Hospitality and Free School
at Islington, gave to the University liberal in Cambridge twenty pounds,
founded one Fellowship and Scholarship in Emanuel-Colledge. To
Christ's-Hospital sixty pounds, to give twelve pence weekly to the Poor in
Islaington; Sixty six pound thirteen shillings four pence to beautify the
Cloister in Christ's-Hospital. To a School-house at Edmonton twenty pound. To
the Parish of Condover in Shropshire, fifty pound for a great Bell. The
Building of Almshouses for ten poor Women at Islington, and the Purchase of
the Lands laid to it cost her 1415 pounds, and the Building of the School-house
there Three hundred fifty one pound: She gave also yearly a Sum of Money to
Preachers not Beneficed, and to the Prisons in her lifetime. By her last Will,
Twenty two pounds per Annum for Islington-School. To Preachers thirty five
pounds. To the Parish of Bassingshaw twenty pound. To the Prisons eight pound.
To the Company of Brewers, in Linen, Plate, and Money, a hunded pound. The Sum
of these Moneys, besides the Annuities of Twenty two pounds, will amount to Two
thousand three hundred twenty pounds, or thereabouts. All this she did, though
at her Death she had Twenty two Children, and Childrens Children; amongst their
parts finding a Portion for Christ's poor Members.

22. Mr. John Kendrick Citizen and Draper of London, who departed this Life
Dec. 30. A.C. 1624, did by his last Will and Testament give the bequeath as
follows: 1. To 60 poor Men, a Broad-cloath Gown for each, and One shilling
a-piece to pay for their Dinners. 2. Six hundred pounds to buy black Gowns and
Cloaks for Mourning, for Kindred, Friends, and Servants. 3. For a Dinner for
his Friends, and the Inhabitants of the Parish of St. Christophers, on the day
of his Burial. 60 l. 4. To the Poor of Reading in the County of Bucks, 7500 l.
5. To the Poor of Newbery in the same County, 4000 l. 6. To the Company of
Drapers in London, 2400 l. viz. for these uses following: For releasing Poor
Prisoners out of the two Compters, Ludgate, Newgate and the Fleet, yearly 24 l.
To the Curate of S. Christophers for Reading Prayers at 6 a Clock in the
Morning constantly, 20 l. yearly. To the Clark and Sexton for Attendance, each
of them 50 shillings yearly. To the Churchwardens for Lights in the
Wintertime, 5 l. To the Poor of St. Christophers, 3 l. yearly. To the poor
Prisoners in London 40 shillings yearly, in Ludgate and the Fleet 30 shillings
yearly, in Bedlam 20 shillings yearly. To the Clark of the Company of Drapers
40 shillings. To the Beadle 30 shillings. To the Beadle of the Yeomanry 10
shillings yearly. To poor religious Men and Women in London 25 l. yearly, at
the Discretion of the Wardens of the Company; and 4 l. yearly to each of them
for their pains. 7. To the said Company for the use of their Common Hall at
their Meetings, a 100 l. 8. To the Poor of Christ's-Hospital to be laid out in
Lands, etc. 500 l. 9. For the Curing of Sick and Diseased Persons in S.
Bartholomew's-Hospital, 50 l. 10. For the Repairing of the Parish Church of S.
Christophers, 40 l. 11. For the Repairing of S. Pauls-Church, 1000 l. 12. For
the Marriages of poor Maids that have served the same Master or Mistress 5
years together, 200 l. to be paid by 40 shillings apiece. 13. For the Marriages
of poor Maids in Reading in the same manner, 100 l. 14. For the Marriages of
poor Maids in Newbery, that have served 7 years the same Master or Mistress, 50
l. 15. To set on work idle vagrant Boys in Bridewel, 200 l. 16. Toward
Finishing the Pinacles of the Steeple of S. Marys in Reading, 50 l. 17. To be
lent upon Bond with Sureties, to several honest industrious poor Clothiers in
Reading, first for 7 years, then for 3 years to others, and so on gratis for
ever, 500 l. viz. 50 l. apiece. 18. To the Clothiers of Newbery, the same Sum
for the like use, viz. 500 l. 19. To poor industrious Merchant-Adventurers in
London, to be lent by 300 l. in a parcel gratis, from 3 years to 3 years, in
like manner as before, 300 l. 20. To his Brother William Kendrick and Children,
2000 l. and a Gold-Ring. 21. To his Sister Anna Newman of Reading, 1000 Marks.
22. To her Children, 2000 Marks, etc. 23. To his Sister Alice Vigures of
Exeter, 500 l. 24. To her Children, 1000 l. 25. To his Brother James Winch of
Purley in the County of Berks and Children, 1000 l. 26. To old Elizab.
Kendrick, his Uncle's Daughter, 50 l. 27. To Tho. Newman at Delf in Holland,
Servant to his Partner, 1000 l. 28. To his Kinsman and late Servant Sim. Gaudy,
1000 l. 29. To Arth. Aynscomb Merchant, then at Antwerp, Shearer with him in
Trade, 500 l. 30. To Barney Reymes Merchant at Delf, another Shearer, 500 l.
31. To Mr. John Quarles who was his Master, and then kept his Accounts, 500 l.
forgiving him also a Debt of 300 l. 32. To Mr. George Low Merchant, and former
Partner, 300 l. 33. To Tho. Billingslie, Son of Sir H. B. 200 l. forgiving him
also a Debt of 200 l. more. 34. To the Executors of Tho. Jackson Merchant, 300
l. 35. To Luces van Punon of Middleburgh, 50 l. 36. To Jeremiah Poets of
Middleburgh, 20 l. 37. To William Powle his Covenant-Servant, 200 l. 38. To And
Kendrick his Apprentice, 300 l. and in lieu of what he had received with him,
100 l. 39. To another Apprentice, Chr. Pack, 100 l. 40. To his Housekeeper 20
l. To two of his Maids 20 l. apiece. To his Drawer 50 l. to another Drawer 25
l. To his Drawers Servants 25 l. To his twelve Clothworkers, Rowers and
Shearers, 130 l. To Big and Salisbury that pressed and folded his Cloth, 25
l. To his Porters at the Waterside, 10 l.. To Packers 10 l. To his
Water-bearer 3 l. To the Washer 5 l. To W. Bealde of Reading Clothier 50 l. to
another Clothier 50 l. To another Clothier Tho. Newman 100 l. To John Skegmere,
Secretary to the Merchant-Adventurers, 100 l. To R. B. a Partner 300 l. To Mr.
W. T. 5 l. To Officers of the Company 15 l. For Service at 6 a Clock in Reading
250 l. the like at Newbery 250 l. to another 100 l. For a Dinner for the
Drapers at his Funeral, 40 l. Extracted out of the Copy printed A. C. 1625.


23. The Lady Alice Duchess Dudley gave many hundred pounds toward the
Building of St. Giles's Church; the Church being finished she gave Hangings of
Watchid Taffety, to cover the upper-end of the Chancel, and those bordered with
a silk and silver Fringe. Item, For the back of the Altar a rich green Velvet
Cloth, with these three Letters in Gold IHS embroidered on it: Two
Service-Books in Folio, embossed with Gold: A gree Velvet Cloth, with a rich
deep Gold Fringe to cover the Altar on Sundays. A Cambrick-Altar Cloth, with a
deep Bonelace round about; another fine Damask-Altar Cloth: Two Cus^ins for the
Altar, rickly embroidred with Gold: A large Turkey Carpet to be spread on the
Weekdays over it. A beautiful Skreen of Carved Work, which was placed where
the former in the old Church stood. Moreover, she gave a neat Pair of Organs,
with a Case richly Gilded.

Item, Ver costly handsome Rails, to guard the Lord's Table from profane uses.
It. The Communion-Plate of all sorts in Silver, and gilt for that sacred use;
she was at the Charge of Paving the upper-end of the Church wih Marble-stones.
She gave the great Bell, and was at the Charge of Casting and Hanging the other
five Bells. She gave to the Church of Stonelay in Warwickshire, as also to the
Churches of Mancester, Leke-Wotton, Ashow, Kenelworth, and Monks-Kirby, Twenty
pounds per Annum apiece, for a perpetual Augmentation to the poor Vicaridges of
those respective Churches for ever. She bestowed on the same Churches, as also
upon the Churches of Bedford, Acton, St. Albans Patshill, diverse pieces of
costly Plate for the Celebration of the Holy Communion in each of them. And she
purchased a fair house and Garden near the said Church of St. Giles's, and gave
it for a perperual Mansion to the Incumbents after three Lives. She also
allowed a yearly Stipend to the Sexton of that Church^^. Tole the great Bell
when the Prisoners, condemned to die, were passing by, and to Ring out after
they were executed. She likewise gave great Sums of Money for the Repairing the
Cathedral Church of Litchfield; and for the Re-edifying of St. Sepulchers in
London. All these (with many more) were the Product of her great Charity,
whilst she lived; and thereby made her own Eyes her Overseers, and her own Hand
her Executors. At her Death she gave for Redemption of Christian Captives from
the Hands of Infidels. One hundred pounds per Annum for ever. To the Hospital
in St. Giles's, Four hundred pounds for Twenty pounds a year for ever. For the
placing out for ever of poor Parish-Children of St. Giles's Apprentices, Two
hundred pounds to purchase 10. l. per Annum. To the Poor of the Parishes of
Stoneley, Kenilworth, Leke-Wotton, Ashow, Bedford, and Passhill aforesaid, and
also of Lichborow and Blakesley, One hundred pounds per Annum. And upon the Day
of her Funeral, Fifty pounds to be distributed among the Poor. She gave to
Fourscore and ten Widows, (according to the number of the years she had lived)
to each one a Gown and fair white Handkerchief to attend the Hearse wherein her
Body was carried, and One shilling apiece for their Dinner after that Solemnity
was performed, which was on the 16th of March 1668. She gave to every place
where her Corpse should rest in its passage from London unto Stoneley aforesaid
in Warwickshire, where she had a Noble Monument prepared by her self. She
ordered that Six pence should be given to every poor Body that should meet her
Corpse on the Road. She gave to Blakesley, Lichborow, and Patshill, Ten pounds
apiece to be distributed among the Poor the same day her Corpse was interred, to
Stoneley Fifty pounds distributed the same day. Thus this Illustrious Duchess
did in her Life, and at her Death, and doubtless for all her good Deeds she has
her Reward in Heaven by God's Mercy and Christ's Merits. See the Narrative of
her Life, etc. by Mr. Boreman.

24. Henry Hilton of Hilton in the County Palatine of Durham Esquire; gave by his
Will for the Term of Fourscore and nineteen years to the Vicar of Warmouth 20
l. per Annum; to the Lord Mayor and four senior Aldermen of the City of London
100 l. per Annum, for their Pains in distributing his Legacies, to a Clark for
keeping the Accounts 10 l. per Annum. Item, For binding five Children of his
Kindred Apprentices yearly. Item, The Interest of 4000 l. for binding poor
Fatherless Children Apprenties yearly. It. To his Servant Nicholas Sturt, his
Lease of Clapham-Farm, (but 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. to the paid yearly out of it to his
Servant John Cartret) and all his Horses, etc. Apparel, Books and Plate, and 30
l. in Money. It. to all the rest of his Servants, 20 l. apiece. To his Friend
Mr. Thomas Bradford of London 100 l. To Richard Williams of Chichester Genesis 30
l. For Erecting Tombs in St. Paul's Church London, near the Tomb of Dr. Donn
1000 l. in a Codicil to Robert Doily, Minister of Goring. 30.

Item, He gave to poor Laborers in all the Parishes hereafter named, Four and
twenty pounds a year during the said Term of Fourscore and nineteen years.

In the County Palatine of Durham. Hibton, 24 l. Fulwell, 24 l. Warmouth, 24 l.
Ousworth Magna, 24 l. Hartlepoole, 24 l. Lumley, 24 l. Gateside, 24 l. Chester
in the Street, 24 l. Herrington, 24 l. Ferryhill, 24 l. Darlton, 24 l.
Sunderland, 24 l. Houghton, 24 l. Reuton, 24 l. Bramspech, 24 l. Lanchester, 24
l. Brakley, 24 l. Southstreet, 24 l. Newcastle, 24 l. Durham. 48 l. In the
County of Sussex. Clapham, 24 l. Patching, 24 l. Subdeanery in Chichester, 24
l. Findon, 24 l. Terring, 24 l. Poling, 24 l. Arundel, 24 l. Angmering, 24 l.
Selsey, 24 l. Stenning, 24 l. Bramber, 24 l. Bright Helmston, 24 l. Lewis, 24
l. New Shoreham, 24 l. In Surrey. Waltham upon Thames, 24 l. Richmond, 24 l.
Lambeth, 24 l. Camberwell, 24 l. Barking, 24 l. In Middlesex. Clement Deans, 24
l.

The Total Sum amonting to One thousand two hundred sixty two pounds, Six
shillings and eight pence.

CHAP. XLII. Remarkable Chastity.
CHastity is a Grace which sets bounds to all the Pleasures of the Flesh, and
teaches us how to possess our Vessels in Sanctification and Honor; according
to the Rules of a single Life, or a Married State; and this certainly is the
Will of God, even our Sanctification, which was intimated by the old Judaical
Circumcision: And it is a Virtue that requires Self-denial, in some more in some
less, according to the Constitution of the Body, and the Strength of Accidental
Temptations; and to enforce this Duty, we are to remember our near Relation to
the Holy Jesus and the Holy Ghost, whose Members and whose Temples we are;
which are the Two new Arguments of the New Testament.

1. Origin to preserve himself Chaste, lay upon the bare ground a-nights,
abstained from Wine, and castrated himself: and when he was put to that hard
Dilemma, whether he would rather expose his Body to a Black-a-moor, or offer
Incense to an Idol-God, he chose the last.

2. Cyprian chiefly studied to keep his Body continent and clean from fleshy
Lusts; saying, That then his Heart would be truly fit to reach the full
Capacity and Understanding of the Truth, if once he could crample under
Concupiscence. Clark 's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

3. Ephrem Syru^ shunned the Sight of a Woman; insomuch that when one of an ill
Life and impudent Face, (by Subbornation as is supposed) met and stared him in
the Face, he rebuked her sharply for it, and had her look upon the ground; but
the Woman answered, How can I do that, who am not made of the Earth, but of
thee? etc. Ephrem went his way, wrote a Book of of these Passages between them,
which the Learned in the Syrian Tongue must esteem. Ibid.

4. S. Augustine never admitted Women into his House, though of his own
Kindred; no not his own Sister, when she was a Widow, and had wholly devoted
herself to the Service of God; nor his Uncle's Daughter, nor his Brother's
Daughter; saying, That though they might dwell in his House without Suspicion;
yet they could not dwell without Maids, or other Women coming to visit them,
which would be offensive and scandasous. And when any Women sent to him,
desiring to speak with him; he would always have some of his Ministers present,
and would never do it alone. Ibid.

5. S. Bernard looking upon a fair Woman so long, till he found the fire of
Lust begin to burn within him, recollected his Thoughts presently, and blushing
for Shame, ran straightway into a Pool (the Weather being then cold) up to the
Neck, where he stayed till he was almost starved, and the Flame of his Lust
extinguished: and thereupon resolved afterward to enter into a Monastery of
the Cistertians, the then strictest Order of Friars, to retire from the World,
and enjoy a more free Communion with God. Ibid. p. 104.

6. The Chastity of the Primitive Christians appeared in these Particulars: 1.
They would not marry. Justin Martyr says, There were many Christians in his
time, who for sixty or seventy years kept themselves uncorrupt^ It Is very easy
to find many amongst us, both Men and Women, who remain unmarried even in old
Age. Athenag. leg. pro Christian. yet this without the Obligation of an Oath of
Perpetual Virginity. 2. When they did Marry, it is for no other end, but the
bringing forth and bringing up of Children; as Husbandmen Till the Ground with
respect to the Crop at Harvest. Just. Mart. 3. They seldom married twice.
Chrysostom's Mother at 40 years old, had lived 20 years a Widow, Tertullian,
Cyprian, Herom, Athenagoras, etc. did inveigh bitterly against second
Marriages, as little better than Aduitery. 4. They shunned all Occasions, etc.
Going to Feasts, Dancing and Music. See more in my Flist. of all Religions.


7. Beringarius is reported not to have suffered any Women to come in his
sight; not because he was a Hater of the Sex, but because he was to deal with
dangerous Adversaries, he would warily cut off all Occasions of Suspicion.
Fuller, Abel Rediv. p. 3.

8. St. Hierom relates a Story of a certain young Man named Nicetas, under one
of the Primitive Persecutors, who was of such an invincible Courage and
Constancy, that the Adversaries of the Truth had no hope of prevailing by
Tortures and Torments against him, and therefore they took another Course with
him. They brought him into a most fragrant Garden, flowing with all manner of
sensual Pleasures and Delights: and there they laid him upon a Bed of Down,
safely inwrapped in a Net of Silk amongst the Lillies and Roses, with the
delicious Murmur of the Streams, and the sweet Whistling of the Leaves, and
then all departed: Presently in comes a beautiful Strumpet, and uses all the
Abominable Tricks of her impure Art, and whorish Villainies to draw him to her
Desire: Whereupon the young Man, fearing now least he should be conquered by
Folly, who was Conqueror over Fury, bites off a piece of his Tongue with his
Teeth, and spits it into the Whore's Face, and so prevented the hurt of Sin by
the Smart of his Wound.

9. Emme the Mother to King Edward the Confessor, being charged for
Incontinency with Aldwin Bishop of Winchester, to clear herself from that
Imputation, being Hood-winked, went barefoot over nine Coulters red hot in
Winchester-Church without any Harm, (an usual kind of Trial in those days, then
called Ordalium) making her Chastity by so great a Miracle, famous to
Posterity. Came. Brit. p. 211.

10. Our Henry the Sixth was so chaste a Prince, that when certain Ladies
presented themselves before him in a Mask with their Hair loose, and their
Breasts uncovered, (he being then at Man's Estate, and unmarried) immediately
rose up, and departed their Presence, saying, Fie, fie, forsooth, you are much
to blame. Sp. Chron.

11. King James used to say of them that went with naked Breasts, that they
either were, or would be --

12. How many profess openly their inward Uncleanness by laying open to the
common view their naked Breasts, as though it were a Bill affixed to the
Door-posts, to signify to the Passers by, that within that place dwells an
unclean Heart, and that whosoever will, may there buy Honesty and Chastity at
an easy rate. Bp. Downam on Hos. 2.2.

CHAP. XLIII. Remarkable Meekness, Quietness, and Peaceableness.
A Meek Heart and quiet Spirit is in the sight of God (says the Apostle) of
great price; and I will add, in the sight of Man too: for it procures
Admiration. Esteem, Love, and contributes much to our peaceable Enjoyment of
this Life: And therefore our Savior has annexed that Blessing to this Grace;
Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth: that is, they shall be
exempt in great measure from the Thorns and Briars, the Quarrels and Lawsuits,
the will Effects of Pride and Revenge, which contentious Men are commonly
embroiled in.

1. Irenaeus, a true (...), loving Peace mightily, and endeavoring to procure
Unity in case of Controversies; especially when Victor Bishop of Rome would
have excommunicated the Church as Schismatics upon their Disagreement in
keeping of Easter, Irenaeus, with other his Brethren of the Gallic Church, met
in Council, and consented together to write Letters, subscribed with their
Names, unto Victor to stop his hand in point of Excommunication; though
themselves agreed with Victor in observing Easter at the same Time. Clark 's
Mar. of Eccl. Hist. He went also himself in the name of his Brethren, with
Letters to Eleatherius Bishop of Rome, desiring him heartily to endeavor to
keep the Church in Unity and Peace. Ibid.

2. Ephrem Syrus, though by nature, and all his Youth very choleric, yet
afterward was never seen to be angry with any Man. Ibid.

3. Gregory Nazianzen, in his Disputations with Eunomius, so contained himself
within the bounds of Defense of the Catholic Truth, that he never brake forth
into any Reproaches; and whatever Argument he handled, wholesome and pleasant
Speeches were never wanting to him; and those not acquired, but natural. Ibid.

4. S. Augustine was much employed in determining Controversies, with much
Patience and Prudence hearing both Parties, sometimes spending a whole Day
fasting to hear the same; always taking advantage thereby to do what good
possible he could to their Souls: Many Letters he wrote to such as sought to
him for Counsel and Direction in secular Affairs; though he complained of this
as a Trouble to him, and an Hindrance from better Offices. Ibid.

5. Theodosius Senior, knowing his own hasty Disposition, used not to determine
of any thing till he had repeated over the Letters of the Greek Alphabet; for
in that space his Wrath would be tempered. He commanded also, that they which
reviled and spoke Evil of him, should not be punished; Because, says he, if it
proceed of Levity, it is not to be regarded; if of Madness, it is to be pitied;
if of an Injury received, it is to be pardoned. Clark in his Life, out of
Socrates Scholast. etc.

6. Sir Matthew Hale was, as he said himself. naturally passionate; I add as he
said himself, for that appeared by no other Evidence save that sometimes his
Color would rise a little; but he so governed himself, that those who lived
long about him, have told me they never saw him disordered with Anger, though
he met with some Trials that the nature of Man is as little able to bear, as
any whatsoever. See his Life written by Dr. Burnet, p. 95.

7. Dr. Sands, when his Stable was robbed of four excellent Geldings, and an
Inventory taken of his Goods, and he was carried on a same Jade through London,
in scorn a base Woman throwing a Stone at him, and hitting him to full on the
Breast, that he was near falling from his Horse; he returned no other than this
mild Answer, Woman, I pray God forgive thee: And going through Tower-Street, a
Woman in her Door said to him, Fie on thee, Thou Knave, thou Traitor, thou
Heretic; at which he only smiled. See his Life by Mr. Clark, p. 8.

8. Mr. Eliot was a great Enemy to all Contention, and would ring a loud
Courseu-Bell wherever he saw the fires of Animosity. When he heard any
Ministers complain, that such and such in their Flocks were too difficult for
them, the Strain of his Answer still was, Brother, compass them, and Brother,
learn the Meaning of those three little words, Bear, Forbear; Forgive: yea, his
Inclinations for Peace indeed, sometimes almost made him to sacrifice Right
itself. When there was laid before an Assembly of Ministers a Bundle of Papers
containing Matters of Difference between some People, which he would rather
unite, with an Amnesty upon all their former Quarrels, he with some imitation
of Constantine, hastily threw the Papers into the fire before them all, and
with a Zeal as hot as that fire; said immediately, Brethren, wonder not at what
I have done, I did it on my Knees this Morning, before I came among you. Cott.
Mather in his life, p. 43. Wherever he like another old John, with solemn and
earnest Perswasives to Love, when he could say little else, he would give that
Charge, My little Children love one another. Ibid.

9. Ephrem Syrus, having fasted diverse days, one of his Servants, that was
bringing him his Supper, brake the Earthen Pitcher wherein it was; Ephrem
seeing him overwhelmed with Fear and Shame, said to him, Be of good cheer, let
us go to our Supper, since it will not come to us: and so sitting down by the
Fragments of the Pot, in an humble and self-denying manner, eat his Supper.
Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

One being voted to an Episcopacy, he ran into the Marketplace, and made as if
he were Crack-brained, and at last fled privately away, till they had chosen
another Bishop to that place. Ibid.

10. Gregory the Great being made choice of by the Clergy, Senate, and People
of Rome, to be their Bishop, opposed it all that possibly he could; crying out,
That he was altogether unworthy of such an Honor, fearing least the Splendour
of worldly Glory, which he had formerly laid aside, should in such an Office
creep upon, and infect him. Ibid. p. 97. Yea, he privately wrote to the Emperor
Manritius, earnestly requesting him that he would not consent to the Election.
Ibid.

10. Although I am sure, (said a Fellow of Sidney-Colledge in Cambridge
concerning Mr. W. Bradshaw, then a Fellow likewise) he had a gird at me, yet
the Man is of so kind and loving a Disposition, that I could not be angry with
him, though he had broken my Head. See his Life by Mr. Clark, p. 31.

CHAP. XLIV. Remarkable Moderation and Zeal for Reconciling Church-Differences.
THE Apostle tells us, It Is good to be zealously affected always in a good
Matter; but certainly in those things which are indifferent, and have nothing
of Moral Goodness in them, such a Moderation ought to be used, as may be most
conducive to the great Ends of general Piety and Edification, and Peace and
Charity; that we may be neither too peremptory and violent in imposing them
upon others, nor too severe and uncharitable in judging and censuring them that
differ from us, in things so remote from the Essentials and Substance of
Religion. Thus we find both our Blessed Savior and his Holy Apostles so candid
and ingeniously complaisant, that they (for Peace and Edification sake) became
all things to all Men, that they might gain Souls: For in truth he that will
not stick to rent the whole Cloth, for the Trimmings sake, is neither good nor
wise. Yet I plead not here for any Indecency or Slovenliness in Divine Worship,
but I think an Ascititious Gaiety will not commend us to God.

1. Cassander was zealously concerned for reconciling the Differences between
those of the Roman and Protestant-Communion, and to that purpose had drawn out
a Platform of Accommodation between them; entertained a free Correspondency
with both Parties, was frequently solicited by the Emperor to come in Person,
and assist at their Councils, with large Promises of Reward, and all
Accommodation; fit for his Journey: but was hindered by his great Indisposition
of Body.

2. Philip Landgrave of Hesse endeavored to reconcile the Differences between
the Saxon and Helvetian Divines, concerning the Eucharist: for which purpose,
A. 1529. he called from Wittenburg, Luther, Justus Jonas, and Melancthon; from
Helvetia, Zuinglius and Oecolampadius; from Nurimberg, Osiander; from Hall,
John Brextius; from Strasburgh, Bucer and Hedio; at their coming all were
courteously entertained by the Landgrave: after Dinner Oecolampadius and Bucer
went to salute Luther, who spoke friendly to Oecolampadius; but being saluted
by Bucer, he answered, You are naught and a Knave. The disputation continued
many days; but in the beginning of it Luther told them, "That he would not
depart a hairs breadth from his Opinion; and accordingly it proved. And all
that was got by the Disputation was the Conversion of the Landgrave, and an
Agreement in thirteen other Articles, together with a mutual Promise to love
one another, and pray for a further Discovery of the Truth. Clark 's Eccl.
Hist. p. 151.

3. Sir William Fitz-James pleaded in Parliament for a Mean, when the Bishops
pleaded for the Catholic Religion, and the People for the Reformation; thus,
That since it was unreasonable to tie up Mankind in blind Obedience one toward
another, and impossible to run through all Difficulties and Controversies our
own selves, (so much Time and Money must be spent in such an Undertaking, so
many Languages learned, so many Authors read, so many Ages looked into, so many
Faiths examined, so many Expositors conferred, so many Contradictions
reconciled, so many Countries traveled for any considerable Satisfaction) to
believe all, is inconsistent; to neglect all, is impious: There remains no
other way for the Laics, but to recollect and stick to the most Common,
Authentic, and Universal Truths, tending to Virtue and Godliness; apart from
what is doubtful and controverted, and tending only to Strife and Perplexity;
and by these to live our selves, and examine all other Pretensions whatever;
there being no part of Reigion but what has Virtue and Grace as its Foundation
and Design: A Way that would keep Men from Atheism, under a sense of Religion;
from endless Controversies, in the solid Practice of Virtue; from fatal
Divisions, in Peace and Concord. Let us (said he) establish and fix these
Catholic and Universal Notions, and they will settle our Souls, and not hinder
us to believe whatsoever is faithfully taught by the Church, or submit to what
is authoritatively enjoined by the State. So that whether the Eastern, Western,
Northern, or Southern Teachers, etc. and particularly whether my Lord of
Rochester, or Luther, etc. be in the Right, we Laics may so build upon those
Catholics, and infallible Guards of Religion, as whatsoever Superstructures of
Faith be raised, these Foundations may support them.

This Discourse opened the door to the Reformation intended, and shut out all
those Prejudices it might lie under from the State, and Religion of our
Forefathers, etc. Lloyd 's State Worthies, p. 123, 124.

4. Bishop Jewel, in a Letter to Bullinger, Feb. 8. 1566. wishes, That the
Vestments, together with all the other Remnants of Popery, might be thrown both
out of their Churches, and out of the Minds of the People, and laments the
Queen's Stifness to them, so that she would suffer no Change to be made. And in
January the same year, Sands Archbishop of York writes, Contenditur de
Vestibus Papisticis mendis vel non utendis, dabit Deus hic quoque finem. Dr.
Burnet 's Letters.

5. Horn Bishop of Winchester, in a Letter July 16. 1565. he writes of the Act
concerning the Habits with great Regret, and expresses some hopes that it might
be repealed next Sessions of Parliament, if the Popish Party did not hinder it;
and he seems to stand in doubt, whether he should conform himself to it or not,
upon which he desires Bullinger's Advice. And in many Letters writ on that
Subject, it is asserted, That both Cranmer and Ridley intended to procure an
Act for abolishing the Habits; and that they only defended their Lawfulness,
but not their Fitness; and therefore they blamed private Persons that refused
to obey the Laws. Ibid.

6. Bishop Grindall, in a Letter Aug. 27. 1556. writes, That all the Bishops
who had been beyond Sea, had at their return dealt with the Queen to let the
matter of the Habits fall; but she continued inflexible: He laments the ill
effects of the Opposition that some had made to them, which had extremely
irritated the Queen's Spirit. Cox Bishop of Ely laments the Aversion that they
found in the Parliament to all the Propositions that were made for the
Reformation of Abuses. Ibid.

7. Peter Martyr to Bishop Hooper; At first I conceived no small Joy of your
singular and earnest Study, in that you put your Endeavors that Christ his
Religion may be brought again unto a chaste and simple Purity: For what should
be desired of all Godly Hearts, than that all things by little and little
should be clean taken away and cut off, which have very little or nothing in
them that can be referred wholly to Edification, but rather be judged of the
Godly to be superfluous.

8. Bishop Latimer speaking to the Clergy, says. How think ye, by the
Ceremonies that are in England, oftentimes with no little Offense of weak
Consciences continued, more often with Superstition so defiled, and so
depraved, that you may doubt whether it were better for them to tarry still, or
utterly to take them away? Have not our Forefathers complained of the
Ceremonies, of the Superstitions and Estimation of them? In Concione ad Clerum.

9. Bishop Usher, (then Mr. Usher) when a Commission was granted by K. James to
Sir Arthur Chichester. then Lord-Deputy of Ireland, to Assemble the Irish
Bishops and others together, to consult about the Reduction of Ireland to the
same Ecclesiastical Government of England; but willing them to consult with Mr.
Usher about it, and do nothing without his Approbation. Bishop Usher, I say,
finding by accident his own Name in the Commission, by glancing upon a letter,
which he saw laid down in the Window by a Bishop, whom he went to visit;
communicated the same to Dean Hill, his Good Friend and a Devout Man, desiring
his Prayers to God for him in that Obscure Case; and hearing what the business
was, when the Assembly was summoned, made his Appearance; and being demanded
his Consent to what they had agreed upon, he replied, That the Matter concerned
more than himself; for, said he, if I had all Men's Consciences in my keeping, I
could in these Disputable Cases give Laws unto them, as well as unto my self;
but it is one thing what I can do, and another thing what all other Men must do,
etc. Adding, The Kings and Queens of England imposed those Ceremonies, that
thereby they might decline the charge of Schismatics, wherewith the Church of
Rome labored to brand them, seeing it did appear hereby, that they left them
only in such Doctrinal Points, wherein they left the Truth. Again, Hereby they
would testify howfar they would willingly stopp, to win and gain them, by
yielding to meet them as far as they might in their own way: But (says he) the
Experience of many years has showed, that this Condescension has rather
hardened them in their Errors, than brought them to a liking of our Religion;
this being their usual Saying, [if our Flesh be not Good, why do you drink of
our Broth?] etc. See his Life by Mr. Clark, p. 286.

10. Dr. Wilkins, (afterward Bishop of Chester) a Man of as great a Mind, as
true a Judgment, as eminent Virtues, and of as good a Soul, as any I ever knew;
together with the Lord Keeper Bridgeman, setting up for a Comprehension of the
Dissenters, and a limited Indulgence toward others, got Sir Matthew Hale
Lord-Chief-Baron on their side; who after several Meetings and Conferences with
two of the most eminent Presbyterian Divines, and Heads were agreed upon, the
Lord-Chief-Baron put them in form of a Bill to be presented to the next Session
of Parliament.

CHAP. XLV. Retractations of Censorious Protestants.
LEwis du Moulin, Doctor of Physic, being in his last Sickness visited by Dr.
Burnet, and admonished of the foul Language used in his Books against Dr.
Stillingfleet Dean of Paul's, Dr. Durel Dean of Windsor, Dr. Patrick Dean of
Peterborough, etc. desired Dr. Burnet to ask them pardon in his name; and when
he spoke of the Dean of St. Paul's, he expressed much Sorrow, and shed some
Tears; and upon their motion, signed this Recantation following:

As for my Books, in which I mixed many personal Reflections, I am now sensible
I vented too much of my own Passion and Bitterness; and therefore I disclaim
all that is Personal in them, and am heartily sorry for every thing I have
written to the defaming of any Person. I humbly beg God, and all those whom I
have so wronged, pardon for Jesus Christ his sake; and am resolved, if God
shall spare my Life, never to meddle more with such Personal things: and do
earnestly exhort all People as a dying Man, that they will study more Love and
mutual Forbearance in their Differences; and will avoid all bitter and
uncharitable Reflections on one another Persons. And as I earnestly pray those
worthy Men of the Church of England to have Charity and Tenderness for the
Dissenters from them; so I beg of the Dissenters that they would have a due
Regard and Respect to those of the Church of England: Of many of whom I say
now, Let my Soul be with theirs; and that all true Protestants among us may
heartily unite and concur in the Defense and Preservation of the holy Reformed
Religion, now by the Mercy of God settled among us. And that Men of all sides
may according to St. Paul's Rule, Cease to bite and devour one another, lest we
be destroyed one of another; and that whereunto we have already attained, we
may walk by the same Rule; hoping that if any Man is otherwise minded, in some
lesser things, God shall either reveal that to them, or mercifully forgive it,
through Jesus Christ, into whose hands I commend my Spirit, and desire to
appear before God, in and through him: Who gave himself for me; and the refore
do now study to learn of him, to be meek, and lowly in Heart, and to love all
the Brethren, as he loved me.

This is Sincerity of Heart I Sign, Lewis du Moulin.

October. 5. 1680.

See his last Words, p. 12.

Mr. John Child, having written a Book called, The Second Argument for a more
firm Union amongst Protestants; where he fell foul upon the Nonconformists, was
thereupon smitten with Remorse; and to one Mr. H. C. coming to visit him,
(taking up the Book in his Hand) began to read where he says, The greatest
number of Disseners, do hold Principles dangerously heretical, and most
abominably abusing the most Holy God, etc. But before he could end that
Paragraph, being under extreme Agony of Mind, and weeping bitterly, put the
Book from him, and spoke to this effect, viz. I have represented those Calvin's
Principles beyond whatever they conceived, strained their Opinions beyond their
Intentions, and drawing such Consequences as never were in their Minds: And,
striking his Breast with uch Anguish, said, These words lie close; I shall
never get over this; I write in Prejudice against them, calling them a
villainous Body of People, which was unjust. Professing that be could not
repent; (and with a very grim Countenance said,) I shall go to Hell; I am
broken in Judgment; when I think to pray, either I have a Flushing in my Face,
as if I were in a flame, or I am dumb and cannot speak, or else I fall asleep
upon my Knees; all the Signs of one whom God has left forsaken and hardened.
Another time, (to Mrs. N.) How deplorable a thing is this, that I who have
preached so much of the Glory of another World, should now be deprived of it
all? You will as surely see me damned, as you now see e stand here. And again,
being pressed to publish his Repentance for his Book that had caused him so much
Trouble; he answered, I have thought sometimes so to do; but I am so confused
and confounded in my Mind, that I know not what to do: I can do nothing to
purpose. Again (with a deep Sign) said, The black Tokens of Reprobation are
upon me: I cannot stoop to the Sovereignty of God, I would be above him. In
short, he drew three Papers of Recantation written with his own Hand. The first
of which begins thus.

That it is a Dishonor to the Church and Clergy of England to have such an
one, that has no more Wit, so little Justice, Reason and Conscience, plead for
them; that the Author of this Libel is worthily so represented, appears by
diverse base, false, devilish, and most scandalous Passages therein contained.

They are represented as a People weak and fantastical, and not rendering a
tolerable Reason for their differing from others, which is a devilish stroke
made by a black blow; to assert the Nonconformists have no kind of Order in
sending forth their Ministers; that Preachers run on their own Head; upon a
phansiful Supposition that they are able to Preach, or, at the most, have but
the Consent and Connivance of a few weak Persons, is a Devilish Lie, as
thousands can witness; to say, it is a true State, or the Case being truly
thus, as we are able to make it good, is a Lie, if possible, more than
damnable, etc. After which he miserable destroyed himself October. 13. 1684. See
the Narrative attested by Tho Blunt and Ben. Dennis, and printed May the 7.
1688.

CHAP. XLVI. Good People extremely Afflicted and mightily Comforted.
THE sharpest Afflictions often befall the best of Men; not only Outward and
Temporal, but Inward and Spiritual; insomuch that they are ready sometimes to
cry out with our Blessed Savior, Eli, Eli, Lama-Sabachtheni. God withdraws his
glorious Countenance, and Satan shows his ugly Visage; and all this on purpose,
to rouse and startle a secure World, and convince us that it is no very easy
matter to get to Heaven; and that it is the safest way to work out our Salvation
with Fear and Trembling. Besides, it serves to show the Sincerity of the poor
deserted Christian; for in such cases the Man is mightily humbled, and
confesses all his Sins, and strips himself stark naked of any Merit, or
Conceit of his own inherent Righteousness; and freely acknowledges, that he
has none else to fly to for Succor and Consolation, but God only.

1. Mr. Tho. Peacock. Bachelor of Divinity, and Fellow of Brazen-Nose College
in Oxford, in his Illness was strangely Afflicted, and as strangely comforted,
as may be collected by these Despairing and Comfortable Expressions of his in
the time of his Visitation, compared together.

1st. His Despairing Expressions were such as these: 'I thought I had been in a
good Estate, but I see it now sat otherwise; for these things my Conscience
lays against me: First I brought up my Scholars in Gluttony; while I was
talking they did undo themselves: And further, I did unadvisedly expound many
places of Scripture many times at the Table; and for these I now feel a Hell in
my Conscience. Again, I have procured my own Death, by often eating like a
Beast, when I came jostling up and down to my Friends in the Country; and now I
see before my Face those Dishes of Meat wherewith I clogged my Stomach. Sin,
Sin, Sin! I am incapable of Prayers: A damnable, wretched, etc. O! how woeful
and miserable is my Estate, that thus must converse with Hell Hounds? The Lord
has cursed me! I have no Grace! I was a foolish glorious Hypocrite; it is
against the Course of God's Proceeding to save me, he has otherwise decreed,
he cannot! I can put my Trust in God, no more than a Horse! I desire to
believe, no more than a Post, than a Horse-shooe! I have no more Sense of
Grace, than these Curtains, than a Goose, than that Block! O! O miserable and
woeful, the burden of my Sin lies heavy upon me: I doubt it will break my
Heart! Comforts! They are nothing to me; hold your Peace, do not trouble your
selves idly; you vex me, your words are as Daggers to my Heart! To one saying,
Good, Sir, endeavor to settle your Mind; he answered, Yes, to play with
Hell Hounds! I cannot desire Grace, I can as well leap over the Church. I fear
to be damned for my Sins! I cannot so much as name Jesus. I had rather be in
the Fire than here! Cursed be the day, when I took Scholars! etc.

2d. His Gracious and Comfortable Expressions: As, O if God! O God give me a
Spark of Grace! etc. O if God would give me a drop! O, if I had! O, if it would
please God! I had rather than any thing in this, or other three thousand
Worlds! I thank God he has began to ease me. O, I love your Company (to Dr.
Aerie and Mr. Dod, etc.) for the Graces in you. O God, reconcile me unto thee,
that I may taste one dram of thy Grace! Being put in mind of that place, Isaiah
45.8 11, etc. he lift up his Eyes, saying, Take heed, be not too bold, look to
the Foundation: Lord, grantme the Comfort of the Deliverance, etc. Blessed be
God! blessed be God! blessed, etc. I am a thousand times happy, to have such
Felicity thrown upon me, a poor wretched Miscreant! Lord Jesus unto thy hands;
Lord, receive my Soul; Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon me,
and be merciful unto me: Then, very weak, he repeated the Lord's-Prayer twice,
his Belief once, with a strong Voice, and so slept in the Lord. The last
Conflicts and Death of Mr. Tho. Peacock, Published by E. B. 1646.

2. See the Story of Mrs. Joan Drake and her great Afflictions, together with
her subsequent Comforts in the foregoing Chapter, Of Earnests of a Future
Retribution; of Mr. Honywood and others, in the Chap. of Doubts strangely
Resolved.

3. Mr. Paul Baynes on his Deathbed had many Doubts and Fears upon him, so
that he went out of the World with her less Comfort than many weaker
Christians, says my Author. Mrs. Harris, (Dr. Harris's last Wife) though a
pious Woman, yet was much afflicted and delivered up to the Buffetings of
Satan, and such hellish Temptations, that the ablest Divines were at their
Wits-end to answer them; and her poor self was put even beyond herself. But as
her Husband would often say, The Difference is not great, whether Comfort come
a little before Death, or an hour after Death. See Dr. Harris 's Life.

4. Mr. Richard Rothwell, that bold. Divine, that often encountered the Devil
with a Courage extraordinary; yet was, in a strange Sickness that he had,
shrewdly buffeted and handled by him, and not far from a Possession. His
Sickness was a Vertigo, 40 Fits at least in an hour, and every one of them
accompanied with sore Temptations; but by Prayer and Fasting they were removed;
and he recovered Strength and Courage, and Comfort; though the Devil had
tempted him strongly to blaspheme, threaten to make him the Scorn of Religion,
to torment and hinder him, if he offered to fast or pray, or preach. Clark in
his Life, p. 71.

5. Mr. Tho. Tregosse for five Weeks was kept under by the Spirit of Bondage
and Afflicting Tortures, till at last he took up a Resolution of discovering
some Sins which most burdened his Conscience; and meeting with a comfortable
Passage concerning God's Love to Mankind in some of our English Divines, he was
somewhat quieted and refrashed. See his Life.

6. Mrs. Elizabeth Wilkinson was much troubled with Temptations, Doubts, Fears
and Sickness; but imparting her Condition to some Christian Friends, hearing
Sermons, and reading proper Books, after many years she was much strengthened
and comforted, and on her Death Bed even ravished with Joy. See her Life by Mr.
Clark.

7. Mrs. Katherine Bretterge was upon her Deathbed assaulted with most
grievous Temptations, which made her cry out; That a Roaring Wilderness of Woe
was within her, her Sins had made her a Prey to Satan; wishing she had either
never been born, or made any other Creature than a Woman, crying. Woe, woe, woe,
etc. a weak, wretched, woeful, forsaken Woman! etc. But at last through the
Mercies of God recovered extraordinary Comfort. See more in the Chap. of
Earnests of a Future Retribution.

8. Mr. Robert Glover for five years was so worn and consumed with Cares and
Fears about his Soul, and Reflections upon his Backsliding, that he had no
pleasure of Meat, Drink, Sleep, nor Life itself; but seemed as if he had been
almost in the Pit of Hell; yet before he died recovered his Comforts so, that
he lived as if already possessed of Heaven. Clark 's Examp. vol. 1. c. 3.

9. I have already, or shall have occasion hereafter, to speak of the
Afflictions and subsequent Comforts of Mr. Mackarnesse, Mr. Rob Smith of
Ludshelft, Mr. Charles Langford, all which have published a Narrative of their
own particular Cases, and following Cures to the World, for the Caution and
Encouragement of others.

10. Mr. Timothy Rogers, who is a very ingenious Gentleman of great Learning,
Candor and Moderation; upon his Recovery after two years very heavy Sickness,
thought himself obliged to commemorate the Mercy of God to him (in delivering
him in a manner Miraculously from his Malady, after the Fruitless Attempts of
many Physicians of great Note to restore him) in the Assemblies of his People,
on these words, Psalm. 30.3, 4. O Lord, thou have brought up my Soul from the
Grave, etc. Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give Thanks at the
remembrance of his Holiness. They are of great use, not only for Persons in his
Case, but for all in general, since they not only contain grateful Remembrances
of God's Mercies for Deliverance out of Trouble, but necessary Directions for
all Christians how to behave themselves, which Precautions to acquit
themselves, so as to provide for the worst of Afflictions.

After Pathetical Acknowledgments of the great Mercies he received from God in
his Affliction, both for giving him Patience under it, and Deliverance from it;
and to the People for their Kindness to him in his Distress, he raises these
two Observations from the Words: 1. That God alone is the Soveraign-Disposer of
Life and Death. 2. That to be brought up from the Grave; is a Mercy greatly to
be acknowledged, and for which we ought to be very thankful. He afterward
proceeds to give a plain Relation of some part of his sore distress; and I
shall give it you in his own words: I would desire (says he) to praise God my
self for his great Mercy in my Recovery, and also beg of you to praise him in
my behalf; I will give you a short Account of the Deplorablness of my Condition
before I was delivered. It will not be a very delightful Account; but yet as
Solomon says, Eccl. 7.2. It is better to go to the House of Mourning than to
the House of Feasting. It is better some times to hear sad, than always
pleasant Things. And in as much as Grief and Mourning is in it self a very
grave and homely thing, that requires not Ornament or artificial setting off, I
shall without affecting to be thought eloquent, give You

A plain Relation of some part of my sore Distress.
AFter an ill habit of Body that had for some years attended me, together with
some little Ilnesses now and then which were but as drops to the greater Storm
that was to come upon me, and which I could not foresee, it pleased God at
length in his just and righteous Judgments, to suffer my growing Distemper to
arrive to a most formidable height: So that before I desisted from coming to
this place, my Sleepdeparted qui^e away; and for several Nights in a Week. I
slept no more than I do at this time: upon which there immediately followed a
general Weakness and Decay of Spirits, a general Listlessness, and a total
Indisposition; and by feeling of this I had a strong Impression in my Mind,
that I shouldvery speedily die; as strongly fixed in my Apprehensions, as if it
had been said to me as to Hezekiah, Thou shall surely die. I thought I was
immediately to go to the Tribunal of God; and the Thoughts of immediate
appearance before him continued with me for about a year: there was not a Day
past wherein. I did not think that I should be dead before Night, and at Night
I should be dead before the Morning. I thought my self just at the entrance
into the Grave: And what a strange prospect that is, and what a mighty Change
it causes in a Man's Thought, none know but those that have apprehended
themselves so near it; nor do they fully know it, unless they have been near it
for many Months together.

He adds in another place; If at any time I rested a little, that little Rest
was all the while disturbed with terrible and amazing Dreams; and when I
awaked, I always sound my self in strange and unexpressible Pain, in Anguish
and Bitterness, such as nothing in this World is able to represent even as to
its lowest degrees. And judge you into what Confusions and Disorders this alone
would throw a Man if it were single. My Disease, and my Fears, and sad
Apprehensions came upon me as a Whirlwind, like the rushing of many mighty
Waters; strange and horrible Pains, and great Fears; so that it was as an
universal Storm, from which there was no retreat. -- Sometimes by the Greatness
of my Trouble, I was even stifled with Grief, that I could not for a great
while speak a Word, and when I spoke, it was in a mournful manner; for many
Months I could not breath without a mighty Pain, and as soon as with Difficulty
I had breathed, every Breath was turned into a Groan, and every Groan was big
with a very deep Sorrow. I was weary with my Groaning, Psalm. 6.6. All the Night
made I my Bed to swim, and watered my Couch with Tears. -- Those that are in
Health will scarcely perhaps credit what I say; they will think I am a
melancholy Man, and aggravate my Trouble, and set it out more than needs, or
than it was, and that in the whole there was a great deal more of Fancy than of
Reality; but I pray God they may never taste one drop of that bitter Cup
whereof I was made to drink, for if they should they will find it whatever Names
they now give it, to be then full of real Miseries. -- You think it may be that
I have spoke a great deal, and your Attention may be wearied; but I Will assure
you it is many hundred times below what I felt. Great Griefs, as well as mighty
Joys, exceed all our Words, and Bitterness is not to be described: Never was
any, I believe, nearer to Death, not to die, never was any compassed with a
greater Danger; never any had less hoep of an Escape, than I, and yet the Mercy
of a God that is Omnipotent, has relieved me. And as it is commonly said that
Music sounds best upon the Water; so by setting our Sorrows and our Mercies
together, our Praise may be more harmonious. You may in this behold the
Severity and the Goddness of God: his Severity in continuing on me so many
smart Strokes for so long a space;and his Goodness in giving me help, when no
Power on Earth was able to give me the least Relief. -- The Storm indeed is in
a great measure over, blessed be God; but I cannot without trembling call it to
mind, nor dare I think very long upon it. -- I can scarce believe that I am at
so much ease as I now am; I can scarce believe that I am in this Assembly, of
which I confidently thought I had taken my leave for ever. When I look back
upon the rough Waves, and the stormy Seas, I am ready to say, Can it be that
God has brought me safe to Land? After I had conversed with the Dead, am I now
among the Living? am I now with People under Hope? blessed be the Name of the
Lord, I am? It is a great Mercy to me, and it is the more so, as it was
unexpected and above the Power of Nature, contrary to all my hopes, and above
all humane help: Those that have heard my Groans, and seenmy Agonies, and heard
of my Affliction, cannot but wonder at it. I often said that I could not be
delivered without a Miracle, and God himself has wrought it. -- It was by the
Sovereign Goodness and mere Mercy and Grace of God, that I obtained this
Deliverance; all this he did for a most unworthy Sinner, for an impatient and
fretful Sinner too; is not this wonderful, Mercy with a witness, a Mercy never
to be forgotten as long as I have a Day to live. -- I have cause to give
Thanks; for how many has he suffered to sink, when the Waves were not so high
against them, as those that rolled over me? the Storms and the Winds that blew
them down, not so fierce in some respect against them, as they were against me;
and yet they are covered in the Grave, whilst I, though sorely weather-beaten,
have outlived the Storm. How many are there dead, since I was ill? many
excellent and holy Men are now silent in the Dust, who were more knowing, more
useful, more zealous and better qualified than ever I am like to be; and yet
God has spared a poor Shrub, whilst he has torn up some of the Cedars of our
Lebanan by the Roots.

Here ends the Relation of Mr. Rogers's Bodily Distress, which you will find more
at large in his Practical Discourses of Sickness and Recovery, to which I refer
you. I shall next proceed to give an Account of his Trouble of Mind, as I find
it in his Treatise upon that Subject: In which he displays in Experimental
Judgment, a Moderate Temper, and a Spirit repleat with all the Charms of
Mildness and Pity, of which his own Sufferings have rendered him very sensible.
The Preface contains certain Heads of Advice to the Relations of such as are
Melancholy: As, 1. That they should look upon the Party as under te worst
Distemper in this Life; both Body and Mind being infected, and therefore a
Subject both for a Physician and Minister. 2. To be compassionate to 'em,
considering that we our selves are in the Body. 3. Not to use harsh Speeches to
'em, but imitate him that would not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the
smoking Flax. 4. To believe what they say, or at least that their
Apprehensions are such as they tell you they are: It Is a real Misery to them if
but fancied: To contradict 'em, is Cruelty. 5. Urge 'em not to do what they
cannot, lest you add to their Burden. 6. Attribute not the Effects of mere
Disease to the Devil; it may proceed from a violent Pressure upon their
Spirits. 7. Do not much wonder at what they say or do: All Is to be born with
where the Agent is so unhappy as to think himself lost for ever. 8. Mention no
formidable Things or Stories to 'em, 'twill effect greater Disorders upon their
Spirits. 9. When you talk to 'em, do not speak as if their Troubles would be
very long, that is the Sword that stabs them: An End of Misery is encouraging.
10. Give 'em Examples of others under the same Circumstances that have been
delivered. 11. Pray for 'em. 12. Get others to pray for 'em. 13. Put 'em in
mind of the Sovereign Grace of God in Christ Jesus. Menasseh found Mercy.

New follow the Letters of several Divines to the Author and his Relations,
very pertinent to the Subject treated of, being mostly Experiences in such
Troubles and Deliverances from 'em.

Mr. Rogers tells us, It is very hard indeed to persuade a Person under great
Pain and Anguish, and a sense of the Wrath of God, and a fear of Hell, that
ever any has heretofore been so perplexed as he: Such generally think themselves
worse than Cain or Judas, or any the most wicked People in the World, as
thinking that their Sins have greater Aggravations, and that consequently they
shall be more miserable: but you may acquaint them with several Instances of
God's Gracious dealing with others, after they have been for many Months and
Years afflicted. I could send you to some now alive, that were long afflicted
with Trouble of Mind, and Melancholy, as Mr. Rosewell, and Mr. Porter, both
Ministers, the latter whereof was six years oppressed with this Distemper; and
now they both rejoice in the Light of God's Countenance. I my self was near two
years in great Pain of Body, and greater Pain of Soul, and without any prospect
of Peace or Help; and yet God has revived me through his Sovereign Grace and
Mercy; and there have been several heretofore forely perplexed with great
inward and outward trouble, whom God, aftr that, wonderfully refreshed. Mr.
Robert Bruce, some time ago Minister at Edinburgh, was Twenty years in Terrors
of Conscience, and yet delivered afterward. You may also direct them to the
Lives of Mrs. Brettergh, Mrs. Drake, Mr. Peacock, and Mrs. Wight, where they
will see a very cheerful day returning, after a black and stormy night; and
that the Issue from their Afflictions, was more glorious than their Conflict
was troublesome; They went forth weeping, they sowed in Tears, but they reaped
an Harvest of wonderful Joys afterward. You have in the Book of Martyrs,
written by Mr. Fox, an instance of Mr. Glover, who was worn and consumed with
inward Trouble for the space of Five years, that he neither had any Comfort in
his Meat, nor any Quietness of Sleep, nor any Pleasure of Life; he was so
perplexed as if he had been in the deepest Pit of Hell; yet at last, this good
Servant of God, after so sharp Tempetations, and the strong Buffetings of
Satan, was freed from all his trouble, and was thereby framed to great
Mortification, and was like one already placed in Heaven, and led a Life
altogether Celestial, abhorring in his Mind all propahen things; and you have a
remarkable instance of mighty Joy in Mr. Holland a Minister, who having the day
before he died meditated upon the 8th of the Romans, he cried on a sudden, Stay
your Reading, What Brightness is it that I see? They told him it was the
Sunshine: Nay, says he, my Savior's shine. Now, farewell World, and welcome
Heaven; the day star from an high has visited my Heart; O speak it when I am
gone, and let it be Preached at my Funeral, God deals familiarly with Man. I
feel his Mercy, I see his Majesty, whether in the Body, or out of the Body, God
he knows, but I see things unutterale: And in the Morning following, he shut
up his blessed Life with these blessed words, O! what an happy Change shall I
make, from Night to Day, from Darkness to Light, from Death to Life, from
Sorrow to Solace; from a factious World, to an Heavenly Being! O! my dear
Friends, it pitieth me to leave you behind; yet remember what I now feel, I
hope you shall find e're you die, That God does, and will deal familiarly with
Men. And now thou fiery Chariot, that came down to fetch up Eliah, carry me to
my happy hold; and all the blessed Angels who attended the Soul of Lazarus, to
bring it up to Heaven, bear me, O bear me into the Bosom of my best Beloved:
Amen, Amen. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. And so he fell asleep. See this, and
several other Instances in Mr. Robert Bolton's Instructions for Afflicted
Consciences, p. 87. and 235, etc.

Thus far Mr. Rogers: I shall next add what dreadful Apprehensions a Soul has
that is under Desertion, from Mr. Rogers's own Experience, and I shall give it
you in his own words, viz. The time of God's Forsaking of a Soul is a very dark
and mournful time; it is not only night, but a weeping stormy Night; and it may
not be unuseful to you who have it may be hitherto lived in the Beams and
cheerful Light of Day to know what passes in this sorrowful and doleful Night;
and in this Matter I will not borrow Information from others, but give you my
own Experience. (1.) In this Night the deserted Soul in overwhelmed with
continual Thoughts of the Holiness and Majesty and Glory of the Lord; not does
in think of him with any manner of Delight, acording to that of Asaph. Psalm.
77.3. I remembered God, and was troubled, I complained, and my Spirit was
overwhelmed. And in how deplorable a case is such a Soul that cannot think of
its God and its Creator, but with Grief and Sorrow. (2.) The Deserted Soul in
this mournful Night, does look upon God as its Enemy, and as intending its Hurt
and Ruin by the Sharpness of his Dispensations; and this makes it to be
incapable of receiving any Consolation from the Creatures; for will it say to
them, Alas! if God be my Enemy as I apprehend him to be, which of you can be my
Friend. -- He is with his People, ut he has forsaken me; he has east me into a
fiery Furnace where I am daily burnt and scorcht, and he is not with me there.
-- I dare not, says the mourning Person, look up to Heaven, for there I see how
great a God I have against me: I dare not look into his Word, for there I see
all his Threats as so many barbed Arrows to strike me to the Heart: I dare not
look into the Grave, because thence I am like to have a doleful Resurection;
and what can a poor Creature do that apprehends the Almighty to be his Enemy?
It is a common thing to say, Why do you so lament and mourn, you have many
Mercies left, many Friends that pray for you, and that pity you: Alas! what
help is there in all this if God himself be gone? Nothing is then looked upon as
a Mercy: and as for the Prayers of others will the distressed Person say, They
can do me no good unless I have Faith, and I find I have none at all; for that
would purify and cleanse my Heart, and I do nothing else but sin. (3.) In this
doleful Night the Soul has no evidence at all of its former Grace; so that in
this Night the Sun is not only set, but there is not one Star appears; such an
one look upon himself as altogether void of the Grace of God; he looks upon all
his former Duties to have been Insincere or Hypocrital; he feels his Heart
hardened at present, and concludes that it was never tender. -- I am an
Apostate; if I had any share in the Intercession of the great Redeemer, he
would not leave me thus sad and desolate. -- O! how greatly have I been
deceived that imagined my self to be an Heir of Heaven; and am now seized with
the Pangs of Hell. (4.) During this Sadness the Soul cannot think of Christ
himself with any Comfort. For thus it argues he will be a Savior to none but
those that believe. I have no Faith, and therefore he will be no Savior to me;
he that is to his Servants as the Lamb of God, will be to me as the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah; he that deals gently with them, will tear me to pieces. -- He
seems to be angry and enraged against me for my Disobedience; and though I have
cried sometimes, Have Mercy on me thou Son of David, he passes away and does
not regard my Cries; and O what shall I do when he comes in the Clouds of
Heaven, when I am to stand at his Bar, and to be punished as an Unbeliever.
(5.) In this Night the Soul is full of Terror; and how can it be otherwise when
every Thought of God and of Christ overwhelms it? -- The Terrors of the Lord we
may feel indeed, but we cannot express them; they are so very terrible that
they wound our most sensible and tender part; they cause our very Souls to pine
and languish away; they fix our Minds to the Contemplation of every thing that
is sad and doleful; they fill us with Confusion: and Heman says, Ps. 88.15.
They are Terrors that compass us round about; they seize upon every Faculty,
and distress us in every part; to have God against us, his Holiness to dazzle
us, his Power to overthrow us, his Law to condemn us, our Consciences to accuse
us, is the Sum of Terrors. (6.) Fear is another occasion of Sorrow. -- We are
frighted with the view of our innumerable Sins, and with the Dangers that
attend them; the Thoughts of Heaven fright us, because we think we have lost
that blessed Place; and the Thoughts of Hell are no less frightful, because we
think we shall soon be there; the Thoughts of Life are frightful, because it is
with Anguish and Horror that we live; nor can we bear the Thoughts of Death,
because we dare not die. (7.) It Is a Night of Weeping to deserted Souls,
because they find no heart to pray, and no life to pray; they fall upon their
Knees, and cover the Altar of the Lord with Tears, but he seems not to regard
them. -- The Thoughts of such poor People are in a continual hurry, and so are
very full of Wanderings in the Performance of their Duty. -- Sorrows damp our
Faith, our Love, and our Hope, and so spoil our Duties; for without these they
are without Life and without Acceptance; and sometimes our Grief is so violent,
that it finds no vent, it strangles us, and we are overcome: I am so troubled
that I cannot speak. Ps. 77.4. (8.) Such have no Patience wherewith to bear
their Evils: Who is he that can bear the Wrath of God? -- The sight of Heaven
inspires our Hearts with vital heat, and makes us quiet and submissive under
every Dispensation; but the daily Sight and Fear of Hell fills us with Tumult
and Disorder. (9.) They usually see no prospect of Relief or Deliverance, and
that increases the Sorrows of their doleful Night. -- They have indeed now and
then some Intermissions, but they are like the small Breathings and
Refreshments of a Person that is newly taken off the Rack to be carried to the
Rack again. (10.) This Night of Weeping is the more sorrowful, because it is
the time of Satan's Cruelty. -- When God is departed, then the Devil comes;
insults and says Where is now your God? What think you now of Sin? What is now
become of all your Hearing, your Reading, and your many Prayers? You thought to
have escaped my Power, and now I have you within my reach: Now remember that at
such a time or such a time you sinned, and therefore God has forsaken you; you
weep, and your Tears are just; for you are miserable, and are like to be with
me for ever. (11.) Sometimes this Sorrow is mixed with deep Despair. -- It is a
tempestuous and stormy Night; and as St. Paul said in another case, All hope of
their being saved, is taken away: -- I shall surely perish, says the Mourning
Soul, I am damned, I am lost for ever, I am already as in Hell; the Lord will
be favorable no more; he is gone, he is gone from me, and he is for ever gone.
No more shall I behold his shining Face; he is my Judge and my Enemity and I am
afraid he will be so for ever. I am never like to see that Heaven where I once
hoped to go; and these unbelieving Conclusions produce hard and strange
Thoughts of God, and an Enemy to him in our Minds. (12.) Looking upon their
present Troubles as an Introduction to more, and that these are but the
beginning of Sorrows: How often do we hear such Saying, O! if I cannot bear
these Pains and this Wrath, what shall I do to bear an eternal Hell? If I
tremble so now, what shall I do when the blow is given, and the final Sentence
past. God knows I dare neither live nor die, O what shall I do, whether shall I
go? The Shadows of the Evening are stretched out, and what shall I do if it
prove an eternal Night: For as it is the Glory of Faith to show us future
things as if actually present, and to give us JOY from them so considered; so
it is the TORMENT of Despair to make poor distressed Souls believe they are
even as in Hell, whilst they are on Earth, and that they are actually scorched
with that Wrath that is to come in greater measures. (13.) From all these flow
strange Discourses and Expressions of Sorrow; they scarce care what they say of
God, or of themselves: My Soul is meary of my Life, I will leave my Complaint
upon my self; I will speak in the Bitterness of my Soul, Job 10. c. 3. They
frequently proceed to wish they had never been born, nay they may proceed so
far as to wish even to be destroyed that they may know the worst. -- And there
are two things that make their Sorrows more sorrowful: (1.) As comparing their
State with that of others. (2.) As with their own former State.

(1.) It makes them more sad when they consider the Case of others, with that
Peace and Joy they have. With what Hope and Comfort, whilst they are drowned in
Sorrows; others, says that deserted Soul, can sing the Praises of God with
Delight, whilst I am overwhelmed, and my Harp is hung upon the Willows. Others
can go into the solemn Assemblies, and hear his Word; but I am confined in my
thick Darkness, and dare not go thither.

(2.) When the deserted Soul compares its present with its former State. To a
Person in Misery it is a great increase of Misery to have been once happy: It
was to David an occasion of new Tears when he remembered his former Joys, Psalm.
42.3, 4. Time was, says the poor Soul, when I could read the Bible, and
treasure up the Promises and Survey of the Land of Canaan as my own
Inheritance; but now I dare not look into the Word, least I read my own
Condemnation there. The Sabbath was formerly to me as one of the days of
Heaven, but now it is as well as the rest, a sad and mournful day. -- How fair
was I once for Heaven, and now am like to come short of it? -- These are some
of the Sorrows that deserted Souls often meet withal, and indeed but a small
part of what they feel in this dark and stormy Night. -- Thus far I have given
you some of Mr. Rogers 's own Words, and have been the larger as thinking his
an EXTRAORDINARY CASE, and well-deserves the Consideration of every serious
Christian; but for a more particular Account of it, I refer the Reader to his
Book entitled, A Discourse concerning Trouble of Mind.

CHAP. XLVII. Remarkable Gratitude.
THankful Returns for Kindnesses and Favors received, are but the just
Expressions and Fruits of Ingenuity and good Nature; no Man that is not quite
degenerated into Stupidity, but has some sense of Duty in such cases. The
Bruit Creatures, and Elements themselves, have some Property very Analogous to
the Virtue of Gratitude; the Earth, the Air, the Seas, Storks, Elephants, Dogs,
every thing almost, insensate and sensible: Man should much more excel in
Gratitude, as being capable of greater Gifts, more sensible of them, and more
able to return them: And the deeper the Divine Image is impressed upon any one,
the more excellent he is in this Quality.

1. There was in Florence a Merchant, whose Name was Francis Frescobald, of a
Noble Family and Liberal Mind; who through a prosperous Success in his Affairs,
was grown up to an abundance of Wealth. While he was at Florence, a young Man
presented himself to him, asking his Alms for God's sake. Frescobald beheld the
ragged Stripling, and in despite of his Tatters, reading in his Countenance
some Significations of Virtue, was moved with Pity, demanded his Country and
Name. I am, said he, of England; my Name is Thomas Cromwell; my Father (meaning
his Father-in-Law) is a poor Man a Cloth-shearer: I am strayed from my Country,
and am now come into Italy with the Camp of Frenchmen that were over-thrown at
Gatylion, where I was Page to a Footman, carrying after him his Pike and
Burganet. Frescobald took him into his House, made him his Guest, and at his
Departure gave him a Horse, new Apparel, and 16 Ducats of Gold in his Purse.
Cromwell rendering him hearty Thank^, returned into his Country; where in
process of time, he became in such favor with King Henry the Eighth, that he
raised him to the Dignity of being Lord-High-Chancellor of England. In the mean
time, Frescobald by great and successive Losses was become poor; but remembering
that some English Merchants owed him fifteen thousand Ducats, he came to London
to seek after it, not thinking of what had passed betwixt Cromwell and him. But
traveling earnestly about his business, he accidentally met with the
Lord-Chancellor as he was riding to the Court: The Chancellor alights, embraces
him, and with a broken Voice cast refraining Tears, he demanded if he were not
Francis Frescobald the Florentine; invites him that day to dinner to his House.
Frescobald wonders who this Lord should be; at last after some pause he
remembers him for the same he had relieved at Florence; he therefore repairs to
his House not a little joyed, and walking in the Court attended his return. He
came soon after, and was no sooner dismounted, but he again embraced him with
so friendly a Countenance, as the Lord-Admiral and other Nobles then in his
Company much marvelled at. He turning back, and holding Frescobald by the Hand;
Do you not wonder my Lord, (said he) that I seem so glad of this Man: This is
he by whose means I have achieved this my present degree; and therewith
recounted to them what had passed between them. Then taking him by the Hand, he
led him to the Chamber where he dined, and seated him next himself. Afterward
leading him into a Chamber, and commanding all to depart he locked the Door;
then opening a Coffer he first took out 16 Ducats, and delivering that to
Frescobald, My Friend (said he) here is your Money that you lent me at my
departure from Florence; here are other ten you bestowed in my Apparel, with 10
more you disbursed for the Horse I rode upon: But considering you are a
Merchant it seems to me not honest to return your Money, without some
Consideration for the long detaining of it; take you therefore these four Bags,
in every of which is four hundred Ducats, to receive and enjoy from the hand of
your assured Friend. Which the Modesty of Frescobald would have refused, the
other forced them upon him. This done he caused him to give him the Names of
all his Debtors, and the Sum they owed; the Schedule he delivered to one of his
Servants, with charge to search out the Men, if within any part of the Realm,
and straightly to charge them to make payment within 15 days, or else to abidethe
hazard of Displeasure. The Servant so well performed the Command of his Master,
that in a very short time the whole Sum was paid in: During all this time
Frescobald lodged in the Lord-Chancellor's House, who gave him the
Entertainment he deserved, and oftentimes moved him to abide in England,
offering him the Loan of Sixty thousand Ducats for the space of 4 years, if he
would continue and make his Bank at London: But he desired to return into his
own Country, which he did with the great Favor of the Lord Cromwell, and there
richly arrived; but he enjoyed his Wealth but a small time, for in the first
year of his return he died. Hackwel 's Apol. l. 4. c. 10. Engl. Worth. by W.
Winstanley, p. 213. Wanley 's Wond. l. 3. c. 20.

2. Bishop Andrews's Gratitude to those from whom he had received any Benefits
was most conspicuous; as Dr. Ward, Son to his first Schoolmaster, upon whom he
bestowed the Living of Waltham in Hampshire. Master Mulcaster, his other
Schoolmaster, he always reverendly respected living, and being dead, caused
his Picture (having but few other in his House) to be set over his Study-door.
Upon a Kinsman of Dr. Wats (which was all he could find of that Generation) he
bestowed Preferments in Pembroke-hall. But should I go about to particularize
all his Virtues, it were sufficient of its self to make up a Volume.
Winstanley's Worthies, p. 373.

CHAP. XLVIII. Remarkable Diligence, Laboriousness, and Studiousness.
GOD requires of all Men, that they should be active and industrious in their
places; and he that is not so, is a Burden to the Creation, no Credit to his
Creator, nor Comfort (as he should be) to Others. The hand of the diligent
makes rich, says Solomon: if thou searchest for her, as for hid treasures,
then shall thou understand, etc. Whilst we have time, let us do good, says our
Savior. Neither Wealth, nor Wisdom, nor Goodness, is to be had without
Diligence; and besides, no Crown without a Combat. I have fought the good
fight, says St. Paul, -- henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of glory.

1. Irenaeus labored exceedingly by Prayer, Preaching, Disputing, Instructing,
and Reproving, with Patience and Wisdom; seeking the lost, strengthening the
weak, recalling the wandering, binding up the brokenhearted, and confirming
those that were strong; insomuch, that Tertullian says of him, He governed the
Flock of Christ with such Integrity of Life, and Sincerity of Doctrine, that he
was loved exceedingly by his own, and feared by others. Clark's Mar. of
Eccles. Hist.

2. Origin was called Adamantinus, for his hardiness and luster, (say some)
because not daunted nor affrighted with any Labors or Afflictions whatsoever:
for he studied the hidden meaning of the Scriptures from a Child, tired, and
sometimes posed his Father with Questions, prompted him, and others, to
Martyrdom, could hardly be restrained from it himself, visited the Dungeons,
attended the Places of Execution, studied the Languages, profited much in the
Hebrew, taught first a Grammar School, then the Catechist-School at Alexandria,
reading daily Lectures, scarce allowing him Rest at Night, but for a very few
Hours, and that not on a Bed, but the bare Ground, often Fasting going
Barefoot, abstaining from Wine, making himself an Eunuch, etc. never affecting
Wealth, though having many and great Friends; continuing above Fifty two Years in
Teaching, Writing, Confuting, Exhorting, and Expounding the Scriptures. Ibid.
One says of him Origeni nullae pars aetatis periit a studiis. And another,
Origenis ingenium sufficiebat ad omnia pardiscenda. Ibid.

3. Isidore, Bishop of Sevil, was very painful, and so macerated his Body with
Labors, and enriched his Soul with Divine Learning and Contemplations, that he
seemed to live an Angel's Life upon Earth. Ibid. p. 99.

4. Mr. Gregory, of Christ-Church, studied Sixteen Hours a Day constantly,
scarce allowing himself sufficient time for Sleep, little for Meals, none for
Society or Recreation. In his Life -- He arose every Morning at Four a Clock,
and seldom went to Bed before Ten.

5. Sir Edward Coke, Author of the Institutes, and Chief Justice in King
James's Days, was very regular in his Hours, especially of going to Bed at Nine
a Clock, and rising at Three in the Morning; insomuch, that when a Messenger
came from the King, to his House, at One a Clock in the Night, to give Orders
for the Issuing out a Writ, for the Seizing the then Earl of Somerset, for the
Murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, his Son told the Messenger, If he came from Ten
Kings, he could not disturb his Father 'till Three a Clock: and so Inviting the
Messenger in to Drink a Glass of Wine with Mr. Coke and his Company, at Three a
little Bell was rung, to call up the Servants, upon which Sir Edward arose.
Detection of the Court and State of England.

6. Bishop Latimer rose Summer and Winter, ordinarily, at Two a Clock in the
Morning to his Studies. Fox's Martyrology.

7. Mr. Julius Palmer, a Martyr in Queen Mary's Reign, was so indefatigable in
Study, that the arose ordinarily every Morning at Four a Clock, and went not
ordinarily to Bed 'till Ten. Fox's Martyrology.

8. Bishop Jewel was so industrious, that he hid himself the greatest part of
the Day in his Studies, and so much recalled his Senses from exterior Objects,
that Chrysippus-like, he had need of a Melissa to put him in mind of his Meat.
In his Life.

9. Mr. Bradford slept not commonly above Four Hours in the Night; and, in his
Bed, 'till Sleep came, his Book went not out of his Hand. Ibid.

10. Erasmus in a Letter to Paracelsus professes, that for some Days he had
not been at leisure either to take Physic, or be Sick, or Die, he was so
overwhelmed with the Toyls of Study.

11. Our late Queen Mary of Sacred Memory, usually rose at Six a Clock in the
Morning; and even whilst she was a dressing, had some good Books read over to
her, at least afterward betook to her Study and Devotions, where she continued
often 'till Public Prayers, or other Important Business called her away.

12. Renatus Deschartes was Educated and Taught in the Schools of Flexia, and
had run through the whole Course and Race of his Study at Seventeen Years of
Age. He was for Three Years a Voluntier in the Dangers of War, twice present at
the Siege of Breda, and in the Battle of Prague; from whence he visited Italy,
discoursed with Galileus, etc. came back to the Siege of Capha, and so to
France again, to the Siege of Rochel. Afterward to Holland, and then into
Denmark, Tyrol, Venice, Amsterdam, Paris, etc. Whilst he followed the War, in
the Winter he employed his vacant Hours in Philosophical Contemplations: he
studied Twenty five Years in a Desert in Holland. He was slenderly stored with
Books, because he understood they were not true, the Mathematical only
excepted; wherefore being asked by a Friend, Whether he had a Library, and
desired to show it; lifting up the Cloth, he discovered to him a Calf
dissected. See his Life by Borellus, p. 14, 15, etc.

13. Hen. Zebertus, Th. D. testifies, That Delrius in the Adversaria which he
published for the Illustration of Seneca, he had quoted One hundred thousand
diverse Authors, in diverse Sciences and Languages, with very great Labor and
Judgment: and all this at Nineteen Years of Age. Drexel. Aurisod. He read over
more than once (with close Reading) all the Fifteen Volumes of Tostatus. Ibid.

14. Thuanus tells of a Countryman of his ( Franc. Victa) who was so bent upon
his Studies, that sometimes for Three Days together he would sit close at it,
without Meat or Sleep, more than what for mere necessity of Nature he took,
leaning on his Elbow, without moving out of his place. Wanley's Wonders, etc.
l. 3. c. 41.

15 St. Augustine sitting one time in a solitary place, meditating upon the
Trinity, a poor Woman coming to Advise with him about a weighty Matter,
presented her self before him; but he took no Notice of her: she spoke to him,
but neither yet did he observe her: upon which the poor Woman went away angry
with the Bishop and her self, supposing her Poverty to be the occasion of the
neglect. Afterward being at Church where he Preached, she was wrapped up in
Spirit, and in a kind of Trance, thought she heard St. Austine discoursing
concerning the Trinity; and was informed by a private Voice, that she was not
neglected, as she thought, by the humble Bishop; but was observed by him: upon
which she goes again, and was resolved in her Doubt. Idem ex Sabell. ex. l. 2.
c. 6.

16. Dr. Reynolds, when the Heads of the University of Oxford came to Visit him
in his Sickness, which he had contracted merely by his exceeding Pains in
Studies, (whereby he brought his withered Body to be a very Skeleton) they
earnestly persuaded him, that he would not (Perdere substantiam propter
accidentia:) Lose his Life for Learning; he with a smile answered out of the
Poet, Nec propter Vitam vivendi perde causas. Nor to save Life, lose that for
which I live. Clark's Mar. c. 82. p. 358.

17. Thomas Aquinas sitting at Dinner with Philip, or (as Campanus says) with
Lewis King of France, was on a sudden so transported in his Mind, that he
struck the Board with his Hand, and cried out, Adversus Manichoeos conclusum
est: The Manichees are confuted. At which, when the King admired, Thomas
blushing, besought his Pardon, saying, That an Argument was just then come into
his Mind, by which he could utterly overthrow the Opinion of the Manichees.
Zuing. Theatr. Vol. 1. L. 1. p. 23. Fulgos. L. 8. C. 2. p. 1044.

And again, he was so very intent upon his Meditations, and in his Reading,
that he saw not such as stood before him, heard not the Voices of those that
spoke to him; so that the Corporeal Senses seemed to have relinquished their
proper Offices to attend upon the Soul's, or at the least were not able to
perform them, when the Soul was determined to be thoroughly employed. Sabell.
Ex. L. 2. T. 7. p. 91.

18. Joseph Scaliger, then at Paris, when the horrible Butchery and Massacre
was there, was so intent upon his Study of the Hebrew Tongue, that he did not
so much as hear the Clashing of Arms, the Cries of Children, the Lamentations
of Women, nor the Clamours and Groans of Men. Heinsii Orat. 1. p. 4. Wanley's
Wonders, etc. L. 3. C. 41.

19. Justin Martyr would not be satisfied in his Mind, 'till he had got
Instructers singularly seen in all the kinds of Philosophy, Stoic,
Peripatetick, Pythagorean, and Platonist. Clark's Mar. of Eccles. History.

20. Tertullian was, In omni genere Doctrine paritus. Lactant. inter Latinos
omnes facile princeps judicandus. Vincent. Lirin. Excellently versed in
Physics, Mathematics, History, and Civil Law. Clark's Mar. of Eccles.
History.

21. Ephrem Syrus, without the help of an Instructor, attained to an excellent
Skill in the Syrian Tongue; and was also a great Philosopher, and a very good
Orator, mightily admired by Basil for his Learning, and for Three hundred
thousand Verses which he wrote, much esteemed; in which Abbas, Zenobias,
Abraham Meras, and Simeon endeavored much to imitate him. Ibid.

22. Hierom distributed his time into two parts, one for Study, the other for
Meditation and Prayer, wherein also he spent a good part of the Night: he
allowed himself the least part for Sleep, less for Food, none for Idleness:
when weary of Study, he prayed, or sung a Psalm, and then to his Study again.
He read over all his Library, and then rubbed up his old Readings; he learned
most of the Scriptures by Heart, and read over Commentaries upon them, not
pretermitting the Works of Heathens and Heretics, and collected out of the
Egyptian Writers; but especially he read the Works of Origin, whom he called
Suum, His own. With great Charge he learned the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Syriac;
yet in this Course he took much pleasure. Ibid.

23. Gregory the Great was very exact in spending his time, saying, That he was
to give an Account of it unto God. Ibid. p. 96.

24. Bernard living privately in his Cell, spent his time in Study, Meditation,
and Prayer, often saying to himself, Bernard, Bernard, remember for what end
thou came hither. He allowed himself very little time for Sleep; often
complaining, that all that time was lost: and so sparing was he in his Diet,
that less Sleep was necessary; he never eat nor slept to satiety: yea, by his
rigid Abstinence he so weakened his Stomach, that he was scarce able to retain
Food when he had eaten it; and that little he did retain, served rather to
retard Death, than prolong Life. Yet all this while he remitted nothing of his
Studies and Labors, but equalled the other Monks in digging the Ground
carrying Wood upon his Shoulders, and busying himself about meaner Services:
and in the Intervals of these Labors, he prayed and meditated. Ibid. p. 104.

25. Zuinglius used to study standing, and tied himself to certain Hours, which
he would not omit, unless necessity compelled him: from his first Rising 'till
Ten a Clock, he employed himself in Reading, Writing, Interpreting the
Scripture, and making his Sermons: after Dinner, 'till about Two a Clock, he
conferred with his Friends, or gave Counsel to such as sought it; and so to his
Study 'till Supper; after which (having walked awhile) he busied himself in
Writing Letters, which sometimes held him 'till Midnight. Ibid. p. 153.

26. John Picus Mirandula read over whole Libraries, both of Latin and Greek
Authors, with a wonderful cele^ity, and yet culled out the most useful things s
he went through them: he was so versed in the Ancient Fathers, as if he had
made them his only Study all his Life long: he was so well acquainted with
Modern Writers, that if any Difficulty were proposed to him out of them, he
could presently resolve it. Concerning his Study of the Scriptures, see under
its proper Head. Clark in his Life.

27. Sir John Jeffery was born in Sussex, and so profited in the Study of our
Municipal Laws, that he was preferred Secondary Judge of the Common Pleas, and
thence advanced by Queen Elizabeth, in Michaelmas-Term, the Nineteenth of her
Reign, to be Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer; which place he Discharged for
the time of Two Years, to his great Commendation. This was he who was called
the Plodding Student, whose Industry perfected Nature, and was perfected by
Experience. It is said of him, Nullus illi per otium dies exit partem noctium
studiis vindicat, non vacat somno sed succumbet, and oculos vigilia fatigatos,
candenetsque in opere detinet. He spent no Day idly, but part of the Nights he
devoted to Study; he had no leisure to Sleep, but when surprised by it, for
wnat of it, his weary Eyes when closing and falling, by reason of his
over-watching, he still held to their work, and compelled to wait upon him.
Floyd's State-Worthies, p. 223.

28. Aristotle to hinder his being overtaken with Sleep, he used sometimes to
apply a Vessel of hot Oil to his Stomach, and when he slept, he would hold a
Brazen Ball in his Hand over a Basin, that so when the Ball should fall down
into it, he might again be awaked by the Noise of it. Laert. L. 5. p. 117, 118.

29. Callistus the Third, at Fourscore Years of AGe, remitted nothing of his
usual Industry and Constancy in his Studies, but both read much himself, and
had others who read to him when he had any time to spare, from the great Weight
of his Affairs. Plat. de Vitis Pontif. p. 320, 321.

30. Jacobus Milichius, a German Physician, when Old Age began to grow upon
him, was so careful and sparing afterward of his time, that no Man could find
him at his own House, but he was either Reading or Writing of something; or
else, (which was very rare with him) he was Playing at Tables, a Sport which he
much delighted in after Dinner. After Supper, and in the Night, he was at
Studies and Succubrations; which was the reason that he slept but little, and
also the cause of that Disease which took away his Life; for the over-constant
and the unseasonable Intentions of his Mind in his Studies, was doubtless the
occasion of the Apoplexy of which he died, 1559. Melch. Adam in Vit. Germ. Med.
p. 96.

31. Jacobus Schegkius, when Aged, Blind, and Apoplectical, had one to read to
him, and even then put forth most Learned Commentaries upon the Topics of
Aristotle. Ibid. p. 295.

32. The Worshipful William Garaway, Esquire; my Honored Friend and Neighbor, of
Ford, in Sussex, now living, and in the 81st Year of his Age, in competent
Health, and great Vigor of Mind, tho of excellent Natural Endowments, and
great Reading, yet is still very inquisitive after more Knowledge, careful to
purchase all Books of worth as they come from the Press, and very curious and
attentive in Reading and Marking them. In all my Conversation I have not met
with such a Walking-Library, except the late Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Barlow.

33. Dr. Rich Blackmore, my Contemporary and Colleague at Oxon, now living, and
one of the College in London, was in his first Years the most eager and
diligent Student that I ever knew; sitting up at his Book 'till Twelve, One,
Two, and sometimes Three a Clock in the Morning, and then lying down only upon
his Chairs 'till Prayer-time, 'till his Health broke, and he was constrained by
necessity to retire into the Country, to repair himself by Physic.

CHAP. XLIX. Remarkable Instances of Contempt of Wealth.
JAcob 's Vow, That if God would be his God, and allow him Bread and Water,
etc. Our Savior's Poverty, St. Paul 's Contentedness, and the Community of the
Primitive Christions are well known; and in truth, the very Intention of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, is to draw us off from a Love of the World, to the Love
of God, and a fond Affection of Secular Riches, to a diligent Enquiry after the
Kingdom of Heaven: so that it is no wonder, if we find sometimes the Spiritual
and Heavenly Temper of Christians so great and strong, and vigorous, as quite
to conquer and triumph over all their little Cares and Concernments about the
present Life.

1. Origin was a great Contemner of worldly Wealth, inuring himself to Cold and
Nakedness, never wearing two Coats, nor Shoes, nor taking care for the time to
come with any convetous desire; sold his Books (especially of Humanity) for
Twopence a Day, to be allowed him for his Maintenance, with which he was
content. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. Dr. Cave's Prim. Christ.

2. Lactantius was so far from seeking after Riches, that he died poor.

3. St. Augustine would neither buy either House or Land; but any thing that
was given to the Church, he would not refuse; except Inheritances offered by
those who had poor Children, Parents, or Kindred; judging it unfit to alienate
them in such Cases: for he would often say, That it were much better to bestow
Legacies, than Inheritances on the Church. Clark. Ibid.

4. Gregory the Great could never read those words: Son, remember that thou in
thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, etc. without horror and
astonishment; least having such Dignities and Honors as he had, he should be
excluded from his Portion in Heaven. Ibid. p. 99.

5. Luther, when he reflected upon the Favors and Presents bestowed upon him
by Princes and Great Personages, fearing least they might be a Bait to draw him
to an inordinate Love of the World, broke out into these pathetick Expressions,
Valde protestatus sum me nolle ita satiari. That is, I protested stoutly that I
would not be satisfied with worldly Welfare for my Portion. Ibid. p. 144.

6. St. Bernard going to entr himself into a Monastery of the Cistertians,
persuaded Four of his Brethren to leave the World, and all their worldly
Preferments, and to join with him in this Retirement; which they did, and
accordingly taking leave of their Father, seeing their youngest Brother Nivard
a playing with other Boys, and Guido, the elder, bidding him, Farewell, (Brother
Nivard) behold (said he) we leave to you all our Earthly Possessions. He
presently answered, You will take Heaven, and leave me Earth; this is no equal
Division. Afterward he himself took leave of his Father, and followed them.
Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 104.

7. Thomas Aquinas was so great a Contemner of worldly Honors and Wealth, that
when Promotions were offered him, his usual Answer was, Chrysostomi
Commentarium in Mattheum vellem. I had rather have Chrysostom 's Commentary on
Matthew. Idem in Vit. ejus.

8. Constantine the Great was so averse from all Superfluities, that upon
Festival Days, and when he entertained Strangers, he was fain to borrow Plate
of his Friends to furnish his Cupboard. Idem, in Vita ejus, p. 2.

9. Archbishop Usher's Father having left him a good Estate in Land, finding
that he must have involved himself in many Suits of Law, before he could attain
to the quiet Enjoyment of it, to the interrupting of his other Studies, he gave
up the Benefit of it to his Brothers and Sisters, suffering his Uncle to take
Letters of Administration for that end, resolving to cast himself upon the good
Providence of God, to whose Service in the Work of the Ministry he had wholly
devoted himself, not doubting but he would provide for him: yet that he might
not be judged weak or inconsiderate in that Act, he drew up a Note, under his
Hand, of the State of all things that concerned it, and Directions what to do
about it.

10. Sir Matthew Hale had a Soul enlarged and raised above that mean Appetite
of loving Money; which is generally the Root of all Evil. He did not take the
Profits that he might have had by his Practice: for in common Cases, when those
who came to ask his Counsel gave him a Piece, he used to give back the half,
and so made Ten Shillings his Fee in ordinary Matters, that did not require
much time or study. If he saw a Cause was unjust, he, for a great while, would
not meddle further in it, but to give his Advice that it was so: if the Parties
after that would go on, they were to seek another Counselor; for he would
assist none in Act of Injustice: if he found the Cause doubtful, or weak in
Point of Law, he always advised his Clients to agree their Business.

11. Mr. John Janeway upon his Deathbed had these words: The World has quite
lost his Excellency in my Judgment. O! how poor and contemptible a thing it is
in all its Glory, compared with the Glory of that invisible World which I now
live in the sight of! And as for Life, Christ is my Life, Health, and Strength;
and I know that I shall have another kind of Life when I leave this, I tell
you, it would more incomparably please me, if you should say to me, You are no
Man for this World; you cannot possibly hold oput long: before to Morrow you
will be in Eternity. I tell you, I do so long to be with Christ, that I could
be content to be cut in pieces, and to be put to the most exquisite Torments,
so I might but die, and be with Christ. Oh, how sweet is Jesus! Come, Lord
Jesus, come quickly. Death, do thy worst. Death has lost its terribleness.
Death, it is nothing: I say, Death is nothing (through Grace) to me. I can as
easily die, as shut mine Eyes, or turn my Head and sleep. I long to be with
Christ; I long to die. See his Life.

12. Miles Coverdale, Bishop of Exeter, flying beyond Sea in Queen Mary's
Reign, his Bishopric was reserved for him till his Return, and then sundry
times proffered him, but he would by no means accept thereof, but chose rather
to live a more private Life; yet not of Action: for he continued in London,
Teaching and Preaching the Gospel so long as the Strength of his Body would
permit: and at length being old and stricken in Years, he died comfortably and
peaceably in the Lord; being about Eighty Years old, January 20. A. C. 1568.
See his Life.

CHAP. L. Remarkable Silence, or Reservedness of Men, etc. As also of
Retirement.
SOme People love to make a loud Noise in the World, but they are rarely the
most wise and solid: for the deepest Waters are generally the calmest, and the
emptiest Barrels in a Sea, the greatest Sound: and a Dear Friend of mine, now
Deceased, Mr. J. Tutte, no impolitick, or irreligious Man, commended this as
his last Farewel-Admonition to his Step-Son, upon his Deathbed, That he should
fear God, and endeavor to pass through the World, without making any great
Noise as he went.

1. St. Basil affected a solitary Life.

2. St. Hierom was in love with a Monastic Life, that he might have more
freedom to attend his Studies; with a good Library, and Heliodorus for his
Companion, retired into Syria; and afterward Heliodorus leaving him, he betook
to a Wilderness between the Syrians and the Saracens, where he continued Four
Years in great Solitude. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

3. Bonosus, Hierom's Fellow-Student, having settled his Affairs, forsaking his
Country, Parents, Friends, and only accompanied with a few Books, departed
into a solitary Island, to extricate himself from the Snares of the World, and
enjoy more Freedom in the Service of Christ. Ibid.

4. Fulgentius, a Year before his Death, retired with some Brethren into the
Island of Circina, and there lived a most strict Life: but the Necessities of
his People requiring, and their Importunity prevailing, he returned to them,
and then fell into most grievous Sickness. Ibid. p. 94.

5. Gregory the Great, after his Father's Death, having given his Estate to the
Relief of the Poor, betook himself to a Monastical Life; first under Hilarion,
and afterward under Maximianus, both famous for Learning and Piety. Ibid. p.
96.

6. John Picus, of Mirandula, Three Years before his Death, retired himself
from the Pleasures, Profits, and Honors of the World, that he might live a
more private Life; and made over almost all his Estate in the Earldoms of
Mirandula and Concordia, to his Brother's Son, and distributed a great part of
his Money, Plate, and Jewels, amongst the Poor. Clark in his Life.

7. Thomas Aquinas was called Bos, (or Ox) by his School-fellows, because he
was also silent. Textor.

8. Mr. Samuel Daniel, the English Poet, being a Servant in Ordinary to Queen
Anne, and thereupon having a fair Salary allowed him, kept a handsome
Garden-House, in Old-street, near London; where, as a Tortoise, burying himself
in the Ground all Winter long, he lay obscure some Months together, that he
might in Retirement enjoy the Felicity he aimed at; and then afterward he
would appear in Public, to enjoy and converse with his Friends; whereof the
Two principal were, Dr. Cowel and Mr. Cambden. In his Old Age he turned
Husbandman, and Rented a Farm in Wiltshire, nigh the Devises, it is thought not
so much for the hopes of Profit, as to enjoy the Retiredness of a Country-life.
No question, he pleased himself with Contentedness, and Freedom from the
Troubles of City and Court; his Fancy being too fine and sublimated to be
wrought down only for private Profit. Select Lives of Worthies in England. p.
338.

9. Mr. Michael Drayton, another famed English Poet, was very temperate in his
Life, and slow of Speech, and inoffensive in Company. Ibid. p. 341.

10. Mr. Abraham Cowley, another excellent Man, (to make up the Triumovirate)
tho he took well at Court, yet seems to resent the Inconveniences that attended
it; for he makes this his serious Wish: To retire from the Buz and Noise of the
City, into some place of privacy, where he might enjoy the pleasant
Correspondence of many Books, and a few Friends, and one Wife, and a pleasant
Garden. Thus he delivers himself in one of his Poems: and in a Letter to Mr.
Evelyn, Author of the Kalendarium Hortense, he declares it more at large,
professing that he had been then a pretty while aiming at it, but was not yet
arrived at that State of Mortal Happiness.

11. One of the Cato's having attained to the Age of Eight and fifty Years,
gave over his Public Charge and Travel in Affairs of the Roman Commonwealth,
and went to wear out the remainder of his Days near to Naples, in a Country
Village, which then was called Picenum, but now it is named Marca de A^^a;
where he maintained his Faculties, and nourished himself with such Conveniences
as his poor Lands and Living afforded him. This Good and Virtuous Cato keeping
a simple Cottage, one while perusing his Books, and other whiles looking to his
Vines and Plants. His Neighbors had written ((...) a Coal) over his Door these
words: How happy a Man art thou, ( O Cato) because thou only know what it is
to live in this World amongst other Men. Treasury of An^. and Modern Times. p.
735.

12. Lucullus the Consul, and Roman Captain, continued at the Wars against the
Parthians, Sixteen Years together: during which time he won much Honor to
Rome, many Provinces to the Commonwealth, great Renown to himself, and mighty
Treasures for his Houses. This Man, after his Return from Asia to Rome, found
the State full of Partialities and Dissensions, through the Quarrels between
Marius and Sylla, he resolved to leave Rome; which forthwith he did put in
effect, causing certain places of sumptuyous Workmanship to be builded near
Naples, along by the Seaside, in a place now called, Castello di Lupo. There
he made his Sojourning for the space of Eighteen Years, in quite Repose, and
silent Pleasure; free from all the Turmoils and Travails of State; and in this
Contentment he ended his Days. Ibid.

13. Dioclesian, after he had governed Rome 18 years, and had attained to very
old Age; he gave over the Empire, from whence he dismissed himself into
Nicomedia, with no other Intention but only to return home to his own House,
and there in Peace and Quiet to spend the rest of his Life; and accordingly at
Salon he dealt in Husbandry 12 years together. After two years spent in this
Retirement, the Romans sent two worthy Ambassadors to entreat him to return to
Rome again: The Ambassadors found him in his Garden weeding his Beds of Lettis,
and other Herbs; whom he answered thus: My Friends, do not you think it more
honest and better, that he who dug and planted these Lettis, should eat them
peaceably and quietly in his own House, than to forsake such wholesome Fare,
and return to the Tumults and Rumors of Rome? I have now made good proof, both
what it is to command, and what Benefit ensues, by laboring and deliving in
the Ground. Leave me then to my self I entreat you, in this private State of
Life; for I much rather affect to maintain my Life by the labor of my Hands,
than to be troubled with the charge of the Roman Empire. With this Answer the
Ambassadors took their Leave, and parted.

14. Doris the Athenian, having governed the Commonwealth Six and thirty years
in upright Sincerity and Justice, became aged and weary with Public
Negotiations. Wherefore he dislodged from Athens, and went to a Country House
or Farm, which he had in a not far distant Village; and there, reading Books
of Husbandry in the nightime, and practicing the Exercise of those
Instructions in the daytime, he wore out the space of 15 years. Upon the
Front-piece of his Gate these Words were engraven: Fortune and Hope, Adieu to
ye both, seeing I have found the true entrance to Rest and Contentment. Ibid.

All these excellent Men, of whom we have spoken, and an infinite number more,
left their Kingdoms, Consulate Dignities, Governments, Cities, Palaces,
Favors, Courts, and Riches, to the end that they might live peacefully. And it
is the more memorable, in that no Slanderers Tongue can avouch, that any of
them forsook their Countries, as being infamous, wretchedly poor, or banished:
but only being thereto moved, in pure and simple Goodness, and on their own
liberal Freewill, for the more commodious Order and Direction of their Lives,
before Death should tyrannize over them. Ibid.

15. Democritus when he had reformed the Commonwealth of the Abderites, and
instituted Governors in all places on the Frontiers; as also on the Seacoasts,
such as were honest minded Men, and not ambitious. Which being done, he lived
with the Citizens some years, and perceiving them to be well reformed, and that
they had no more need of his Laws, he made his Retirement to a solitary place
to attend on his Philosophy, highly contemning all matter of the World, which
are nothing but true Vanities; well knowing, that they deserved not to be
sorrow'd for, because Heraclitus did nothing else; and daily therefore he
laughed them to scorn. Without the City, and very near unto the Walls, there
was a Tree, which we commonly call a Plane-tree, somewhat low, yet extending
his Branches very amply: under which, he sat upon a Stone continually alone,
having no other Garment but a long Gown of coarse Stuff, barefooted, his
Visage pale, with a long Beard, and his Body very meager. Somewhat near unto
him, there ran a River descending out of a Neighboring little Hill, whereon
stood a Temple dedicated to the Nimphs, round environed with wild Vines, having
good store of Books by him, and diversity of Creatures; whereof he dissected
some, setting instantly down what his Experience taught him. Ibid, l. 5. c. 19.

16. Charles the Fifth laid down first some of his Hereditary Dominions, A. C.
1556. and the rest with the Empire not long after; he had now enjoyed the one
Forty years, and the other Thirty six. He was much disabled by the Gout; he had
been in the greatest Fatigues that ever Prince had undergone, even since the
Seventeenth year of his Age. He had gone nine times into Germany, six times
into Spain, seven into Italy, four into France: had been ten times in the
Netherlands; ahd made two Expeditions into Africa had been twice in England,
had crossed the Seas eleven times: had not only been a Conqueror in all his
Wars, but had taken a Pope, a King of France, and some Princes of Germany
Prisoners; but at last grew weary of this Pomp and Greatness of the World, and
retired to a place within the Confines of Castile and Portugal, pleasant, and
of a temperate Air, where he had seven Rooms, twelve Servants about him, and
some other Servants sent to stay in the Neigbouring Towns. At first he gave
himself to Mechanic Studies, making Clocks, etc. afterward to Gardening, etc.
and afterward more to his Devotion, using Discipline to himself with a Cord,
(marked with the Severity he had used to himself with it, and reserved by his
Son afterward among his Rariries) went often to the Chapel and Sacrament, and
was supposed to be in most Points a Protestant before he died. Hist. of the
Reform.

17. The Lord-Chief-Justice Hales, having laid down his Place about a year
before his Death, betook himself to a retired Privacy, in order to a
Preparation for his Departure, according to his own Paraphrase of Seneca's
Thyestes, Act 2.

'Let him that will ascend the Tottering Seat,
'Of Courtly Grandeur, and become as Great
'As are his mounting Wishes; as for me,
'Let sweet Repose and Rest my Portion be.
'Give me some mean obscure Recess; a Sphers
'Out of the Road of Business, or the Fear
'Of falling lower; wherre I sweetly may
'My self, and dear Retirement till enjoy:
'Let not my Life or Name be known unto,
'The Grandees of the time, tossed to and fro,
'By Censures and Applause; but let my Age
'Slid gently by, not over-thwar the Stage
'Of public Action, unheard, unseen,
'And unconcerned as if I he're had been.
'And thus while I shall pass my silent days,
'In shady Privacy, free from the noise,
'And bustles of the mad World, then shall I
'A good old innocent Plebeian die.
'Death is a mere Surprise, a very Snare
'To him that makes it his Life's greatest care
'To be a public Pageant, known to all;
'But unacquainted with himself does fall.
See his Life written by Dr. Burnet. 18. Mr. Abraham Cowley had much in the
like manner retired from Public Business, to prepare for Death, as he tells us
in his Poem:

'Well then, I now do plainly see,
'This busy World and I shall never agree.
'The very Honey of all earthly Joy,
'Doth of all Mears the soonest cloy.
'And they methinks deserve my Pity,
'Who for it can endure the Stings,
'The Crowd, the Buz, and Murmurings,
'Of this great Hive, the City.
'Ah! yet, e're I descend to the Grave,
'May I a small House, and large Garden have,
'And a few Friends, and may Books, but true,
'Beth Wife, and both delightful too, etc.
And again;

Whilst this hard Truth I teach, methinks I see,
The Monster London laugh at me.
'I should at thee too, foolish City,
'If it were fit to laugh at Misery,
'But thy Estate I pity.
'Let but the wicked Men from out thee go,
'And all the Fools that crowd thee so;
'Even thou, who do thy Millions boast,
'A Village less than Islington will grow,
'A Solitude almost.
See his Poems.

19. Renatus Deschartes, when he found that there were nothing worth his
Knowledge among Men, he made choice of a Desert at Egmond in Holland; and there
lead a solitary Life for the space of Five and twenty years, and discovered
many admirable things by hs Contemplation, and composed his so much applauded
Works. A Summary of his Life by Borellus, p. 13, 17.

20. Gabriel Dugres speaks of Cardinal Richlieu in these words:

The old Latin Proverb says, that, Vir sapit qui pauca loquitur; A Man is wise
that says but little: We have likewise two old Proverbs in French to this
purpose; Parlez peu, parlez bien: Parlez rien, ou parlez bien. The first is in
English; Speak little, speak well: And the second is; Speak nothing, or speak
well. If every a Man did observe that Rule punctually, and followed those
Proverbs exactly, it was the Cardinal. For, except in Public Meetings, and
when State-Business were in agitation, he spoke very little, or nothing at all:
We said before, that when the King himself did speak to him in the behalf of an
English Gentleman, he nodded only unto the Gentleman, and gave him never a
word. See his Life by Dugres, p. 34.

21. Thomas a Kempis is remarked likewise for his Silence in Company,
execepting where Discourse was moved upon Religious Subjects. See his Life.

22. Mr. Samuel Fairclough had it deeply engraven on his Heart, for he highly
approved that common Saying, viz. Been vixit qui been latuit; A retired Life is
an happy Life. It Is true, his Parts and his Employment would not permit him to
be hid; but he always endeavored it, and he counted a Life of Meditation and
Study and sweetest Life in the World. It was from this settled Judgment, that
he did avoid (as much as he was able) all places of public Trust. See his Life.

CHAP. LI. Good Wives Remarkable.
A Good Wife is the Gift of the Lord, and a good Thing, and rarely to be found;
said the wisest of mere Men: And we have reason to believe him the rather,
because the first Man, Adam, the righteous Lot, the faithful Abraham, the meek
Moses, the strong Sampson, the wise Solomon, the zealous Peter, the Philosopher
Socrates, the Orator Cicero, were all either overreached, or overpowered, or
afflicted with Women: Yet the Grace of God and the Doctrine of Christianity,
has been able to make some Wives so good, that they have been an Honor to
their Sex, and a Comfort and Crown to their Husbands.

Amongst the old Heathens we find these following remarkable, viz.

1. Andromache the Wife of Hector, noted by Ovid for one of the best of Wives.

2. Laodomia the Wife of Protesilaus, who hearing that her Husband was killed
at Troy, slew her self; because she would not outlive her Husband. Ovid.

3. Penlope the Wife of Ulysses, a Woman of rare Chastity; for though her
Husband presently after Marriage went to Troy, where he stayed Ten years, and
was Ten years more wandering out of his way home; yet would the not by any means
violate the Faith given to her Husband in Marriage; no not when it was
reported, that her Husband was dead, and her Parents persuaded her to marry,
and many Nobles came to woo her, and some were ready to take her by force: but
she, craving Patience till a Web of Cloth, which she had in hand, was finished;
undid that in the night which she did by day, and so beguiled them. At last her
Husband returned, and slew the Ruffians, who had disturbed his Wife and House.
Idem.

4. Amongst the Christians Marcella a Noble Matron of Rome, with whom Hierom
was acquainted, and under his Instruction she profited so much, that in Points
of Controversy upon Points of Scripture, People repaired to her as a Judge
therein. Clark 's Mar of Eccl. Hist.

5. Livia is recorded to have been easy to Augustus, feigning her self wholly
at the b^ck of her Husband, not for her Husband's sake, but for her own and her
Childrens: And whatever Sempronius Gracchus and Ca^us Caesar, boast of their
Cornelians, M. Antony of his Octavia, Germanicus of Agrippina, and Trajan of
his Plotina; whatever the British History vaunts of Marcia Proba the Wife of
Guitheline, of Maud the good Wife of Henry the First, of Joan Beaufort married
to James the First King of Scotland; of Eleanor of Castile, Wife of Edward the
First; Philippa of Haynault, married to Edward the Third; for their Manly
Deeds, for the Preservation of their Husbands or their Kingdoms, or for their
Conjugal Affection; certainly William (the Third of England) might justly exalt
his single Mary above all the Wives of former times: than whom no Woman greater
for her Courage, more religious in her Affection, more amiable in her
Countenance, more modest in her Habit, more affable in her discourse, or who
with a more obedient Readiness to serve her Royal Consort, whether present or
absent; was more his Counselor, his Hands, his Ears, his Eyes, and every way
more assistant to him. Certainly this was the True Rose of York, born indeed
among Thorns, yet free from Prickles her self; -- as the August William told
his mournful Bishops and Grandees, That Mary 's Outside was known to them, but
her intrinsic and just value was only known to himself. Fr. Spanhemius, in his
Funeral Orat. of Q. Mary II. p. 22.

6. Carlot a Portu, Daughter of the Noble Peter a Portu, Wife to Frederick
Spanhemius, was of such Innocence, and Dove-like Simplicity, free from Fraud
and Guile, and depended so wholly upon her Husband, that she was willing to be
governed in all things by his Advice; which is the chief Commendations of a
Wife, and so had all things common with him. Clark 's Eccl. Hist. p. 499.

7. Clara Cervenda, was one of the most beautiful and fairest Virgins in all
Bruges; she was married to Bernard Valdaura, at that time above Forty four
years of age. The first night after her Marriage she found that her Husband's
Thighs were rolled and wrapped with Clouts, and that he was a Man very sore and
sickly; for all which, she loved him not a whit the less. Not long after
Valdaura fell so sick, that all the Physicians despaired of his Life: then did
she so attend upon him, that in six Weeks space she put not off her Clothes,
only for shift, nor rested above an hour (or two at the most) in a night, and
that in her Clothes. This Disease was a venomous Relick of the Pox; and the
Physicians counseled Clara not to touch the sick Man, or come near him; and so
also did her Kindred and Neighbors. All which moved her not, but having taken
order for that which concerned the Benefit of his Soul, she provided him all
things that might tend to the Health of his Body; she made him Broths and
Juleps, she changed his Sheets and Clouts, although by reason of a continual
Looseness and many Sores about him, his Body never left running with Matter and
Filth, so that he never had any clean part about him. All the day after she
rested not, the Strength of her Love supporting the Delicacy of her Body; by
this good means valdaura escaped that danger. After this by reason of a sharp
and hot Rheum falling from his Brain, the Gristle within his Nose began to be
eaten away; wherefore the Physicians appointed a certain Powder to be blown up
softly into his Nose at certain times with a Quill; no body could be found to
take such a loathsome Service in hand, because of the Stench that came from
him: But Clara did it cheerfully, and when his Cheeks and Chin were all covered
over with Scabs, Wheals and Scales, so as no Barber could nor would shave him,
she with her little Scissars played the Barber, and made him a deft Beard. From
this Sickness he fell into another, which lasted seven years: During which
time, with incredible Diligence, she made ready his Meat. put in his Tents,
laid on his Plasters, dressed and bound up his Thighs, all rotten with Scabs
and Ulcers; his Breath was such that none durst come near by ten paces, and
abide by it, which yet she protested was sweet to her. This long Sickness, and
the Nourishing and Medicining of a Body oppressed by so many Diseases, was a
great matter in a House that had no Rents or Profits coming in, and where Trade
had ceased of a long time, and consequently the Gain: She therefore to furnish
Expenses, sold her Precious Jewels, her Gold Chains, her rich Carcanets, her
Garments of great value, a Cupboard of P^ate, not caring for any thing so her
Husband was relieved; and contenting her self with little, so he wanted
nothing. Thus Valdaura lingered on a Life, by the help of his Wife, within a
rotten Body, or rather within a Grave, for Twenty years together, in which time
she had eight Children by him, yet neither she not they had so much as a Scab,
Wheal, or Pimple in any part of their Bodies. Valdaura died an old Man, for
whose Death his Wife Clara made so much Mourning as they who knew her well, say
never Woman did for any Husband. When some instead of comforting her, told her,
God had done much in taking him away, and that they therefore came to
congratulate with her. She detested their Speeches, wishing for her Husband
again in exchange of five Children; and though she was yet both young and
lusty, and sought to by many, she resolved not to marry; saying, She should
never meet with any whom she could like so well as her Dear Bernard Valdaura,
Lud. viv. de Christian Faemina. l. 2. p. 360. Camerar. Oper. subciscent. 1. c.
51. p. 226.

8. The Lord of Harlem, in the Low Countries, having by his Exactions and
Cruelty made himself odious to all his People, was, together with his Wife,
besieged in his Castle by them, and so pressed for want of Victuals, that he was
compelled to enter into Treaty: His Wife (a true Mirror of Piety and Love
toward her Husband) amongst other Articles, Capitulated, That she might have
so much of her most precious Movables as she could carry out at one time, the
which being granted, the (with the help of her Chamber-Maids) carried her
Husband, locked in a Chest, out of the Castle; leaving all her Rings and Jewels
behind her. Belg. Com. Wealth. p. 55.

9. In the Bohemian Persecution, we read of the Major of Litomeritia, who
apprehended Twenty four Godly Citizens, of whom his own Son-in-Law was one, and
after he had almost pined there in Prison, he adjudged them to be drowned in
the River Albis, whereupon his Daughter wringing her Hands, and falling at her
Father's Feet, besought him to spare her Husband: but he, harder than a Rock,
bid her hold her Peace, saying, What? can you not have a worthier Husband than
this? To which she answered, You shall never more espouse me to any. And so
beating her Breast, and tearing her Hair, she followed her Husband to the
River; and when he was cast into the midst of the River bound, she leaped in,
and caught him about the middle; but being unable to draw him forth, they were
both drowned together, and the next Day were found embracing one another.
Clark's Mar. V. 1. p. 289.

10. Philip, Sir-named, the Good, Duke of Burgundy, married the Sister of
Charles the Dauphin; and not long after this, Charles basely and perfidiously
slew Philip's Father: whereupon, Philip being full of Anger and Grief, went to
his wife, saying: O my Wife, thy Brother has murdered my Father. Upon this
his Wife (that loved him dearly) burst forth into Tears and Lamentations,
fearing least this Act of her Brother's, would make a Breach betwixt her
Husband and her: which her Husband taking Notice of, comforted her, saying, Be
of good cheer; though it was thy Brother's, yet it is not thy Fault; neither will
I esteem, or love thee the less for it, etc. Which accordingly he made good so
long as they lived together. Lip. Exem. Pol. p. 200.

11. Budaeus (that learned Frenchman) had a great help of his Wife in Points
of Learning; she used to be as busy in his Study, as about her Huswifery.
Clark's Mar. V. 1. C. 65. p. 291.

12. Mrs. Katherine Clark was singular, and very exemplary in that Reverence
and Obedience which she yielded to her Husband, both in Words and Deeds. She
never rose from the Table, even when they were alone, but she made Courtesy:
She never drank to him, without bowing: his Word was a Law unto her: she often
denied herself to gratify him: and when in her Sickness and Weakness, he
mentioned her Case in particular unto God in his Prayer; the Duty being ended,
she would make him Courtesy, and Thank him. In case of his absence, she would
pray with her Family, Morning and Evening: the like she would do in his
Presence, in case of his Sickness and Inability to perform the Duty himself.
Her Modesty and Chastity were rare and remarkable; but fitter to be conceived
by those which know what belongs to them, than to be expressed in Words: for
there is a Conjugal, as well as a Virginal and Vidual Chastity.

In case of her Husband's Sickness, she was a tender, diligent, and painful
Nurse about him, skilful, and careful in making him Broaths, and what else was
needful for him. If at any time she saw him in Passion, with sweet and gentle
Words she would mollify and moderate it. She was often a Spur, but never a
Bridle to him in those things which were good.

She was always well pleased with such Habitations, (as in their many Removes)
he provided for her; and with such Apparel and Diet, as his Means (which was
sometimes short) would allow. She never grutched nor grumbled at any of those
Dispensations which God's All-wise Providence carved out unto them. Clark's
Lives, last Vol. p. 154.

13. Madam de Saint Blanker, Wife to the late magnanimous Marshall de Biron,
was Visited by a Lady of great Birth, who brought with her very goodly Works of
Silk, which she and her Daughters had wrought in Samplers. She brought with her
also, one of her Children, that danced delicately, and played sweetly on the
Gittern, whom she showed to the Lady Marshall, that she and her Children
should learn to spend their time in the like delightful Exercises. Madam
Marshall made her Answer, That she could not devise any better Works,
Exercises wherein to instruct her Sons and Daughters, that in the Fear of God,
and good Means, whereby their Hearts would become magnanimous, to do Service
for their King, according as their Father had formerly done. And indeed, all
the Male-Children issuing of her, were very brave Minded, and valiant Men. As
for her Daughters, over and besides their Happiness, to marry with wise and
worthy Knights; so were they well Educated in Houshold-Discipline, by their
excellent Breeding, and famous Houses of generous Nourishing. Treasury of
Ancient and Modern Times, C. 8. p. 761.

14. Madam Margaret de Savoy, Wife to the Deceased Anne de Montmorency,
Constable of France, who had Five Children, all worthily Educated, and evermore
most lovingly affected unto the Crown of France, as being very remarkable for
their Fidelity, as also well provided of Honorable Estates. When News was
brought her. That one of her Sons was dead, named Mombrum, whom she most dearly
affected above all the rest, and was slain in the Battle at Dreux, fought
against the French Protestants, in the Year 1562; and also, That her Husband
(being wounded) was there surprised: she said, blessed be God, as well for the
bad as the good; and gave him hearty Thanks, not only because her Son was
slain, but that her Husband remained wounded, and a Prisoner, for the Service
of the King, etc. Ibid.

15. Madam Katherine du Salaignat, Wife to Messiere Geffrey de Saillet, a brave
and hardy Knight in his Lifetime; she sending her Sons (in their very young
Years) to Paris, for Instruction, was advised by some familiar Friend, to keep
them (as yet) at home; because they were but young and tender. She made Answer,
That her Children resembled Vessels wholly new, wherein, if good Liquor were
put at the first, they would savor thereof so long as Nature lasted. In like
manner, if Children embrace good Doctrines in their Young Age, they will relish
always after thereof, even to Old Age. Which they cannot do, being kept under
the Mother's Wing, as we term it; where neither are like Masters, or commodious
Means, as it is in such places, where all Virtues are taught, to such as will
seek for them. For this good Lady added, That she desired rather to be without
Children, than that they should not be virtuous. And indeed, such did her Sons
prove to be, and good Servitors to their King, notwithstanding all the
partiality in France. Ibid. p. 763.

16. Under this Head of Good Wives may very fitly be inserted a short Narrative
of the Life of Mrs. E --, (with whom I was well acquainted) her Love to her
Husband, proved to be that Non-such Love which she was pressed too in her
Wedding-Sermon; such an unpresidented Love and Tenderness she had for him, that
there has not been a greater Instance of Conjugal Affection on her part;
neither could it be known which of the two were most obliging: and therefore it
was, that once upon a very remarkable occasion, she told a young Lady, That he
loved her even to an excess, (if such a thing could be between Man or Wife).
This is certain, if there was any Contest between 'em, 'twas only, which of the
two loved most, or which of 'em was most happy in their Married State. Before
their Marriage there was a Day of Prayer kept, in order to it; and one of the
Divines that prayed had this Expression, Let 'em never give Ear to those that
may go about, even in the least thing, to divide 'em. Which they both promised
when the Day was concluded, and subscribed their Hands to a formal Agreement,
as to this matter, to show their hearty Consent to it. -- This incomparable
Person was Descended from very Honorable Parents, and had an extraordinary
Education; and I may sincercly say of her, as Dr. Walker did of the Countess of
Warwick, That there many Daughters; yea, all their Daughters did virtuously;
but she -- I shall therefore Draw her, though but in little, who had nothing
little, nothing mean, but a little esteem of her own Perfections, and being
mean in her own Eyes. -- She was a Person of that great Piety, that when the
was but in the 34th Year of her Age, I sound she had kept a Diary of her
Soul-concerns, for above Sixteen Years. -- Her Honored Father has given this
Character of her, That of all his Children, she was the only one that had never
once disobeyed him in her whole Life. And her Husband lately told me, (for he is
still living, and has enjoined me to conceal her Name, it being contrary to her
Inclinations, to have any thing she ever said, or writ, published to the World)
for the whole time he was married to her, which was many Years, she never once
omitted Secret Prayer twice a Day, and was for all that time as constant in
Reading the Scriptures in private, besides what they read in the Family. -- Her
Husband, by going to Bed before her, has been often waked out of his Sleep, by
the extraordinary Goings-forth of her Soul, in private Devotion -- And as to
Public Worship, she never omitted going to the Sacrament, and hearing two
Sermons every Lord's Day, from the Sixteenth Year of her Age, to the time of
her Sickness. -- 'Twill be of no small use to the Reader, to insert here what I
find in one of her Diaries, it being the Rules she walked by, in the management
of her whole Life: and I shall first insert, -- Her Resolutions about Marriage,
which I found in the Journal of her Life, written with her own Hand. Her own
Words were these, viz. -- What I intend to do, if it please God to bring me
into a married State: For the Choice of a Husband, his Person shall be such as
I can entirely love and delight in. His Humor, as near as I can judge,
suitable to mine; so that we may delight in each others Company. I would not
have him Hasty, nor Passionate, no not to others. A Competency of Estate, so
that we may live, and not be beholding to Friends, is all I desire: For I do
not, nor never did reckon, that the Comforts of ones Life, will, or does
consist in having abundance of the World. I would chiefly, and above all, have
one that does truly fear God; not only a Professor, but one that is seriously
Godly, and whose chief Delight is, as near as I can judge, and learn by others,
in the things of God. I will, if I can possibly, have my Judgment go before my
Affection, in the Choice of a Husband. If it please God my Parents live to see
me married, I will not entertain any Discourse with any that I intend to marry,
without their consent and liking. If I am able too keep Servants, they shall
be, as near as I can discover, and by enquiring know of others, those that
truly sear God; at least they shall be Civilized. As for Menservants, if I
should marry a Citizen, I shall think it my Duty, to let my Husband alone with
them; but if he does neglect his Duty to them, by not calling them to an
Account, for the Sermons they hear, Reading. etc. If I cannot persuade him to
it, I shall then think I may, and must take some care of their Souls. As for
Maids, I Will, before ever I hire them, tell them, they must go with me to hear
at the same place I do; but if they are joined with any others, then I Will let
them go sometimes there, and sometimes with me. They shall give an Account of
what they hear, until the Affairs of my Family are such that I cannot do it.
They shall read to me, at least, once a Day; or else I Will ask them about their
Reading: for I shall think it to be my Duty, when I take any into my Family, to
take some care of their Souls, as well as for their Bodies, and to do all I can
for their Souls good, by Admonishing them, and giving them all the good Council
I can, and giving all Encouragement I can in what is good. If they grow wicked
and careless, and will not bear Reproof, I shall look upon it my Duty to change
them, and not to mind what People say of my frequent changing of Maids. David
would not abide a Liar in his sight: and I am sure that is most pleasing to
God, to have, as near as I can, all in my Family that fear him, and deight in
his holy ways. As for Children, if it please God to bless me with them, I shall
look upon it to be my Duty, if I am able, to Nurse them my self, and to take
all the care of them I can in their Infancy, and betimes to check the Buddings
of Original Sin, by not encouraging of Revenge or Pride in them; and as soon as
they are able to learn, to teach them their Catechism, and what is good; but so
as not to tire them, but make it as pleasant to them as I can, by giving them
all the Encouragement and Praise when they do well, and timely Correcting them
when they do what is sinful.

As for my CARRIACE TO MY HUSBAND, I shall reckon it both Prudence and my Duty,
to study his Humor when we first come together, and then to do all I can
without sinning to please and oblige him, to obey him in all things that are
not contrary to the Commands of God. -- If I should light on one that is
wicked, I Will endeavor what I can by my carriage to engage his Affections
thoroughly to me, and then to make use of that tie to engage him to God, and by
my Christian Carriage to try what can be done to win him over to Christ by
reproving of him with all Meekness, and acknowledging my great Love to him, and
that it is Love that makes me do it, and my desire of his being happy for ever.
I shall reckon it my Duty if I have a good Man, to be willing to learn of him,
and to do what we can to engage each other more entirely to God, to make use of
our Love to one another to inflame our Souls with Love to Christ. -- Being
convinced from Scripture and Reason that it is my Duty to give to the Poor, I
now resolve when I marry to give according to my Ability; though I cannot
resolve upon any Sum, yet I Will give according to my Ability. -- When I make any
Provisions that I Would have kept I Will give some to all in the Family, that so I
may not put 'em upon the Temptation of Stealing. And as for other Victuals they
shall have sufficient, but none to waste if I can help it. -- This is a thing
that I hate for People to repeat my words after me: I will not therefore allow
any under my care to do it; and if ever it please God that I keep Servants, I
now resolve to endeavor to do my Duty toward them, though they should not do
theirs toward me, and to endeavor conscientiously to discharge my Duty
toward all Relations; begging of God that he would now help me to do it: O
that I could now do all with an Eye to God, and be willing always to be at his
dispose in every thing.

Next follows her occasional Reflections upon Variety of Subjects, as I find
'em in her Diary.

REFLECTION I. Occasioned upon seeing my Mother very melancholy one day after
she and I had had some words, and I fearing she was displeased with me.
OH! my Soul see how afraid I am at the Anger of an Earthly Parent: It lays a
Restraint upon me in their presence when I think I have any ways offended them.
I am grieved for fear of their Anger, and would do the utmost I can to have 'em
reconciled to me again. O my Soul! I may well wonder at the Patience of God
toward me, that when I daily grieve his holy Spirit, resist all the Workings
of his Grace, yet he bears with me. I am not, neither can I be any ways so
obliged to an Earthly Parent, as to my dear Heavenly father; and yet I sin
against him, offend his Justice, abuse his Mercy frequently in the daytime,
without one serious Thought on my own Ways. When I offend my natural Parents, I
can reflect on my self, consider what I have done, that may any ways give the
Offense. I can offend my dear God, and not be troubled as I should be. O the
W^nders of Divine Patience! that God should bear so long with one so vile. O
the Wonders of free Love! that when God knew before my Creation what a base
disingenuous ungrateful Wretch I should prove, yet nothing could hinder his
Thoughts of love toward me before the Foundation of the World was laid. Well,
O my Soul! I see I am so infinitely indebted to free Grace, that I can never do
enough to testify my Thankfulness to God. I am so infinitely indebted to Divine
Justice, that without fresh Supplies of pardoning Mercies, I am irrecoverably
undone for ever. O God, I beg of thee, that I may be more and more sensible of
my unchild-like Carriage toward thee; that I may be more and more grieved when
I offend thee, that I may do my utmost endeavors to please thee in all things,
and yet daily grieve that I can do no better.

REFLECTION II. Upon seeing her Sister T -- 's continually loving to be talking
of her Cousin W. and when she had begun a Discourse to carry it on with great
Delight.
SEE how Persons talk of those they love; they are grieved if they are troubled
at any thing; so that two Persons Satisfaction must go to the making one happy,
and one's Trouble will make them both miserable.

Turn in, O my Soul! into thy self, and consider what a vast Difference there
is betwixt God's Love to the Soul, and all other kinds of Love in the World.
God loved the believing Soul millions of Years before it had a Being. And
though he knew what Sins the Creature would commit, how all his Laws would be
broken; yet this could not hinder his Electing Love. So that then you will grant,
the Sinner could not deserve God's Love, since its being, it has done, ^^^d
daily does grieve and offend him, yet this cannot take off God's Love from the
Soul. The Love of a Creature is for some Real or Imaginary Excellency and
Suitableness: Their Love is at best fickle, and subject to change. We are short
sighted, and cannot see at first what the Effects of such Love will be. And
therefore what more ordinary, than for Lovers to grow cold and indifferent? If
the Person be loved for Beauty, the Smallpox or Fever may put an end to that
Love: If for good Humor, Age and Sickness often alters it; if for Money,
Riches may make themselves Wings and fly away; or else any Unkindness or
unsuitable Carriage from the Person loved, often alters the Affections. Yet
with what delight can they talk of these they love; it is hard to put them off
with other Discourse. Lovers think not the time long they are together. Yet, O
my Soul! I am infinitely obliged to God, his Love is beyond all Expression. I
have ever since I was born offended him; and brought Sin enough into the World
with me, to set me at an eternal Distance from him. Yet God's great Love was
such, that he thought nothing too much for fallen Man. He knew, before ever he
fixed his Love on me, what I should prove, how I should carry it toward him;
yet that could not hinder his Thoughts of Love. O my Soul! thou can never do
enough to testify thy Love to God. There Is no fear of the Decay of his Love to
thee, if thou do but carry it ingenuously toward him. There can be no Defect
in God; all that is, is on my part. I have cause to bewail my former
Miscarriages, and now to resolve to walk more holily and humbly before God.
Christ, he is altogether lovely; there is nothing in him, but what if
considered may inflame my Heart with Love to him. I may wonder at my self, that
I do no more love to talk of this lovely Jesus, that I do so seldom think of
him. Well now, let me learn something from this Reflection, to fill my Soul
with Love to him, and to set me a longing after Communion with him. O that I
may for ever have him in my Thoughts, whose Thoughts I was never out of from
Eternity, (if I am not mistaken, but am truly his.)

REFLECTION III. On her Brother H -- 's telling her Mother that she lay at Mrs.
B -- 's, and her Mother discoursing what her Landlord said of her Febr. 2. 1679.
Her Reflections on this were these, viz.

OH my Soul! What use should I make of all this? I may see how vain it is to
expect Satisfaction in the Creatures when they do in so small a matter
disappoint me, and prove false. Sure the use God would have me to make of all
the Disappointments I have ever yet met with, is, to expect more from God, and
less from the Creature. I see and find by Experience, this I may soon expect
more from them than is to be had. But I never yet expected that from God that
is to be had in him. I find I may soon loose my good Name and Credit in the
World. I should from hence learn to make it my business, to keep a Conscience
void of offense toward God and Man; that so whatever the World says or thinks
of me, I may still be able to approve my Heart to God; and to carry it so
toward all I converse with, as not willingly to give them any just cause to
speak Evil of me. I see it is a vain thing, nay I shall be the most inexcusable
of any one in the World, if ever I should expect Satisfaction in the Creature.
For my Experience tells me, it is not there to be had. I no sooner promise my
self Comfort in any Earthly Enjoyment, but some way or other it is imbittered
to me. I promised my self a great deal of Comfort in Mrs. B -- 's Acquaintance,
and now I cannot go to see her, without hazarding my good name. Well, I will
now retreat back again to my former SOLITVDE, and converse more with God and my
own Soul. I have found enough of the Vanity of Acquaintance: But I never yet
had cause to complain of my God. The more I acquaint my self with him, the
better it is; I should be so ingenuous in all cases to make a Spiritual
Improvement of an Earthly Disappointment, that so I may reap real Benefit by
outward Vexations.

REFLECTION IV. Upon her being taken ill in the Night, and thinking she was
struck with Death.
OH my Soul! thou see what need I have to be always prepared for Death? How
soon can God take away Health and Life? I am but Tenant at Will to my Maker,
and therefore I need to be ready. I then began to call my self to account to
see with what Comfort I could appear before God. I find upon Examination, and
some sight of Eternity, here is abundance of Sin to be repented of. I dare not
think of appearing before God, without an Assurance of an Interest in Christ.
-- Well, O my Soul, what use should I make of this Providence! I know not how
soon I may die: Death is a serious thing, it is a solemn thing to appear before
the Heart-searching God, there to be accountable for all I have done in the
body, and for ever to be doomed to endless Happiness or Misery: What a mad Body
and Fool am I then to be so negligent in working ^^t of my Salvation, when I am
sure I cannot live long. The Pain I felt was great, but nothing to what the
Damned feel. I did then bless God that it was not eternal. I thought, if my
Pain was so sad, what is it to be tormented in Body and Soul, and that for
ever. -- I then considered what Sin it was that most disturbed my Peace, and
find it is trifling with God. -- Well, O my Soul! it is time for thee now to
resolve to be more serious, and always prepared, because in such an hour as I
think not, the Son of Man comes.

REFLECTION V. Upon her Mother's and Sister T -- 's saying to her, She would
neither make a fond Wife nor Mother.
OH my Soul! What use should I make of all the Opinions People have of me, and
of their thinking I shall never be fond of any Relation? Sure God has some end
in it; that notwithstanding my Willingness to please all manner of Persons, I
cannot yet have their good word. Let me now more than ever endeavor to please
God. I have great cause to love my Parents: for under God I am beholding to
them for my Being. But I am not only beholden to God for my Creation, but I
hope for Redemption, and a whole Life of Mercies, that be has continually
followed me with. I have great cause to love Relations, but that is nothing if
compared with what cause I have to love God. Their greatest Love is Hatred,
when compared with God's Love. Well then, the use I should make of all this is
to consider my Obligations to God. I would not willingly displease an Earthly
friend; sure then, had not Sin basely besotted me, I should abhor the Thoughts
of doing any thing that might displease God. I should endeavor conscientiously
to discharge my Duty to all Relations, let the Event be what it will. O that I
were so spiritual, as to make a good use of all the Disappointments I have ever
yet met with. I bless God I have not promised my self Happiness in any thing in
the World, but have been some way or other disappointed in it. God is very kind
to me in it: He sees how my Affections are still running out after the
Creature, and how apt I am to be fond of that which draws my Heart from God.
Now I will return to God, let God do what he pleases with me. I bless God for
Relations and Friends, but I desire to enjoy them more, as God is pleased to
make them a Blessing to me, than for any outward Comfort I have in them. O that
I could love Christ more, and Creatures less! I see they are uncertain
Comforts, but in Christ is never failing Delight and Satisfaction to be had.

Upon a Dream she dreamt on the Nineteenth of November, in the Year 1680.
HER Dream in her own Words was this, viz.

Methoughts I was above Stairs, and either something, or a Voice said to me,
That I must in a very short time come and appear before my Judge, there to give
an Account of all I have done; and then I should be tried, whether I was
sincere or no in what I did. Methoughts I presently died, but Soul and Body
remained together, 'till I were Summoned to Judgment. I was extremely concerned
at this Voice, and began to bethink myself, what Account I could give at
Judgment. I could not tell whether I was really sincere, or no. I began to
Examine myself, and thought what should I do? The Day of Grace was over; 'twas
too late to repent: and the like, etc. and I could not tell what would become
of me for ever. I dreamt, I went down Stairs, and there the People told me, I
looked like Death. Aye, says I, so I well may, when I am dead. I could not tell
what to do for a room to pray in, to see if there were any hopes of acceptance.
I was so amazed and affrighted, that I was almost besides myself, for fear I
was not siucere. I then thought what Ends have I proposed to myself, in the
performance of Duties, and could not find that I had designed any thing of Self
in what I had done; I was, I hoped, sincere, though under great Fears and
Amazements, because of my appearing before the Heart-searching God. I awaked in
a great fright.

REFLECTION VI. Her Reflection, in her own Words, upon this Dream, was this,
viz.
OH my Soul! What shall I now do! This that was but a Dream, will shortly be
true. I must e're long be Summoned to Judgment, in a more Solemn Manner than I
can now think of; and there I must give up my Account before the Great GOD. If
I am an Hypocrite, I shall then be undone for ever. Sure there is something
more than ordinary in this Dream. God is wonderful good and kind to me. I have
been very careless and negligent in the performance of all Duties. God is
pleased to give me one Warning more, to see if I will do what I can toward an
Assurance of Salvation. If after all these Warnings I shall be found
Christless, my Damnation will be greatly aggravated; my Summons to Judgment
will be more dreadful, than I can now think it will be. When I must appear
before my Judge, fitting on his Throne, I shall there be accountable for all my
Thoughts, Words, and Actions, before that God who knows them better than I do
my self. When the Sentence shall be pronounced, and the Judge will stay to see
it executed: there will be no Repealing of that Sentence, no avoiding its
Execution; but I must for ever then, enter either into endless Joys, or
Torments. What shall I now resolve upon? I do, and cannot but believe that this
Day is near. Die I must; I am not sure of one Moments time more. Am I mad then,
to live as I now do? To be contented, when I know not what will become of me
for ever? I now resolve, through the Assistance of the Blessed Spirit, to be
more in the Work of Self-examination, that I may not be surprised by Death or
Judgment: Blessed be God for bearing with me so long, for giving me one Warning
more before the Great Day of Judgment. What wonderful Patience have I abused?
What need have I to be speedy and sincere in my Repentance, and now do what I
wished in my Sleep I had time to have done.

REFLECTION VII. Upon Scalding her Foot, Sept. 7. 1681. Her Reflection upon it
was this which follows, in her own Words, viz.
OH how great was that Smarting Pain! I then presently considered, if that pain
was so dreadful, what would be the Torments of the Damned? If it is now so sad
to have a little hot Liquor poured on ones foot, what will it be to have Soul
and Body tormented, to lie burning in Fire and Brimstone for ever! This pain,
though great, yet is quickly over, I have cooling things for it; but in Hell a
Drop of Cold Water cannot be obtained to cool the Tongue of the Damned: though if
that could be, yet it would do but little good. What does God point out to me
by all these Providence, but that I should do the utmost I can, to escape Hell
Torments? I have now time and opportunity to work out my Salvation. How
inexcusable shall I be, if after all, I should neglect so great Salvation? What
cause have I to admire Christ, who not only died to deliver his from
Hell Torments, but has purchased such Joy and Glory, for all such as durst
trust themselves with him.

Well now! what do I resolve upon. Oh! for an Holy Ingenuity in my Carriage
toward God! that I could but live as becomes the Redeemed of the Lord, and
make use of all Providence and Ordinances, as God has appointed them for.

Her Carriage before she Received the Sacrament.
IN her Sixteenth Year, she had longing Desires to receive the Sacrament, which
she acquainted her Pastor with; who told her, That then she must forsake all
Sin, and cleave to Christ, and not live in the omission of any known Duty, or
in the commission of any known Sin. then he said, She must make Religion her
Business. He said, He hoped she made Conscience of Secret Prayer. He said, She
knew what Paul said concerning the unmarried Woman, That she cares for the
things of the Lord, how she might be holy both in body and spirit. And he bid
her observe this, and he did not question but Christ would bid her Welcome: and
accordingly on the Sabbath Day following, she went to the Sacrament; but before
she went, she spent some time in Examination, and could not find, but that she
had Truth of Grace. And then she brake out in the following pathetical
Ejaculations, viz.

Oh! how should the Thoughts of Free Grace ravish and fill me with Love to God!
Oh! how am I filled with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory! Oh Lord, I
solemnly resolve against all my Sins. These are the Murderers, that would not
have thee to Reign over me; Original Sin, the pollution of my own Nature; the
Sins that I have committed before I knew what Sin was, have rendered me
obnoxious to thy Displeasure. I beg of thee, that thou would give them their
Death's Wound. I shall now meditate on the wonderful Love of God, in electing
some to Salvation, and passing by others, and wonder that I should be an Object
of Electing Love; sure, Lord, thou could not have chosen one more vile than I
am, and one that would have carried it to thee as I have done: I may well
wonder at thy infinite Love; I considered of the Love of God, in parting with
the Son of his Love, to die for Sinners, that God should contrive such a way of
Salvation for fallen Man, and not for fallen Angels. What an astonishing,
amazing Love was that, that Christ should become Man? that he should be so poor
as not to have where to lay his Head, when he came to enrich the World. Oh that
sweet Expression of Christ's Love, when he says, I was with him when he laid
the Foundations of the World, yet then my Thoughts were in the habitable part
of the Earth, and my Delights were with the Sons of Men. That I should be one
of them that Christ should have in his Thoughts of Love; I, could not but cry
out, And why me, Lord? why me? Oh infinite Free Grace! that I should be freely
chosen! whereas, if God had but required Satisfaction for one Sin, (though but a
sinful thought) I must have perished for ever. I told Christ, Dearest Jesus, I
cannot at this Sacrament take a denial of thy gracious Presence. I come to meet
with God, and I cannot be contented without him. I bless thy Name, I have often
enjoyed great Delight in this Ordinance; but now I would enjoy more of God than
ever. I would have all my Graces grow and flourish; I would have my Sins
utterly destroyed and rooted out: O Blessed Jesus! I come to thee; here are my
Lusts, my Pride, my Unbelief, my want of Love to thee, the base Sins of my
Nature, my disingenuous Carriage toward thee; here, Lord, slay them before
thee. They are unwilling that thou should rule in my Soul. I did in these or
the like Expressions, make over my self to be more entirely God's; and I dare
own upon review, that I did enjoy Christ. This did in some measure set my Soul
a longing for Heaven; Lord, said I, if a Smile of thy Love is so sweet, what
are the full and ravishing Views of thy Love? If a Glimps of my dearest Jesus
is so sweet and refreshing, what will the full Visions of God be for ever? But
my base Heart was several times trying to draw me from God. O surely a Freedom
from Sin will be unconceivably sweet to me, that am so continually harassed
with these Corruptions.

She writ abundance of such MEDITATIONS and EJACVLATIONS as these; but here is
all that her Husband could ever get transcribed.

By these her MEMOIRS and RVLES for holy Living, we not only see what an
extraordinary Wife she was (for her Husband says she fully practiced 'em) but
also the happy Effects of a regular Course of Piety; for certainly never was
there (on a Sickbed) a greater Instance of a willing Resignation to the Will
of God, as to either Life or Death. -- She would often say to her Husband, O my
dear it is a solemn thing to die, but I can freely leave all the World but you,
(and at saying so, she would still burst out into Tears;) she said at another
time, Sickness is no time to prepare for Death; were my Work now to do, I were
undone for ever. -- But I shall stop here, for she needs not borrowed Shades to
set her off; I need do no more than refer you to these Memoirs, which are all
the curious Contexture of her own Brain. -- I shall only add, She was MISTRESS
IN THE ART OF OBLIGING; in which she attained that Sovereign Perfection, that
she reigned over all Hearts with whom she did converse. In a word, She did
consecrate her self entirely to God, and was more afraid of Sin than of Hell it
self. -- In such a loose Age as this, such an extraordinary Instance may
perhaps be doubted as to the Truth of it, but I do assure the Reader there is
nothing inserted in this Relation of Mrs. L -- but what is real Matter of Fact.

CHAP. LII. Good Husbands Remarkable.
HVsbands have as much cause to be good, as Wives; and more clearness of
Reason, and strength of Judgment, ordinarily to govern their Passions, and
direct their Actions: and therefore they should excel the Women, not only in
Prudence, but in Goodness, and particularly Patience. And so they do sometimes;
as for Instance:

1. Sir Nathanael Barnardiston, seemed here to imitate the Practice of the Lord
Jesus toward his Church, in his Conjugal Love, Protection, and full
Contentation and Delight, until he became a Pattern and Mirror of Matrimonial
Sweetness and Faithfulness: and as it is said by one of the Rabbis concerning
Methuselah's Wife, That she had Nine Husbands in One, for Age and Years; so I
may say of this Gentleman's Lady, that she had Nine Husbands in him alone, for
his aimable Carriage and Graces. These were, it is true, acted while he was
living; but he left a Testimonial in his Will, of his living Affection after
his own Death, over and above the Marriage-Covenants, to show his endearedness
of her, by his Affectionate Remembrance when he himself was gone. See his Life.

2. Dominicus Catalusius, was the Prince of Lesbos, and is worthy of eternal
Memory, for the entire Love which he bare to his Wife: she fell into a grievous
Leprosy, which made her appear more like unto a rotten Carcass, than a living
Body. Her Husband not fearing in the least to be infected with the Contagion,
nor frighted with her horrible Aspects, nor distasted with the loathsome Smells
sent forth by her filthy Ulcers, never forbid her either his Board or Bed; but
the true Love he had toward her, turned all those things to him, into Security
and Pleasure. Land. Theatr. p. 462. Fulgos. L. 4. C. 6. p. 526.

3. Ant. Wallaeus, lived most lovingly with his Wife, they never brake forth
into Anger or mutual Brawling; their mutual Care was to please each other, and
by Deeds to prevent each others's Desires: neither did Wallaeus fear any thing
more, than that his Dear Wife should die before him-for he used her not only
for the Government of his Family, but for his constant Companion. What: soever
befell him in the Commonwealth, Church, or Civil Converse, he acquainted her
with it, asked, and often followed her Advice; for she was a modest and prudent
Woman. Clark's Eccles. Hist. p. 488.

4. Mr. Eliot, of New England, loved, prized, and cherished that one Wife which
was given to him truly from the Lord, with a kindness that notably represented
the Compassion, which he hereby taught his Church to expect from the Lord Jesus
Christ; and after he had lived with her more than half a Hundred Years, he
followed her to the Grave with Lamentations, beyond those which the Jews from
the Figure of a Letter in the Text affirm, that Abraham deplored his Aged Sarah
with; her departure made a deeper Impression upon him, than what any common
Affliction could. His whole Conversation with her had that Sweetness and that
Gravity and Modesty beautifying of it, that every one called them Zachary and
Elizabeth. Cott. Mather in his Life, p. 57.

5. C. Plautius Numida, a Senator, having heard of the Death of his Wife, and
not able to bear the Weight of so great a Grief, thrust his Sword into his
Breast, but by the sudden coming in of his Servants he was prevented from
finishing his Design, and his Wound was bound up by them; nevertheless, as soon
as he found opportunity according to his desire, he tore off his Plasters,
opened the Lips of his Wound with his own Hand, and let forth a Soul that was
unwilling to stay in the Body, after that his Wife had forsaken hers. Val. Max.
L. 4. C. 6. p. 114.

6. Philip, sir-named, the Good, the First Author of that Greatness whereunto
the House of Burgundy did arrive, was about Twenty three Years of Age, when his
Father John Duke of Burgundy was slain by the Villainy and Perfidiousness of
Charles the Dauphin: being informed of that unwelcome News, full of Grief and
Anger as he was, he hasts into the Chamber of his Wife (she was the Dauphin's
Sister) O, said he, my Michalea, thy Brother has murdered my Father. Upon
this his Wife (that loved him dearly) burst forth into Tears and Lamentations,
fearing least this Act of her Brother's would make a Breach betwixt her Husband
and her: which her Husband taking Notice of, comforted her, saying, Be of good
cheer; though it was thy Brother's, yet it is not thy fault; neither will I
esteem or love thee less for it, etc. Which accordingly he made good, so long
as they lived together. Lips. Monit. L. 2. C. 17. p. 388. Pol. p. 200. Clark's
Mar. c. 65. p. 291. Wanley's Wonders of the Little World. p. 143.

7. Mr. Samuel Fairclough, his Wife dying in Childbed, was blamed for his
great Sorrow for such a pious Relation. See his Life.

CHAP. LIII. Good Children Remarkable.
THat old celebrated Proverb in our Church, Train up a Child in the way he
should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it: has so much truth in
it, that a Good Education will either improve and meliorate the Nature of
Persons, or haunt them with continual Checks, and Uneasiness of Thought all
their Life after: either they shall be made better by the Impression of early
Notions upon their Hearts, or smart for their Disobedience and Obstinacy. For
certainly a crooked Child seldom grows straight with Age: and if a Plant is not
flexible when young, it will grow stiffer and more obdurate with time. We use
to Imprint the Seal, when the Wax is warm and soft, and Sow our Seed at
Seed-time, not in the Drought of Summer, or the Coldness of Winter. Every Body
that has Eyes, takes Notice of the Rising Sun, and the first opening of the
Day: every Gardener and Farmer loves to see his Seeds and Grain, and Plants
promise well at the first; And who is there so improvident among Christians, as
not to take notice and rejoice in the early Product of their Instructions and
Endeavors; but especially to see them grateful and good in their particular
Relations?

1. Ant. Wallaeus attended upon his Parents so carefully in the time of their
Sickness, and so comforted them with Divine Consolations; that at the Hour of
Death they both blessed him, and gave this Testimony of him, that he had never
offended them in all his Life. Clark's Eccles. History, p. 471.

2. Q. cicero, Brother of Marcus, being proscribed and sought after to be slain
by the Triumvirate, was hid by his Son, who for that cause was hurried to
Torments; but by no Punishments or Tortures could he forced to betray his
Father. The Father moved with the Piety and Constancy of the Son, of his own
accord offered himself to Death, least for his sake they should determine with
utmost severity against his Son. Zonar. Annual. Tom. 2. p. 86. Xiphil. in
Augusto, p. 60.

3. There happened in Sicily, (as it has often) an Irruption of Aetna, now
called Mount Gibel; it murmurs, burns, belches up Flames, and throws out its
fiery Entrails, making all the World to fly from it. It happened then, that in
this violent and horrible breach of Fire (every one flying and carring away
what they had most precious with them) Two Sons, the one called Anapias, the
other Amphinomus, careful of the Wealth and Goods of their Houses, reflected on
their Father and Mother, both very old, who could not save themselves from the
Fire by slight: And where shall we, said they, find a more precious Treasure
than those who begat us? The one took up his Father on his Shoulders, the other
his Mother, and so made passage through the Flames. It is an admirable thing,
that God, in the Consideration of this Piety, though Pagans, did a Miracle; for
the Monuments of all Antiquity witness, that the devouring Flames staid at this
Spectacle, and the Fire wasting and broiling all about them, the Way only which
these two good Sons passed, was Tapestry'd with fresh Verdure, and called
afterward by Posterity, The Field of the Pious, in Memory of this Accident.
Causs. Hic. Tom. 1. L 3. p. 113. Lon. Theatr. p. 272. Solin. C. 11. p. 225.
Camerar. Oper. Subciscent. 1. C. 86. p. 401.

4. Sir Thomas Moore, being Lord Chancellor of England, at the same time that
his Father was a Judge of the King's Bench, he would always at his going to
Westminster, go first to the King's Bench, and ask his Father Blessing, before
he went to sit in the Chancery. Baker's Chron. p. 406. Fuller H. S. L. 1. C. 6.
p. 13.

5. The Carriage of Mr. Herbert Palmer toward his Parents was very dutiful and
obsequious; not only during his Minority, but even afterward: which was very
evident in that Honor and Respect which he continued to express to his Aged
Mother, to the Day of her Death. Clark's Exampl. Vol. 1. C. 23.

6. Our King Edward the First returning from the Wars in Palestine, rested
himself in Sicily, where the Death of his Son and Heir coming first to his Ear,
and afterward the Death of the King his Father, he sorrowed much more for the
loss of his Father, than of his Son: whereat King Charles of Sicily greatly
wondered; and asking the Reason of it, had this Answer returned him: The loss of
Sons is but light, because it may be easily repaired; but the Death of Parents
is irremediable, because they can never be bad again. Idem, ex Speed Chron.

7. Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston enjoyed his Father a less time than his
Grandfather; his Father being removed by Death long before his Grandfather:
but yet we may easily gather what his Carriage to him was, from the high and
extensive Value he set upon his Memory; as he used to please himself to
Discourse of his Father: affirming, That he was a very Godly Man; and that it
was a great Disadvantage for him to part with him so young. These things, and
others, he would often declare to his Children and Friends, dropping many
Tears, to show his great and strong Affection: and when he made his Will, he
there expressed an importunate Desire to his Executors, that the Bones of his
Father might be dug out of the Earth, (where they were buried) and laid by
his own Body in a new vault, he ordered his Executors to erect for the same
purpose. Thus, though he could not live with his Father as long as he would
have desired, yet he designed that their Bodies, or Relics, should lie
together 'till the happy Resurrection-Day; which certainly did denote a Noble
Veneration, and a most raised Filial Affection: See his Life.

CHAP. LIVE. Remarkable Instances of an Early Piety, or Children Good betimes.
TO see young Trees newly planted, hopeful and promising, is a very lovely and
inviting sight: A Jeremiah sanctified from his Mother's Womb, a Joshua pious in
his young years, a Timothy well instructed in the Scriptures from a Child, are
very pleasant in sacred Records. And when we see the Seeds of Piety spring up
so soon, we are ready to impute it to the Influence of Heaven, and the Efficacy
of Divine Grace: And though sometimes these Blossoms die before any Fruit
appears, and a good Beginning has not always a good Ending; yet certainly (
and Lot, Solomon, or our Senses, be Witnesses in the case) it is the likeliest
way to end well, when we begin well.

1. Mr. Samuel Crook, to show that his Heart, even in his Youth, was drawn up
toward the Pole of Heaven, translated diverse of David's Psalms, and composed
several Hymns of his own. Some of which he sung with Tears of Joy and Desire in
his last Sickness. See his Life, p. 4.

2. Origin when a Child, was mightily inquisitive into the Meaning of the
Scriptures, even tiring his Parents with asking Religious Questions, comforting
his Father in Prison with Letters, and hardly forbearing to offer himself to
Martyrdom. Dr. Cave 's Prim. Christian.

3. K. Edward VI. took Notes of such things he heard in Sermons, which more
nearly related to himself. Hist. of the Reform.

4. Queen Elizabeth wrote a good hand, before she was Four years old, and
understood Italian. Ibid.

5. Sir Thomas Moore never offended his Father, nor was ever offended by him.

6. Archbishop Usher at 10 years old found himself wrought upon by a Sermon on
Romans 12.1. I beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, etc. Dr. Bernard in
his Life.

7. Dr. W. Gouge, when at School, was continually studious, even at play-hours;
conscionable in secret Prayer, and sanctifying the Sabbath. Clark 's Lives.

8. Mr. Tho. Gataker was often chid by his Father from his Book. Ibid.

9. Mr. Jeremy Whitaker, when a Schoolboy, would frequently go in company 8 or
10 miles to hear a warming Sermon; and took Notes, and was helpful to others in
repeating them; and though his Father often and earnestly endeavored to divert
him, yet when a Boy, he was unmovable in his Desires to be a Minister. Ibid.

10. Mr. Herbert Palmer was esteemed sanctified even from the Womb; at the Age
of 4 or 5 years, he would cry to go to his Lady Mothers (Sir Tho. Palmer being
his Father) that he might hear somewhat of God. When a Child, little more than
Five years old, he wept in reading the Story of Joseph, and took much pleasure
in learning Chapters by heart: he learned the French Tongue almost so soon as
he could speak; he often affirmed, that he never remembered the learning of it;
by his Discourse he could hardly be distinguished from a Native Frenchman.
When at the Latin-School, at vacant hours, others were at play, he was
constantly observed to be reading studiously by himself. Ibid.

11. Mr. Tho. Cartwright, in his younger years, rose many times in the night to
seek out places to pray in. Ibid.

12. Mr. Rich. Sedgwick when he was a Schoolboy, and living with his Uncle,
and the rest of the Family were at their Games and Dancing, he would be in a
Corner mourning. Ibid.

13. Mr. Julius Herring, when a Boy was noted for his Diligence in Reading the
Scriptures: On Play-days, he, with 2 or 3 more School-fellows, would pray
together, repeat the Heads of the Catechism, with the Sermons which they heard
last Lord's Day. Ibid.

14. Mrs. Margaret Corbet, Daughter of Sir Nathaniel Brent, (Warden of
Merton-Colledge) whom about 14 years of Age, wrote Sermons with Dexterity, and
left many Volumes of such Notes writ with her own Hand. Ibid.

15. Mrs. Elizabeth Wilkinson was from her Childhood very Docile, took much
pains in writing Sermons, and collecting special Notes out of Practical
Divines. When I was (says she, in a Narrative written with her own Hand) about
Twelve years old, upon reading in the Practice of Piety, concerning the happy
State of the Godly, and the miserable Condition of the Wicked in their Death,
and so on to all Eternity; it pleased the Lord so to affect my Heart, as from
that time, I was wrought over to a desire to walk in the Ways of God. Ibid.

16. Mr. Caleb Vernon could read the Bible distinctly at Four years old; and by
six became very apt in places of Scripture, the Theory thereof, and moral
Regard thereto: exactly observant of his Parents, with ambition to serve and
please them in love. To begin a Correspondency with a good Friend of his, Mr.
R. D. then in London, he wrote this his first Letter at Ten years of age.

Dear Sir,
I Received your kind Letter, for which I thank you, and desire the Book which
you sent me may be made of good effect to my Soul, and that my Soul may be
filled with the Love of God' being ready for the Day of his coming to judge the
World in Righteousness, when the Kings of the Earth shall tremble, and the
Rulers shall be astonished at the Brightness of his coming; when he shall come
with his Holy Angels in Power and Glory, to judge the Earth in the Valley of
Jehoshaphat. O! that my Soul was fit for his Coming, that I may be like a
flourishing Flower in the Garden of Eden, prepared for the Lord Christ. This is
a Trying-day, the Lord is searching Jerusalem with Candles, to find out
outside Professors, who do make clean the outside of the Cup and Platter,
when their Hearts are full of Deceit. Oh! that we might be comforting one
another with his coming; putting on the Breast Plate of Faith, and laying aside
the Traditions of Men. O! how near is his coming, even at the door: therefore
we should be watching, for we know not what hour he will come. My Brother John
and Cousin Deb. thank you for your kind Letters. I remain

April 1663. Caleb Vernon.


After some time, falling sick, he earnestly desired to be Baptized, (I suppose
being born of Anabaptist-Parents) saying, Father, pray have you come to any
Conclusion to day about my being baptized? I pray Father, do, for indeed I
cannot be satisfied, and I would fain be in Christ's Fold. After which being
admonished, and many gracious Expressions uttered, he died comfortably. See his
Life, printed An. 1665.

17. A Child of one Master Maxey of Lime, when it was but Two years old, would
use to kneel down often, and with his Eyes and Hands lift up toward Heaven,
seemed to be very serious in Prayer; and as it grew older would often be at
Prayer by it self, and ask very strange Questions of its Mother concerning
Spiritual Matters, much beyond its Age: The Mother expounded all these things
as proceeding rather from childish Imitation, than from any Relish or
Understanding that it had of those things. At last when the Child was Five
years old, in the midst of his Sports, as he was Whipping-top, on a sudden he
cast away all, and went to his Mother, saying to her with much Joy: Mother, I
must go to Heaven, will you go with me? asking her the same Question the second
time. His Mother answered, Yes, dear Child, when God shall please: But how do
thou know that thou shall go to Heaven? The Child answered, God has told me
so, I must go to Heaven; for I love God, and God loves me. After which time he
never played more: About three Weeks, or a Month after, he sickned and died,
speaking much during his Sickness of his going to Heaven; still asking his
Mother whether she would not go with him? And when his Mother asked him whether
he would not stay with her here? he refused, rather desiring that she should go
with him. Master White.

18. A nameless Person, J. B. gives this Relation concerning her self.

About seventeen years since, a Child of mine about six years of age, when I
have bid him go forth to play, he has come in again very solitary, and other
Children would swear, and be very debaucht: I would ask him, Robert, what
aileth you, why do you not go to play? He would answer, That he had no Fellows
to play withal, but such as would swear, and the like; and they could not be
(said he) God's Children. I would say, why not Child? then he would say, No
Mother, though I am but a little way in my Book, yet I have learnt that God
will not pardon such Sins as Swearing: I have sometimes said, yes Child, I hope
God will pardon them, else God help thy Father, and God help us all: Then he
has replied, Mother, with great Repentance God can forgive, for his Mercies
are great; but good Mother let us forbear that which is evil. And many times I
had such conference with that Child, who seeing me troubled about it, he has
said, Good Mother be content, their Parents are such, and they must needs learn
after them.

I thought upon my Child's words; and having before often offended God, about
gathering of Flowers in my Garden on the Lord's-days, and the Thoughts of other
Failings in my Conversation, it wrought great trouble upon my Heart; so that I
was much afflicted in Soul, considering that my Child so young should give me
such Instructions; which has proved a Blessing to me, to bring me home to him:
I did make then some doubt whether God would forgive me those Sins; and about
that time hearing Dr. V. preach several Sermons at O. and particularly upon
that Text, That we are but Sojourners and Travelers here; and showing, That we
are not at home, therefore we must keep on the straightway to Heaven, and take
heed of the broad-way, which leads to Hell; which then, as also other means
since, did much throw me down low under the sense of Sin, yet not without
sometimes some Refreshments. Believers Experiences, p. 54.

19. Bishop Usher at Fourteen years old was judged fit, and admitted to the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and his usual Custom was, the Afternoon before,
to retire himself in private, and to spend it in a strict Self-Examination, and
deep Humiliation for all his Sins; wherein he had such Enlargements of Heart,
that a Stream of Tears flowed from his Eyes, which afterward he often recalled
to mind, both as a Provocation and Censure of himself: When he was elder of
years, there was a certain place by a Waterside, whither he often resorted,
sorrowfully to surveigh his Sins, and with Floods of Tears to confess, and
bewail them; wherein he found so much Sweetness and Communion with God, that
he thirsted for such comfortable Opportunities, and it was his usual Custom to
spend Saturdays in the Afternoon in these Duties. Amongst other Sins he much
bewailed his too much love to Humane Learning, which made him as glad when
Monday came, that he might renew his Studies, as he was when Sabbath Day came,
wherein he was to apply himself to the Service of God; and it cost him many
Tears, that he could not be more Heavenly-minded at that Age. See his Life.

20. Lancelot Andrews Bishop of Winchester, from his Youth declared an
extraordinary worth, that he was made up of Learning and Virtue; in both of
them so eminent, that it was hard to judge which had the Precedence and
greatest Interest; though it was truly asserted from his Comtemporaries that
there was not any kind of Learning that he was a stranger to, but in his
Profession admirable; which was as well, if not better known abroad, than
admired at home. England's Worthies, by Will. Winstanley, p. 366, 367.

21. Mr. Bernard Gilpin being yet a very Child, gave Testimony of a future
Holiness upon this Occasion. A begging Friar lodging at his Father's House one
Saturday Night, in order to preach the next day; but eating at Supper like a
Glutton, and drinking like a Beast, in the Morning as if he had been some young
Saint lately dropped from Heaven, he caused the Bell to tole to the Sermon; and
in the midst there of blustering out certain good words, he presumed to grow
hot against some Sinners of the time, and amongst the rest to thunder boldly
against Drunkenness. Young Gilpin who had but newly got the use of his Tongue,
having observed (as it seemed) the hateful Baseness of the Man by his Oversight
the Night before, and now hearing the Beast cry out so loud against these
Crimes which himself had so lately been guilty of, as he was sitting in his
Mother's Lap in the Church, suddenly cries out in these words: O Mother, do
you hear how this Fellow dates speak against Drunkenness, who was drunk himself
yester-night at our House? The Mother made speed to stop the Child's Mouth with
her Hand, that he might speak no further. Mr. Gilpin 's Life by Bp. Carleton,
p. 2.

22. Mr. Samuel Fairclough at 13 years of Age, upon hearing a Sermon of Mr.
Ward's, concerning Zacheus his Restitution, began to be very serious and
devout: as will be showed under the Chapter of Restitution.

23. Jabez-Eliezer Russel, Son to William Russel, in the Parish of St.
Bartholomew the Great, London, was remarkable in his Life for his Obedience to
his Parents in what they commanded him:

-- For his addicting himself to the reading of the holy Scriptures: For his
great Memory; he was able to give a particular Account of most of the memorable
Passages both in the Old and New Testament, with the Names of Persons, their
Actions, and the Circumstances thereof: To say no more, his retentive Faculty
was so capacious, that whatever he read, he made it his own.

-- His Meditations in the Word of God, in the Practice of which he was both
frequent and serious: His frequent Praying; taking notice of the Words and
Works of God; fearing Sin greatly, wishing he had died, when he came first out
of the Womb; because then he should not have sinned, etc. And in his Sickness,
having a great sense of both Original and Actual Sin; using such Expressions as
these; I shall see the holy Angels; and I shall be ashamed, they will be so
glorious; for I am Dust and Ashes; and there I shall see the Twelve Apostles
sit upon Twelve Thrones, etc. And to his Mother, 'Prayer will do me more good,
and is better than Sleep; I am best when I pray. And at last, enquiring after
his Sisters Names, because as was supposed, he thought he should know them in
Heaven, though he never saw them on Earth: and so fell asleep in the Lord, Feb.
19. -- 71. aged 9 years, 2 months, and 6 days. See the Account of his Life and
Death.

24. Mrs. Luce Perrot late Wife of Mr. Rob. Perrot of London Minister, amongst
her last Speeches, has these; I would not for ten thousand Worlds, but have
began to seek God betimes; he then took me off from other Delights, and carried
me on step by step: I then could see nothing in the World to delight in: I then
thought Holidays a Wearisomness to me; would sometimes sit and see others play,
but took no delight therein, for which they would laugh at me; and tell me, I
studied Divinity, etc. -- When Children grow crooked at first, they are hardly
ever set straight again afterward, etc. See the Printed Account of her
Speeches, p. 1, 2.

25. Tho. Aquinas is reported, to have loved his Book so dearly when he was but
a Child, that he must have it constantly to Bed with him; and if at any time,
when he awaked out of Sleep, he missed it, he would fall a crying. Pontan.
Attic. Bellar.

26. Susanna Bickes, who died in the 14th Year of her Age, Sept. 1. 1664. of a
Pestilence at Leyden; The first night she was seized, betook her self earnestly
to Private Prayer; breaking forth into those words, Psalm. 119. If thy law were
not my Delight, I should perish in my Affliction; and Heb. 12.10, 11. No
chastening for the present seems joyous, etc. and then sighing to God, with her
Eyes up to Heaven, she said, Be merciful to me, O Father, be merciful to me
poor Sinner, according to thy Word. Commending that Text, Ps. 55.23. to her
sorrowful Parents, and Isaiah 49.15, 16 addding, 'O comfortable words for both
Mothers and Children, etc. Upon the Lord's Day she minded her Father of having
her Name given up to be remembered in the Public Prayers; saying, she had
learned, That the effectual fervent Prayer of the Righeeous availes much. Yet
out of Tenderness for their Safety, would not have the Ministers to visit her,
but rather cast her self upon the Lord's own Hand, and accept of the Visits of
others, whom the Providence of God should send unto her. One of her Visitants
having told her, that the Minister was taken ill at Church, she wept bitterly;
saying to her Father, Have I not matter enough for weeping, having heard but
just now that Domine de W^t was taken sick in the Pulpit, and went home so ill?
It is a sad Token for the People; for when God is about to smite a Land or a
City, oftentimes he smites and removes their Pastors: and ought we not then to
lay such a thing to heart? although for my part I know that I shall not long
live to behold the Evil which may come, and which I have helped to procure as
well as others: And I therefore pray with David, Ps. 25. Remember not, O Lord,
the Sins of my Youth, nor my Trespasses, according to thy tender Mercy;
Remember thou me for thy Goodness sake, O Lord. O, how do I long! Even as the
Heart pants, etc. Ps. 42. and Ps. 51. to the 11th verse, which she enlarged
upon much, especially the 5th verse, Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in
Sin did my Mother conceive me; citing other Texts to the same purpose, as Genesis
5.3. Eccl. 7.29, etc. She desired her Father to go to Domine de Wit and
Ardenois, and thank them for the Learning and Instruction she had received by
their Catechizing: -- O! that sweet Catechizing, said she, unto which I did
always resort with Gladness, and waited upon it without Weariness, until it
were ended. I have seen and understood, that there is so little Comfort and
Good, and so much Vanity in the Kermis and idle Holidays of Play, that I have
grieved and been ashamed both for young and old People, to see them so glad and
mad upon Vanity. Also dear Father, ye shall give Thanks to my Schoolmaster and
School-mistress, who taught me the first beginnings of my Reading. Professing,
that her Parents Carefulness for her Education and Instruction had been better
to her, than if they had provided ten thousand Gilders of Portion for her. With
many Arguments and Texts she comforted her Parents, as 2 Samuel 24.14. 2 Samuel
12.23. adding, so ought ye to comfort your self after my Death, and say, Our
Child is well; for we know, that they who trusted in God are well. My dear
Mother, who has done so much for me, you must promise to me, that after my
Death ye shall not sorrow so much; for I am afraid for you, when I consider
your Grief for me, and for my other Sister and Brother, who are gone through
Death before me. And consider your Neighbor who has lost her two Sons, and
has no more Children. Ye shall both of ye promise me, that ye will comfort one
another. Comfort your selves with Job, who having lost all his Children, said,
The Lord has given, etc. And John 16.33. etc. O Dear Father and Mother! I wax
more and more feeble and weak. Oh! that I may quietly fall asleep in his Bosom!
Mark 10.14, 16. I he here as a Child, O Lord, I am a Child, receive me into thy
gracious Arms. O Lord! Grace, Grace; and not Justice: for if thou enter into
Judgment with me, I cannot stand: yea, no Man living shall in thy sight be
justified. After a little Rest and Slumber, she spoke to her Father with much
Joy and Gladness, 1 Cor. 15.54, etc. Death is swallowed up of Victory, etc. She
commanded afterward, Psalm. 84. to her Mother, saying, Read that Psalm, Dear
Mother; and therewith ye may comfort one another. As for me, I am more and more
spent, and draw near unto my last Hour. Pray with me, pray that the Lord would
vouchsafe me a soft Death. And when they had prayed with her, she turned to her
Mother, and with much Affection said, Ah, my Dear Loving Mother! that which
comes from the Heart, does ordinarily go to the Heart. Once come and kiss me,
before I leave you, and also my Dear Father, and my Sister: and, Father, let my
Sister be trained up in the Ways of God, as I have been; I bewailed and wept
for my Sister; thinking she would die, and now she weeps for me. Also she took
her young little Sister in her Ams, a Child of Six Months old, and kissed it
with much Affection, as if her Bowels had been moved, speaking with many
Heartbreaking Words, both to her Parents and the Children, 'till her Father
said to one standing by, Take away that young poor Lambkin from the hazard of
that fiery Sickness: Give her away, for ye have too much already to bear. Well,
Father, said she, did not God preserve the Three Children in the fiery Furnace?
Citing also, Isa. 43.3. After a little Rest awaking again, she rehearsed, 1 Cor.
15.42, 43. Isa 57.1, 2. Job 19.25, 26, 27. John 5.28, etc. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. and
descanted pathetically upon them; adding, My Dear Parents, now we must shortly
part; my Speech fails me: pray the Lord for a quiet Close to my Combat. -- I
go to Heaven, and there we shall find one another. I go to Jesus Christ, and to
my Brother Jacob, who did cry so much to God, and call upon him, to the very
last Breath; and to my little Sister, which was but Three Years of Age when it
died, etc.

At last, after she had prayed a pretty space by herself, she asked her
Parents, If she had angered or grieved them at any time, or done any thing that
became her not? Craving Forgiveness of them. Then she began to dispose her
Books, and other little things, with some proportion of Prudence; and after a
short Discant on the following Scriptures, Psalm. 23. Romans 8. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. 1
Cor. 6.20. Isa. 53 Joh. 1. 1. Cor. 6.11. Rev. 7. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. she concluded
with these Words: My Soul shall now part from this Body, and shall be taken up
into the Heavenly Paradise; -- there shall I dwell, and go no more out; but sit
and sing, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, etc. O Lord God, into thy Hands
I commend my Spirit. O Lord, be gracious, be merciful to me a poor Sinner. And
hereupon she fell a sleep, Sept. 1. between Seven and Eight in the Evening,
having obtained, according to her Prayers a quiet and soft Departure.

26. Jacob Bickes, abovementioned, Brother to the aforesaid Susanna, was
visited Three or Four Weeks before his Sister, and slept most of his time,
'till near his Death; but so often as he awaked, he gave himself to pray. Upon
motion made to send for the Physician, he said, Dear Father and Mother, I will
not have the Doctor any more: The Lord shall help me. I know he shall take me
to himself, and then he shall help all. -- After Prayer: Come now, Dear Father
and Mother, said he, and kiss me. I know now, that I shall die. Adieu, Dear
Father and Mother: Adieu, my Dear Sister: Adieu all. Now shall I go to Heaven,
unto God, and Jesus Christ, and the Holy Angels. Father, know ye not what is
said by Jer. 17. Blessed is he who trusts in the Lord. Now I shall trust in
him, and he shall bless me. And 1 John 2. Little children, love not the world:
for the world passes away. Away then, all that is in the World; away with all
my pleasant Things in the World: Away with my Dagger, (which a Student had
given him) for where I go, there is nothing to do with Dagger and Sword: Men
shall not fight there, but praise God. Away with all my Books; for where I go,
there is nothing to be done with Books; there I shall know and be learned
sufficiently, all things of true Wisdom and Learning without Books. The Father
telling him, God would be near to him, and help him. Yea, Father, the Apostle
Peter says, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. I shall
humble myself under the mighty Hand of God, and he shall help and lift me up.
-- God has given me so strong a Faith upon himself, through Jesus Christ, that
the Devil himself shall flee from me: for it is said, John 3. He who believes
on the Son, has everlasting life: and has overcome the wicked one, 1 John 2.
Now I believe in Jesus Christ my Redeemer; and he will not leave, nor forsake
me; but shall give unto me Eternal Life: then shall I sing, Holy, Holy, Holy,
is the Lord of Sabath. And with this short Word of Prayer, Lord, be merciful to
me a poor Sinner: he quietly breathed out his Soul, and slept in the Lord, aged
Seven Years. August 8. 1664. Extracted out of a Pamphlet called, An Edifying
Wonder of Two Children, Printed at London, for Richard Tomlins. 1667.

27. The Reverend Mr. Clark, in his Works, quotes a Child of Two Years old,
that looked toward Heaven. -- And credible History acquaints us, with a Martyr
of Seven Years old, that was whipped almost to Death, and never shed one Tear,
nor complained, and at last had his Head struck off.

28. Of Mary Warren, born in May 1651, aged Ten Years, in May 1661. -- When
this Child was about Five or Six Years old, she had a new plain Tammy Coat; and
when she was made ready, was to be carried with other Children into Morefields:
but having looked upon her Coat, how fine she was, she presently went to her
Chair, sat down, her Tears running down her Eyes, she wept seriously by
herself: her Mother seeing it, said to her, How now? Are you not well? What Is
the matter that you weep? The Child answered, Yes, I am well; but I would I had
not been made ready: for I am afraid my fine Clothes will cast me down to Hell.
Her Mother said, It Is not our Clothes, but wicked Hearts that hurt us. She
answered, Aye, Mother, fine Clothes make our Hearts proud. -- What next
follows, was written by her Father, on Friday Night, October. 4. 1661. Her Mother
asked her, If she were willing to die? she answered. ' Aye, very willing; for
then I shall sin no more; for I know Christ's Blood has made Satisfaction for
my Sins. October the Fifth, her Mother going softly to the Chamber Door, she
heard her speaking alone, and she listened, and heard her say thus, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, and receive thy poor Creature out of all my Pains. On the
Lord's Day, ( October. 6.) she said thus, Here is nothing here but sin, I am
willing to die; but either to live or to die, which the Lord pleases, his Will
be done: and so it will, whether I will or no, On Tuesday at Night, October. 8.
seeing her Mother weeping, she said, Mother, do not weep for me, but leave me
to the Lord, and let him do with me what he pleases. And then clasping her
Arms about her Mother's Neck, her Mother said, Thou embracest me; but I trust
thou art going to the Embracings of the Lord Jesus. She answered, Mother, I
know it, that when I go from hence, I shall go into Health and Happiness; or
else I should not undergo all my Pains with so much patience. More Expressions
of Mary Warren. Pray you, Mother, take off these Plasters, for I would not
have them: I would have no Doctors, or Apothecaries, for God shall be my
Physician, and he will heal me. I do not value the Things of this World no more
than Dirt. Her Mother had told one, That she thought her Daughter had Assaults
of Satan; she once looked very ghastly: and now her Daughter said thus: Once I
think I looked ghastly, and turned my Head on one side, and on the other; Satan
stood upon my left side, and God was upon my right side, and opened the Gates
of Heaven for me; and he told me, Satan should not hurt me, though he sought to
devour me like a roaring Lion. I am very sore from the Crown of my Head, to the
Sole of my Foot; but I am so full of Comfort and Joy, that I do feel but little
of my Pain; I do not know whether I shall live or die, but whether I live or
die, it will be well for me; I am not in trouble for my sins, God is satisfied
with his Son Jesus Christ, for he has washed them away with his Blood. Then
her Sister standing by, she said, Sister Betty, and Sister Anne, be sure your
first Work be in the Morning to seek the Lord by Prayer, and likewise in the
Evening; and give Thanks for your Food: for you cannot pray too ofen to the
Lord; and though you cannot speak such Words as others have, yet the Lord will
accept of the Heart; for you do not know how soon your Speech may be taken away
as mine was. She desired her Mother thus: Do not let too much Company be here
late at Night, lest it should hinder them from seeking the Lord in Duty at
home. I know not whether I shall live or die; but if I die, and if you will
have a Sermon, I desire this may be the Text; the Place I do not know, but the
Words may be comfortable to you: That David, when his Child was sick, he
clothed himself in Sackcloth, and wept; but when his Child was dead, he washed
and eat Bread. For you have wept much, while I have been sick: and if I die,
you have cause to rejoice. My Comfort is in the Lord, there is Comfort indeed:
Though we may seek Comfort here, and the Glory of this World, yet what is all
that? All will be nothing, when we come to lie upon a Deathbed, then we would
fain have the Love of God, and cannot get it: I am full of Comfort and Joy.
Though my Pains are very great, yet I am full of Joy and Comfort: I was very
full of Comfort before, but I am fuller of Joy this Hour than I have been yet.
It is better to live Lazarus's Life, and to die Lazarus's Death, than to live
Dives's Life: he had his Delicates, and afterward would have been glad to have
had Lazarus dip his Finger in Water, and cool his Tongue. The last Night I
could not stir my Head, Hand, nor Foot, but by and by the Lord did help me to
move my Head a little, and at length my Body. O what a good God have I, that
can cast down and raise up in a moment!

29. Of the Expressions of an hopeful Child, the Daughter of Mr. Edward
Scarfield, that was but Eleven Years of Age, in March 1661: Gathered from a
Letter written by one fearing God, that lived in the House with the Child. --
In August last, this Child was sick of a Fever; in which time she said to her
Father, (who is a holy, humble, precious Man) I am afraid, I am not prepared to
die: and fell under much trouble of Spirit, being sensible, not only of actual
Sins, but of her lost Estate without Christ, in Unbelief, (as Ephesians. 2.12. John
16.8, 9.) and she wept bitterly, crying out thus, My sins are greater than I
can bear, I doubt God will not forgive them: telling her Father, I am in
unbelief, and I cannot believe. Yet she was drawn out to pray many times in
those words of Psalm. 25. For thy Name's sake, O Lord, pardon my sin, for it is
great. Thus she lay often mourning for sin, and said, I had rather have Christ
than Health. She would repeat many Promises of God's Mercy and Grace; but said,
she could not believe. But whilst her Father was praying. the Lord raised her
Soul up to believe; as she told her Father when Prayer was ended, Now I believe
in Christ, and I am not afraid of Death. -- After this, she said, I had rather
die than sin against God. Since that time she has continued quiet in mind, as
one that has Peace with God. -- Her Father says, that since she was Five
Years old, he remembered not that either a Lie, or an Oath, has ever come out
of her Mouth; neither would she have wronged any to the value of a Pin. For
these two last Relations, I Am beholding to Mr. Henry Jessey.

Next follows a Narrative of the Conversions and happy Deaths of several young
Children; extracted from Mr. White's and Mr. Janeway's Treatises upon that
Subject, to which the Reader is referred for a much larger Account.
1. THere was a Child of whom many things which I here relate, I was an
Ear-witness of, and other things which I shall speak of him, I am fully
satisfied of.

This little Child, when he died was in Coats, somewhat above eight years old,
of singular Knowledge, Affections, and Duties for his Age, of whom that I may
give a more full Account:

For his Knowledge: -- 1. He asked how the Angels could sin, since there were
none to tempt them, and they were with God? 2. It being told him that all Sins
and Duties were commanded in the Ten Commandments, and forbid; I asked him what
Commandment forbad Drunkenness? He said, Thou shall not kill, for they
quartelled and killed one another: His Father asked him, who bid you learn your
Book? and there is no Commandment says, Thou shall learn thy Book? The Child
answered in these words, or to this purpose; It is said, Thou shall honor thy
Father and thy Mother, you bid me learn my Book: He asked his Father when he
was at Dinner, what became of Children that died before Baptism? he made a
little stop that he might answer him suitable to his Capacity; the Child
prevented him, saying, I think it is thus, God knows all things, he knows which
of those Children, had they lived, would have served him, them he takes to
Heaven; and he knows which would not have served him, them he casts into Hell.
I set not this down as a true Answer to the Question, but it argued more than
ordinary consideration in a Child.

For his Affections; 1. Some years since, his Mother found him crying: His
Mother taking him into her Lap, asked him why he cried? he answered with many
Tears, he feared he should go to Hell; yet he served God as well as he could.
2. Another time being found weeping upon a Lord's Day, his Mother asked him why
he cried? he said, Because he remembered no more of the Sermon. 3. Other times
he had wept, lest he should not go to Heaven.

For his Practices; -- I bless God his Practices were not unequal to his
Affections and Knowledge; he was often found in Corners at Prayer: When my Wife
sent him upon an Errand, she would ask him why he staid? he would answer (with
much ado) that he thought there was no great haste, so he stayed a little at
Prayers; he spent a quarter of an hour daily in secret Prayer: he got his
Brother to keep a Diary, but he bid that we should not know of it till his
Deathbed; wherein he set down many of his Sins, but none of his Duties; for
them he said were so few, that he could easily remember them: Some of which
Sins were these, 1st. He whetted his Knife upon a Lord's Day. 2d. He did not
reprove one that he heard swear. 3d. He once omitted Prayer to go to play. 4th
He found his Heart dead, and therefore omitted Prayer. He one day hearing the
Bell toll, said, He would not have any Rings given at his Burial, but a good
Book that may do them good.

2. There was a little Child which frequented that excellent Duty of Secret
Prayer, and would ask the Mother strange Questions concerning Heaven and God;
and the Mother thought the Child had heard some discoursing of those Questions,
and so had taken them from their Conferences. He once ran to his Mother, and
said, O Mother, I must go to God, will you go with me? His Mother said, I must
go when it pleases God; but my Child, how know thou that thou must go to
God? The Child answered, God told me so; for I love God, and God loves me; and
after that cared no more to play: but about a month after fell sick and died,
always saying in his Sickness, that he must go to God, and asking his Mother
whether she would go with him.

3. I know also a Minister, who told me, That one of his Children, when but
four years old, said to him, that he had seen God and his Angels, and that he
must go to them.

4. This fourth History I have out of the Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. John
Langham, eldest Son to Mr. James Langham, being but five years and a half old,
and it is thus: -- This sweet Child had arrived to that in five years and a
little more, that some which are here (I am afraid) have not arrived to in ten
times that space. -- He was a very dutiful Child to his Parents, and would
exceedingly rejoice when he had done any thing, or had carried himself so, as
to please them. -- He was taken with the Book called the Practice of Piety, and
delighted to be reading in it. -- His Father speaking to him one day about the
Devil and Hell, and things of that Nature; he asked him if he were not afraid
to be alone? he answered, No, for God would defend him. His Father asked him
why he thought so? he replied, that he loved God, and that he hoped God loved
him. -- The day before he died, he desired me to pray for him: I told him if he
would have me to pray for him, he must tell me what I should pray for, and what
he would have God to do for him. He answered, To pardon my Sins. -- Often upon
his Sickbed he would be repeating to himself the fifty fifth Chapter of
Isaiah, and other pieces of Scripture, which in the time of his Health he had
learned by heart.

5. I shall next set down several Passages in a Letter, written by one that
went to School; a rare Example for Children of that Age to follow: I find he
was to get time from his Sleep to write; I shall not set down the whole Letter,
but leave out things of business, and that are introductory.

The Letter.
BRother, pray let me entreat you to fit and prepare your self for Death, for
it knocks at the door of young ones as well as the old; there are as many young
Souls in Golgotha, as old; the Sithe of Mortality mows down Lillies as well as
Grass: One thing I beg of you, and I hope you will not deny me; which is this,
seeing you have Knowledge, Will, Mind, take heed you be not drawn away by
hypocritical Deceivers; for the Scripture says, That in the latter days many
false Prophets shall arise, who would deceive the very Elect themselves if it
were possible; but it is not possible, for God will reserve some for himself.
Thus far Mr. White.


6. Mrs. Sarah Howley at eight years old gave her self much to attending upon
the Word preached, and still continued very tender under it, greatly savouring
what she heard. -- She was much in Secret Prayer, as might easily be perceived
by those who listened at the Chamber Door, and was usually very importunate,
full of tears. -- She was exceeding dutiful to her Parents, very loath to
grieve them in the least: and if she had at any time (which was very rare)
offended them, she would weep bitterly. -- She abhorred Lying, and allowed her
self in no known Sin. -- The Lord's Day before that in which she died, a
Kinsman of hers came to see her, and asking of her, Whether she knew him; she
answered, Yes, I know you; and I desire you would learn to know Christ: you are
young, but you know not how soon you may die. Now and then she dropped these
words: How long sweet Jesus? Finish thy work sweet Jesus, come away sweet
Jesus, come quickly; sweet Lord help, come away, now, now, dear Jesus come
quickly; Good Lord give patience to me to wait thy appointed time, Lord Jesus
help me, help me, She often commended her Spirit into the Lord's Hands; and the
last words which she was heard to speak, were these, Lord help, Lord Jesus
help, Dear Jesus, Blessed Jesus. -- And thus upon the Lord's Day, between Nine
and Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, she slept sweetly in Jesus, and began an
everlasting Sabbath. February 19. 1670.

7. Of a Child that was admirably affected with the Things of God, when he was
between Two and Three Years old. -- A certain little Child, whose Mother had
Dedicated him to the Lord in her Womb: when he could not speak plain, would be
crying after God, and was greatly desirous to be taught good Things. He could
not endure to be put to Bed without Family-Duty, but would put his Parents upon
Duty, and would with much Devotion kneel down, and with great Patience and
Delight continue 'till Duty was at an end. When he had committed any fault, he
was easily convinced of it, and would get into some Corner, and Secret Place,
and with Tears beg Pardon of God, and Strength against such a Sin. He had a
Friend that often watched him, and listened at his Chamber Door, from whom I
received this Narrative. A Friend of his asked him, Whether he were willing to
die? when he was first taken sick; he answered, No; because he was afraid of
his State, as to another World. Why, Child? said the other, thou did pray for
a new Heart, for an humble, and a sincere Heart; and I have heard thee: Did
thou not pray with thy Heart? I hope I did, said he. Not long after, the same
Person asked him again, Whether he were willing to die? He answered, Now I am
willing; for I shall go to Christ. He still grew weaker and weaker, but carried
it with a great deal of sweetness and patience, waiting for his Change, and at
last did cheerfully commit his Spirit unto the Lord; and calling upon the Name
of the Lord, and saying, Lord Jesus, Lord Jes^^, -- in whose Bosom he sweetly
slept, dying, as I remember, when he was about Five or Six Years old.

8. Of a little Girl that was wrought upon, when she was between Four and Five
Years old -- Mary A. when she was between Four and Five Years old, was greatly
affected in hearing the Word of God, and became very solicitous about her Soul,
and Everlasting Condition, weeping bitterly, to think what would become of her
in another World, asking strange Questions concerning God and Christ, and her
own Soul. So that this little Mary, before she was full Five Years old, seemed
to mind the one thing needful, and to choose the better part; and sat at the
Feet of Christ many a time, and often with Tears. She was very Conscientious in
keeping the Sabbath, spending the whole time either in Reading or Praying, or
learning her Catechism, or teaching her Brethren and Sisters. See took great
delight in Reading of the Scripture, and some part of it was more sweet to her,
than her appointed Food; she would get several choice Scriptures by heart, and
discourse of them savourly, and apply them suitably. A little before she died,
she had a great Conflict with Satan, and cried out, I am none of his. Her
Mother seeing her in trouble, asked her what was the matter? she answered,
Satan did trouble me; but now I thank God all is well: I know I am none of his,
but Christ's. After this, she had a great Sense of God's Love, and a Glorious
Sight, as if she had seen the very Heavens open, and the Angels come to receive
her? by which her Heart was filled with Joy, and her Tongue with Praise. Being
desired by the Standers-by, to give them a particular Account of what she saw;
she answered, You shall know hereafter: and so in an Ecstasy of Joy and holy
Triumph, she went to Heaven when she was about Twelve Years old. Hallelujah.

9. Of a Child that began to look toward Heaven, when she was about Four Years
old. -- A certain little Child, when she was about Four Years old, had a
Conscientious Sense of her Duty toward her Parents, because the Commandment
says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. And though she had little advantage of
Education, she carried it with the greatest Reverence to her Parents
imaginable, so that she was no small Credit as well as Comfort to them. She
would be very attentive when she read the Scriptures, and be much affected with
them; and would by no means be persuaded to profane the Lord's Day, but would
spend it in some good Duties. When she was taken sick, one asked her, Whether
she were willing to die? she answered, Yes, if God would pardon her Sins. Being
asked, How her Sins should be pardoned? she answered, Through the Blood of
Christ. There were very many observable Passages in the Life and Death of this
Child, but the Hurry and Grief that her Friends were in, buried them.

10. Charles Bridgman had no sooner learned to speak, but he betook himself to
Prayer. His Sentences were wise and weighty, and well might become some ancient
Christian. His Sickness lasted long, and at least Three Days before his Death,
he prophesied his Departure; and not only that he must die, but the very Day.
The last Words which he spoke, were exactly these: Pray, pray, pray; nay, yet
pray; and the more Prayers, the better all prospers; God is the best Physician;
into his Hands I commend my Spirit. O Lord Jesus receive my Soul: Now close
mine Eyes: Forgive me, Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, all the World. Now I am
well, my Pain is almost gone, my Joy is at hand. Lord have mercy on me, O Lord
receive my Soul unto thee. And thus he yielded his Spirit up unto the Lord,
when he was about Twelve Years old. This Narrative was taken out of Mr. Ambrose
's Life's Lease.

11. Of a poor Child that was awakened when she was about Five Years old. -- A
certain very poor Child, that had a very bad Father, but it was to be hoped a
very good Mother, was by the Providence of God, brought to the sight of a Godly
Friend of mine, who upon the first sight of the Child, had a great pity for
him, and took an Affection to him, and had a mind to bring him for Christ. It
was not long before the Lord was pleased to strike in with the Spiritual
Exhortations of this good Man, so that the Child was brought to a liking of the
things of God. He would ask very excellent Questions, and Discourse about the
Condition of his Soul, and Heavenly Things, and seemed mightily concerned what
should become of his Soul when he should die: so that his Discourse made some
Christians even to stand astonished. He was greatly taken with the great
kindness of Christ in dying for Sinners, and would be in Tears at the mention
of them: and seemed at a strange rate to be affected with the unspeakable Love
of Christ. After the Death of his Mother, he would often repeat some of the
Promises that are made unto Fatherless Children, especially that in Exodus
22.22. Ye shall not afflict any Widow, or the Fatherless Child; if thou afflict
them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry --
These words he would often repeat with Tears, I am Fatherless and Motherless
upon Earth, yet if any wrong me, I have a Father in Heaven who will take my
part; to him I commit myself, and in him is all my trust. Thus he continued in
a Course of Holy Duties, living in the fear of God, and showed wonderful Grace
for a Child, and died sweetly in the Faith of Jesus. My Friend is a Judicious
Christian of many Years Experience, who was no ways related to him, but a
constant Eye and Ear-witness of his Godly Life, and Honorable and Cheerful
Death, from whom I received this Information.

12. Of a notorious wicked Child, who was taken up from begging, and admirably
converted; with an Account of his holy Life, and joyful Death, when he was Nine
Years old. -- A very poor Child of the Parish of Newington-Butts, came begging
to the Door of a Dear Christian Friend of mine, in a very lamentable Case, so
filthy and nasty, that he would even have turned ones Stomach to have looked on
him: but it pleased God to raise in the Heart of my Friend, a great pity and
tenderness toward this poor Child, so that in Charity he took him out of the
Streets, whose Parents were unknown, who had nothing at all in him to commend
him to any ones Charity, but his Misery. A Noble Piece of Charity! And that
which did make the kindness far the greater, was, that there seemed to be very
little hopes of doing any good upon this Child, for he was a very Monster of
Wickedness, and a thousand times more miserable and vile by his Sin, than by
his Poverty. But this Sin and Misery was but a stronger Motive to that gracious
Man to pity him, and to do all that possibly he could to plack this Firebrand
out of the Fire. The Lord soon struck in with his godly Instructions, so that
an amazing Change was seen in the Child; in a few Weeks space he was soon
convinced of the Evil of his Ways: no more News now of his calling of Names,
Swearing, or Cursing; no more taking of the Lord's Name in vain: now he is
Civil and Respective; and such a strange alteration was wrought in the Child,
that all the Parish that rung of his Villainy before, was now ready to talk of
his Reformation; his Company, his Talk, his Employment is now changed, and he
is like another Creature; so that the Glory of God's Free Grace began already
to shine in him. He was made to cry out of himself, not only for his Swearing
and Lying, and other outwardly notorious Sins; but he was in great horror for
the Sin of his Nature, for the Vileness of his Heart, and Original Corruption;
under it he was in so great anguish, that the Trouble of his Spirit made him in
a great measure to forget the Pains of his Body. Being informed how willing and
ready the Lord Christ was to accept of poor Sinners upon their Repentance and
Turning, and being counseled to venture himself upon Christ, for Mercy and
Salvation, he said, He would fain cast himself upon Christ, but he could not
but wonder how Christ should be willing to die for such a vile Wretch as he
was, and he found it one of the hardest things in the World to believe. But at
last it pleased the Lord to give him some shall hopes that there might be Mercy
for him. The Wednesday before he died, the Child lay (...) for about half an
Hour, in which time be thought he saw a Vision of Angels: (...) he was out of
his Trance, he was in a little Pett, and asked his Nurse, Why she did not let
him go? Go, whither Child, said she. Why along with those brave Gentlemen (said
he): but they told me, they would come and fetch me away, for all you, upon
Friday next. And he doubled his Words many times, upon Friday next, those brave
Gentlemen will come for me. And upon Friday Morning he sweetly went to rest,
using that very Expression, Into thy Hands, Lord, I commit my Spirit. He died
punctually at that time which he had spoken of, and in which he expected those
Angels to come to him. He was not much above Nine Years Old when he died. This
Narrative I had from a Judicious Holy Man, unrelated to him, who was an Eye and
Ear-witness to all these things.

13. Of a Child that was very serious at Four Years old. -- John Sudlow was
born of Religious Parents, in the County of Middlesex, whose great Care was to
instill Spiritual Principles into him, as soon as he was capable of
understanding of them; whose Endeavors the Lord was pleased to Crown with the
desired Success: so that (to use the Expression of a Holy Man concerning him)
scarce more could be expected or desired from so little a one. The first thing
that did most affect him, and made him endeavor to escape from the Wrath to
come, and to enquire, what he should do to be saved, was the Death of a little
Brother; when he saw him without Breath, and not able to speak or stir, and
then carried out of Doors, and put into a Pit-hole, he was greatly concerned,
and asked notable Questions about him; but that which was most affecting of
himself, and others, was, Whether he must die too? which being answered, it
made such a deep Impression upon him, that from that time forward, he was
exceeding serious; and this was when he was about Four Years old. When any
Christian Friends have been Discoursing with his Father, if they began to talk
any thing about Religion, to be sure they should have his Company, and of his
own accord he would leave all to hear any thing of Christ, and creep as close
to them as he could, and listen as affectionately, though it were an hour or
two. When he was Reading by himself, in Draiton's Poems, about Noah's Flood,
and the Ark, he asked, Who built the Ark? It being answered, That it was likely
that Noah hired Men to help him to build it. And would they (said he) build an
Ark to save another, and not go into it themselves? Another Question he put was
this: Whether had the greater Glory, Saints, or Angels? It being answered, That
Angels were the most excellent of Creatures, and it is to be thought, their
Nature is made capable of greater Glory than Man's. He said, He was of another
Mind; and his Reason was, Because Angels were Servants, and Saints are
Children; and that Christ never took upon him the Nature of Angels, but he took
upon him the Nature of Saints, and by his being Man, he has advanced Human
Nature above the Nature of Angels. In the time of the Plague he was exceedingly
concerned about his Soul, and Everlasting State; very much by himself upon his
Knees. This Prayer was found written in Shorthand after his Death.

O Lord God and merciful Father, take pity upon me a miserable Sinner, and
strengthen me, O Lord, in thy Faith, and make me one of thy Glorious Saints in
Heaven. O Lord, keep me from this poisonous Infection; however, not my Will,
but thy Will be done, O Lord, on Earth, as it is in Heaven; but, O Lord, if
thou have appointed me to die by it, O Lord, fit me for Death, and give me a
good Heart to bear up under my Afflictions: O Lord God, and merciful Father,
take pity on me thy Child, teach me, O Lord, thy Word, make me strong in Faith.
O Lord, I have sinned against thee, Lord, pardon my Sins; I had been in Hell
long ago, if it had not been for thy Mercy: O Lord, I pray thee to keep my
Parents in thy Truth, and save them from this Infection, if it be thy Will,
that they may live to bring me up in thy Truth. O Lord, I pray thee, stay this
Infection that rages in this City, and pardon their Sins, and try them once
more, and see if they will turn unto thee. Save me, O Lord, from this
Infection, that I may live to praise and glorify thy Name; but O Lord, if thou
have appointed me to die of it, fit me for Death, that I may die with Comfort;
and, O Lord, I pray thee to help me to bear up under all Afflictions, for
Christ his sake. Amen.

These are some of his dying Expressions, -- The Lord shall be my Physician,
for he will cure both Soul and Body. -- Heaven is the best Hospital. -- It is
the Lord, let him do what seems good in his Eyes. Again, -- It is the Lord
that takes away my Health, but I will say as Job did, Blessed be the Name of
the Lord. -- If I should live longer, I should but sin against God. Looking
upon his Father, he said, If the Lord would but lend me the least Finger of his
Hand, to lead me through the dark Entry of Death, I will rejoice in him. An
hour and an half before his Death, a Minister came to Visit him, and asked him,
John, Art thou afraid to die? He answered, No, if the Lord will but comfort me
in that hour. But said the Minister, How can thou expect Comfort, seeing we
deserve none? He answered, No, if I had my Deserts I had been in Hell long ago.
But, replied the Minister, which way do thou expect Comfort and Salvation,
seeing thou art a Sinner? He answered, in Christ alone. In whom, about an hour
and half after, he fell asleep, saying, He would take a long sleep, charging
them that were about him not to wake him. -- He died when he was twelve years
three weeks and a day old.

15. Anne Lane was born of honest Parents in Colebrook in the County of Bucks,
who was no sooner able to speak plain, and express any thing considerable of
Reason, but she began to act as if she was sanctified from the very Womb. --
She was very solicitous about her Soul, what would become of it when she should
die, and where she should live for ever, and what she should do to be saved,
when she was about five years old. I having occasion to lie at Colebrook, sent
for her Father, an old Disciple, an Israelite indeed, and desired him to give
me some account of his Experiences, and how the Lord first wrought upon him. --
He gave me this answer, That he was of a Child somewhat civil, honest, and as
to Man harmless, but was little acquainted with the power of Religion, till
this sweet Child put him upon a through Inquiry into the state of his Soul, and
would still be begging of him, and pleading with him to redeem his time, and to
act with life and vigor in the things of God, which was no small Demonstration
to him of the reality of Invisibles, that a very Babe and Suckling should speak
so feelingly about the things of God, and be so greatly concerned not only
about her own Soul, but about her Father's too, which was the occasion of his
Conversion. -- It was the greatest Recreation to her to hear any good People
talking about God, Christ, their Souls, the Scriptures, or any thing that
concerned another Life. -- She continued thus to walk as a Stranger in the
World, and one that was making haste to a better place. And after she had done
a great deal of work for God and her own Soul, and others too, she was called
home to rest, and received into the Arms of Jesus before she was ten years old;
she departed about 1640.

16. Talitha Alder was the Daughter of a Holy and Reverend Minister in Kent,
who lived near Gravesend. She was much instructed in the Holy Scriptures and
her Catechism, by her Father and Mother; but there appeared nothing
extraordinary in her, till she was between seven and eight years old. -- About
which time, when she was sick, one asked her what she thought would become of
her if she should die? She answered, that she was greatly afraid that she
should go to Hell. -- Upon this, seeing her in such a desponding Condition, a
dear Friend of here is spent the next day in Fasting and Prayer for her. -- After
this, she had a Discovery of her approaching Dissolution, which was no small
comfort to her: Anon (said, she, with a holy Triumph) I shall be with Jesus, I
am married to him, he is my Husband, I am his Bride, I have given my self to
him, and he has given himself to me, and I shall live with him for ever. -- I
am going to Glory, O that all of you were to go with me to that Glory! With
which words her Soul took wing, and went to the Possession of that Glory which
she had some believing sight of before. She died when she was between eight and
nine years old, about 1644.

17. Susanna Bicks was born at Leyden in Holland, Jan. 24. 1650. of very
Religious Parents, whose great care was to instruct and Catechize this their
Child, and to present her to the Minister of the Place, to be publicly
instructed and Catechized. -- It pleased the Lord to bless Holy Education, the
good Example of her Parents, and Catechizing, to the good of her Soul, so that
she soon had a true Savor and Relish of what she was taught, and made an
admirable use of it in a time of need, as you shall hear afterward. That which
was not the least observable in her, was the arden^ Affection she had for the
Holy Scriptures and her Catechism, in which she was thoroughly instructed by the
Godly Divines of the place where she lived, which she could not but own as one
of the greatest Mercies next the Lord Christ. O how did she bless God for her
Catechism, and beg of her Father to go particularly to those Ministers that had
taken so much pains with her to instruct her in her Catechism, and to thank
them from her a dying Child for their good Instructions, and to let them
understand, for their Encouragement to go on in that Work of Catechizing, how
Refreshing those Truths were now to her in the hour of her distress. O that
sweet Catechizing, said she, unto which I did always resort with Gladness, and
attended without Weariness! -- She laid a great charge upon her Parents not to
be over-grieved for her after her Death, urging that of David upon them, while
the Child was sick, he fasted and wept, but when it died, he washed his Face,
and sat up and ear, and said, Can I bring him back again from Death, I shall go
to him, but he shall not return to me. So ought you to say after my Death, Our
Child is well, for we know it shall be well with them that trust in the Lord.
She had a very strong Faith in the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and did
greatly solace her Soul with excellent Scriptures, which do speak the happy
state of Believers, as soon as their Souls are separated from their Bodies; and
what she quoted out of the Scripture, she did excellently and sutably apply to
her own use, incomparably above the common reach of her Sex and Age. That in 1
Cor. 15.42. was a good support to her, The Body is sown in Corruption, but it
should be raised incorruptible; it is sown in dishonor, it shall be raised in
glory; it is sown in weakness, but it shall be raised in power. And then she
sweetly applies it, and takes in this Cordial. Behold thus it is, and thus it
shall be with my poor mortal Flesh, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,
because they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. The
righteous perish, and no Man lays it to heart, and the upright are taken
away, and no Man regards it, that they are taken away from the evil to come,
they shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their Beds, every one who
walked in their uprightness. Behold now Father, I shall rest and sleep in that
Bedchamber. Then she quoted Job 19.25, 25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter end upon the earth; and though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God, whom I
shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold, and not another, though my
reins be consumed within me. Behold now Father, this very Skin which you see,
and this very Flesh which you see, shall be raised up again; and these very
Eyes which now are so dim, shall on that day see and behold my dear and
precious Redeemer; albeit the Worms eat up my Flesh, yet with these Eyes shall
I behold God, even I my self, and not another for me. Hear last words were
these; O Lord God, into thy hands I commit my Spirit, O Lord be gracious, be
merciful to me a poor Sinner. -- And here she fell asleep. She died the first
of September 1664. betwixt seven and eight in the Evening; in the fourteenth
year of her Age.

18. Jacob Bicks, the Brother of Susanna Bicks, was born in Leyden, in the year
1657. and had Religious Education under his Godly Parents, the which the Lord
was pleased to sanctify to his Conversion, and by it lay in excellent
Provisions to live upon in an hour of distress. -- This sweet little Child was
visited of the Lord of a very sore Sickness, upon the sixth of August 1664.
Once when his Parents had prayed with him, they asked him if they should once
more send for the Physician? No, (said he) I will have the Doctor no more; the
Lord will help me: I know he will take me to himself, and then he shall help
all. When his Parents had prayed with him again, he said, Come now dear Father
and Mother, and kiss me, I know that I shall die. -- Farewell dear Father and
Mother, Farewell dear Sister, farewell all. Now shall I go to Heaven unto God,
and Jesus Christ, and the holy Angels. Then with a short word of Prayer, Lord
be merciful to me a poor Sinner, he quietly breathed out his Soul, and sweetly
slept in Jesus, when he was about seven years old. He died August 8. 1664.

19. John Harvey was born in London, in the year 1654. His Father was a Dutch
Merchant, he was piously Educated under his virtuous Mother, and soon began to
suck in Divine Things with no small delight. The first thing very observable in
him was, that when he was two years and eight months old, he could speak as
well as other Children do usually at five years old. -- It was his Practice to
be much by himself in secret Prayer, and he was careful to manage that work so
as that it might be as secret as possible it might be; but his Frequency and
Constancy made it to be so easily observed, upon which one time one having a
great mind to know what this sweet Babe prayed for, got into a place near him,
and heard him very earnestly praying for the Church of God, desiring that the
Kingdom of the Gospel might be spread over the whole World, and that the
Kingdom of Grace might more and more come into the Hearts of God's People, and
that the Kingdom of Glory might be hastened. He was wont to continue half an
hour, sometimes an hour, upon his Knees together. He would have a savoury word
to say to every one that he conversed with, to put them in mind of the Worth of
Christ, and their Souls; and their nearness to Eternity. -- He was (next to the
Bible) most taken with reading of Reverend Mr. Baxter's Works, especially his
Saints Everlasting Rest; and truly, the Thoughts of that Rest and Eternity,
seemed to swallow up all other Thoughts; and he lived in a constant Preparation
for it, and looked more like one that was ripe for Glory, than an Inhabitant of
this lower World. His Mother asked him, whether he were willing to die, and
leave her? he answered, Yes, I am willing to leave you, and go to my Heavenly
Father. His Mother answered, Child, if thou had but an assurance of God's
Love, I should not be so much troubled. -- He answered, and said to his Mother,
I am assured, dear Mother, that my Sins are forgiven, and that I shall go to
Heaven: For, said he, here stood an Angel by me, that told me, I should quickly
be in Glory. At this, his Mother burst forth into tears. O Mother, said he, did
you but know what Joy I feel, you would not weep but rejoice. I tell you I am
so full of Comfort, that I cannot tell you how I am; O Mother I shall presently
have my Head in my Father's Bosom, and shall be there, where the Four and
twently Elders cast down their Crowns, and sing Halleujah, Glory and Praise, to
him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever.

CHAP. LV. Good Parents Remarkable.
PArents are not only obliged to provide a temporal Livelihood, a Purse and
Wife, and calling for their Children, but especially to see that they be
brought up in the Fear of God, and set out in a fair way to Heaven, and the
Salvation of their Souls; and they that do the one and not the other, had
better never have been the Instruments or Means of conveying them into the
World: for certainly it is better for us, not to be at all, than be miserable
for ever.

1. Eusebius the Father of Hierom, was very careful of the Education of his
Son, and his Mother was a religious Woman; and therefore from his Infancy he
was trained up, like another Timothy, in the Knowledge of Christ, and the
sacred Scriptures. Clark 's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Mariana the Mother of Fulgentius, after the Death of her Husband, was very
careful to train her Son up in Learning, causing him to be instructed in the
Greek Tongue, before he learned Latin; and as his years increased, so he much
improved in all sorts of Learning, to her great Joy: so that she committed to
his care the Government of her whole House. And afterward, when he had retired
into a Monastery under Faustus, she impatiently running to the Bishop, cried
out, Restore the Son to his Mother, the Master to his Servants and Household; it
becomes you to comfort such disconsolate Widows, not to destroy my forlorn
House: Filling the Air with her Exclamations, ever calling upon the Name of
Fulgentius. Ibid. p. 90, 91.

3. Monica the Mother of S. Augustine, was very sollicitous for the Conversion
and Reformation of her Son, admonishing him, and spending many Prayers and
Tears upon that score; consulting with S. Ambrose about him; who told her, it
was impossible a Child of so many Prayers and Tears should miscarry. And
afterward, when he was converted, rejoicing at it, she desired to be
dissolved, as being satisfied mightily in her Mind, as to that which she
desired most in this World, the Conversion of her Son; and according within a
few days she fell sick and died. August. Confess.

4. Ant. Wallaeus and his Wife were both careful in the Education of their
Children; and their first care was to train them up in Piety and good Manners,
for which end their Father read to them daily some Chapters, and made some
Application thereof unto them: His next care was, to bring them up in Learning;
neither would he wholly trust their Masters therein, but many times examined
them himself to see their Proficiency: nor did he train them up to Science only
but also to Prudence; for which cause, when they were come to Years of
Discretion, he used to impart to them the Affairs of Church and State, asking
their Judgments therein. He sought not to advance his Children to high places,
knowing the danger thereof; but rather desired a middle and competent Estate
for them, wherein they might live honestly and comfortably; and according to
his desire, he lived to see his eldest Son John a Doctor of Physic, and
Professor thereof; and employed by the States into France to fetch that Miracle
of Learning, Salmasius to Leyden: his Daughter Margaret married to John of
Breda Doctor of Both Laws; his Daughter Katherine married to Anthony Clement, a
Learned and Pious Divine; his Son Anthony a Lawyer; his Son Baldwin a Student
in Divinity; only his youngest Daughter Susan remained at home to be a Comfort
to her aged Mother. Clark's Eccl. Hist. p. 489.

5. It was a Saying of Ignatius, that Parents ought to afford these three
Things to their Children: Correction, Admonition, and Instruction, both in
Humane Arts, and God's Word; all which preserve them from Idleness and Folly;
give them Wisdom, and learn them Subjection, and Obedience to their Superious.
Clark 's Examples, p. 495.

6. In the Reign of Queen Mary, there was one William Hunter, a young Man of
Brentwood in Essex, who being condemned by Bishop Bonner to the Fire for his
Religion, and was sent down to Brentwood to be burnt there: His Father and
Mother came to him, desiring heartily of God that he might continue constant to
the end, in that good way which he had begun. His Mother added, That she
thought her self happy that she had born such a Child, who could fine in his
Heart to lose his Life for Christ's sake. William answered; For the little Pain
that I shall have, which is but for a moment, Christ has promised me a Crown
of everlasting Joy. His Mother kneeling down, said, I pray God to strengthen
thee, my Son, to the end: I think thee as well bestowed as any Child that ever
I bore. Ibid.

7. If I can but once find the Fear of God in those about me, (said Reverend
Claviger) Satis habeo, satisque mihi, Vxori, filiis, and filiabus prospexi; I
shall have enough for my Self, Wife, and Children, they will be all cared for.
Sell.

CHAP. LVI. Good Servants Remarkable.
THE Faithfulness of Abraham 's Servant is recorded to his everlasting Praise,
and so is Joseph 's Fidelity to his Master; and the Apostles have laid down
their Offices so expressly, that now under the Evangelical Economy, a sincere
discharging the Duties of that Relation, is accounted an honorable Badge to
the Person. Good nature has prevailed far with some, but Grace with more; only
this is to be said by way of Apology for them of this lower Orb, that they who
take upon them to write Histories for the Benefit of future Ages, are too apt
to overlook this lower Class of People, and pass them over in a careless
Silence: But God will not be forgetful.

1. Publius Catienus Philosimus was left by his Master, the Heir of his Estate;
yet did he resolve to die with him, and therefore cast himself alive into that
Funeral Fire which was prepared to burn the dead Body of his Master. Sabellic.
l. 3. c. 8. p. 161.

2. M. Antonius, an excellent Orator, being accused of Incest, his Servant (the
Witness deposing that he carried the Lanthorn before his Master when he went to
commit this Villainy) was apprehended; and to extort a Confession from him, he
was torn with Scourges, set upon the Rack, burnt with hot Irons, all which
notwithstanding he would not let fall a word whereby he might injure the Fame
or Life of his Master, although he knew him guilty. Val. Max. l. 6. c. 8. p.
169. Lips. Monit. l. 2. c. 13. p. 331.

3. The Servant of Vrbinius Panopion knowing that the Soldiers commissioned to
kill his Master, were come to his House in Reatina, changed Clothes with him;
and having put his Ring upon his Finger, he sent him out of a Postern-door, but
went himself to the Chamber, and threw himself upon the Bed, where he was slain
in his Master's stead. Panopion by that means escaped: and afterward, when the
Times would permit it, erected a noble Monument with a due Inscription in
memory of the true Fidelity of so good a Servant. Val. Max. L. 6. C. 8. p. 180.
Lips. Monit. L. 2. C. 131, 332. Dinoth. L. 4. p. 300.

4. Antistius Restio, was Proscribed by the Triumvirate, and while all his
domestic Servants were busied about the Plunder and Pillage of his House, he
conveyed himself away in the midst of the Night, with what privacy he could;
his Departure was observed by a Servant of his, whom not long before he had
cast into Bonds, and branded his Face with infamous Characters; this Man traced
his Wandering Footsteps with such Diligence, that he overtook him, and bare him
Company in his Flight; and at such time as the other were Scrambling for his
Goods, all his Care was to save his Life, by whom he had been so severely used;
and though it might seem enough, that he should forget what had passed, he used
all his Art to preserve his Patron: for having heard that Pursuers were at
hand, he conveyed away his Master, and having erected a Funeral Pile, and set
Fire to it, he slew a poor Old Man, that passed that way, and cast him upon it.
When the Soldiers were come, and asked, Where was Antistius? pointing to the
Fire, he said, he was there burning, to make him amends for that Cruelty he had
used him with. The Soldiers that saw how deep he was stigmatized, though it was
probable enough, believed him; and by this means Antistius obtained his Safety.
Val. Max. L 6. C. 8. p. 181. Lips. Monit. L. 2. C. 13. p. 332.

5. Cornutus having hid himself, was no less wittily and faithfully preserved
by his Servants, in those difficult Days of Marius and Sylla; for they having
found the Body of a Man, set Fire about it; and being asked of such as were
sent out to kill their Master, What they were about? with an officious Lie they
told them, They were performing the last Offices for their dead Master: who
hearing this, sought no further after him. Plut. in Mario, p. 431.

6. One Mr. Dissen, living within Two Miles of Chipping-Norton, told me, about
Three and twenty Years ago, when I was in familiar Discourse with him, his Wife
being present, That he had found by his Personal Experience, that Honesty was
the best Policy: for he being Steward some Years to a Gentleman in that
Neighborhood, and approving him just and faithful in all the Offices he was
employed in, his Master so affected him, and he his Master's Daughter, that by
a free Consent both of the one and the other, he married the Daughter, and
inherited the Estate.

7. A Kinsman of mine, one Thomas Huxley, being Bailiff to one Mr. Ireland of
Albrighton, near Shrewsbury, and approving himself very honest and obliging in
his place, both to Master and Tenants, insomuch that every Body spoke well of
him, except One or Two of a different Principle from him (for his Mistress was
a Romanist) who objected against him, his Reading some particular Books, that
served not for their Cause, as Fox's Martyrology, etc. at last upon ill Words
and Execrations from his Master, who afterward turned to the Roman Communion,
he left the Service, came to my House, and for some time sojourned there; 'till
at last his Master, who had parted with him with some regret, sent for him to
my Patron's House, Mr. Clayton's, and motioned him to another Place, under a
Welsh Gentleman in Carnarvon-shire, (as I take it) Mr. Vaughan, of Lloyd-yarth,
near Llanvilling; where he has continued ever since, and prospered well, and
married comfortably. Since I came into these parts, he wrote me word, That he
had made a Reflection upon his Life past, and designed to form it into a Book,
with an intention to publish it after his Death, if I thought fit; and
requested of me some Rules for the future Management of his Conversation.

CHAP. LVII. Good Masters and Mistresses Remarkable.
1. THE late Countess of Warwick was so careful for the Good of her Servants,
that she exacted their Attendance on Public Worship, and reverent Behavior
there: Her Eyes surveyed her Chapel, and none could be absent, but she would
miss them. She instructed them personally and familiarly; scattered Books in
all the Common Rooms and Places of Attendance, that those who waited might not
lose their time. She prepared them for, and persuaded them to the frequent
Participation of the Lord's Supper, and made Religion the Footstep to
Preferment; using Psalm. 101, for the Rule of her Economy. Dr. Walker in her
Life.

2. Sir Matthew Hale was a very gentle Master, tender of all his Servants; he
never turned any away, except they were so faulty, that there was no hope of
reclaiming them. When any of them had been long out of the way, or had
neglected any part of their Duty, he would not see them at their first coming
home, and sometimes not 'till the next Day, least when his Displeasure was
quick upon him, he might have child them indecently; and when he did reprove
them, he did it with that Sweetness and Gravity, that it appeared he was more
concerned for their having done a Fault, than for the Offense given by it to
himself: but if they became immoral, or unruly, then he turned them away: for
he said, He that by his Place ought to punish Disorders in other People, must
by no means suffer them in his own House. He advanced his Servants according to
the time they had been about him, and would never give occasion to Envy amongst
them, by raising the younger Clerks above those who had been longer with him.
He treated them all with great Affection, rather as a Friend than a Master,
giving them often good Advice and Instruction. He made those who had good
Places under him, give some of their Profits to the other Servants, who had
nothing but their Wages. When he made his Will, he left Legacies to every one
of them; but he expressed a more particular kindness for one of them, Robert
Gibbon, of the Middle Temple, Esquire; in whom he had that Confidence, that he left
him one of his Executors. See his Life, written by Dr. Burnet, p. 96, 97.

3. Mr. John Carter did not carry himself as a Master to his Servants, but as a
familiar Friend to his Friends. He would make them to sit down with him at his
Table, and would drink to them at his Meals. See his Life.

4. Dr. Chaderton was married Fifty three Years, and yet in all that time, he
never kept any of his Servants from Church, to dress his Meat, saying, That he
desired as much to have his Servants know God, as himself. If at any time he
had a Servant upon Trial, though they could do as much Work as Three others, yet
if they were given to Lying, or any other Vice, he would by no means suffer
them to dwell in his House. See his Life.

CHAP. LVIII. Good Pastors, Bishops, and Ministers.
YE are the salt of the earth, says our Savior to his Disciples (with an
especial respect, I suppose, to their future Apostolical Function). Certainly
there is a double Portion of Knowledge, and a greater Measure of Prudence, and
a higher Strain of Piety and Exemplary Devotion required in them that are
Spiritual Guides, than others. The Copy must be writ fair, or the Scholar will
suffer a great Disadvantage. Men had need be very wise and very good, that lead
others: and though the Ministerial Office be full of Duty and Burden, and
Temptation, that ought to be a stronger Argument to Caution and Diligence.

1. Ignatius writing to Polycarp, commends to him the Congregation at Antioch,
praying him to be careful of the Business there is and especially for the
Election of a Godly Bishop in his room. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Basil the Great, fearing the Growth of Arrianism in Pontus, hasted thither,
to Instruct the Weak, and Confirm the Wavering; and though there had been a
Difference between Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, and him, upon danger of a
Persecution from Valens, the Arrian Emperor, he hasted to Caesarea, and was
reconciled to Eusebius. Ibid.

3. Fulgentius, before his Death, prayed for his People, That God would provide
for them a Pastor after his own Heart. He was a Man of such a moving Eloquence,
that the Bishop of Carthage hearing him Preach Two Days together in his Church,
could not refrain from Tears; rejoicing that God had given to his Church in
those afflicted Times such a worthy Instrument of his Glory. Ibid. p. 95.

4. Austin would have a Preacher so long pursue and press the same Point,
until, by the Gestures and Countenances of the Hearers, he perceived that they
understood it, and also intended to practice it.

5. Jerome was called, Fulmen Ecclesiasticum, the Churches Thunderbolt: And
surely Ministers should take the same liberty to cry down Sin, that Men take to
commit Sin. Isa. 58.1.

6. Athanasius was said to be both an Adamant and a Loadstone: for in his
private Converse, he was very affable and courteous, drawing all Men to him,
even as a Loadstone does Iron: but in the Cause of God, and his Truth, he was
unmovable, and unconquerable, as an Adamant.

7. Of Luther it was said, Vnus homo solus, totius Orbis imperium sustinuit:
That he alone opposed a World of Enemies.

8. Its recorded of Father Latimer, that he preached twice every Sabbath, even
when he was of a very great Age; and that he arose to his Studies, Winter and
Summer, at Two a Clock in the Morning. Act. and Mon.

9. 9. Bernard has these Words, If I deal not plainly and faithfully with your
Souls, Vobis erit damnosum, mihi periculosum: Timeo itaque damnum vestrum,
timeo damnationem meam si tacuero: It will be ill for you, and worse for me:
the Truth is, ye would be betrayed, and I should be damned, if I should hold my
Peace.

10. Peter Chrysologus was eloquent, and very powerful in his Sermons to the
People, and very holy in his Conversation, whereby he won many to embrace the
Truth. Ever before he penned any thing, he used with great ardency and humility
to set himself by Prayer to seek unto God for Direction therein.

CHAP. LIX. Reverence to Learned, or Good Men.
THere is such a Majesty in Wisdom and Goodness, that they beget at least a
secret Veneration in all Sensible Persons. Barnabas and Paul were on this score
worshipped at Lycaonia for Gods, one under the Notion of Jupiter, the other of
Mercurius; and Sacrifices were preparing for them. The Lacedaemonians finding it
their Interest to corrupt Philopae^en with Money, were yet so possessed with a
Reverence of his Virtues, that none durst venture to attack him. And we are
told, that certain Pirates came to Visit Scipio, that worthy Conqueror of
Africa, worshipped the Posts of his Doors, laid their Gifts at his Thresholds,
went hastily to kiss his Hands, and so over-joyed, they departed. And it is not
long ago, since a wild Bravo of our own Nation, the late Earl of Rochester,
acknowledged, That even in the midst of his wild Paroxysms, he had a secret
Veneration for a Good Man.

1. Valens the Emperor coming to Church on purpose to disturb Basil, Bishop of
Caesarea, in his Holy Offices, was so convinced and struck with an awful
Opinion of him, by observing his Reverent Behavior, that he made a large
Offering (instead of doing him any hurt); which notwithstanding Basil refused,
as coming from an Heretic. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Gregory Nazianzen, when Valens the Emperor entered his Church, first
astonished him, and afterward by discreet Conference deterred him from his
Cruelty; yea, reclaimed him from the Arrian Faction, though he afterward
relapsed again. Ibid.

3. Fulgentius being recalled from Exile by King Hilderic, was received with
such great Devotion by the Africans, as if he had been peculiar Bishop to every
City; every where met with Tokens of Joy; yea, their Love was so great toward
him, that a Shower of Rain falling, they held their Garments over him, to keep
him dry. Ibid. p. 94.

4. Poggius, Secretary to the Council of Constance, writing to a Friend
concerning Hierom of Prague, says thus of him, I profess, I never saw any Man,
who in Discourse (especially it being for Life or Death) that came nearer to
the Eloquence of the Apostles and Ancients, whom we do so much admire. It was a
Wonder to see with what Words, with what Eloquence, Arguments, Countenance, and
Confidence, he answered his Adversaries, and maintained his own Cause;
insomuch, as it is to be lamented, that so fine a Wit had strayed into the way
of Heresy, if that be true which was objected against him. -- When every
Article of his Accusation was read publicly, and proved by Witnesses, they
asked him, Whether he had any thing to object? But it is almost incredible, how
cunningly he answered, and with what Arguments he defended himself: He never
spoke one Word unworthy a good Man: So that if he thought in Heart, as he spoke
with his Tongue, no Cause of Death could have been found against him, neither
indeed was he guilty of the least Offense. -- At last (he concludes, that) he
was a Man that deserved everlasting remembrance. Ibid. p. 129.

5. Luther has this Testimony given him by Melancthon, Pomeram is a
Grammarian, I a Logician, Justus Jonas an Orator; but Luther is All, even a
Miracle amongst Men: whatsoever he reads or writes, pierces to the very Soul,
and leaves wonderful Stings in the Hearts of Men. And this from Vrbanus Regius,
Talis and tantus est Theologus Lutherus, ut nullo secula habuer nt similem
semper mihi Magnus fuit, at jam mihi Maximus est; vidi enim praesens, and
audici quae nullo calamo tradi possunt abseneibus. Ibid. p. 169.

6. Cassander. for his Learning, was so respected, that he held a
Correspondence with most Learned Men of all Persuasions, Roman Catholics,
Lutherans, and Calvinists; was sent for more than once by the Emperor, to
assist in reconciling the Differences that were then arisen, with large
Overtures for his Encouragement.

7. William Tindal, hearing of a Juggler amongst the English Merchants at
Antwerp, that by his Magical Art could fetch all kind of dainty Dishes, and
Wine, from what place they pleased, and let it presently upon the Table before
them; with many other suchlike Feats, desired of some of the Merchants, that
he might be present at Supper to see this Juggler play his Pranks: which being
granted, the Juggler came, and with his wonted boldness boasted what he could
do: but after much Labor, Toil, and Sweating, being able to effect nothing, he
openly confessed, That there was some Man in the Company, which disturbed and
hindered all his doings. Clark's Eccl. Hist. p. 167.

8. Vrbanus Regius, was dearly beloved by Ernestus Duke of Brunswick, and
esteemed as his Father; insomuch, as when the City of Auspurg, A. C. 1535, sent
to the Duke, desiring him to return Regius again; he answered, That he would as
soon part with his Eyes, as with him. And at his Return from Auspurg, when
diverse of his Nobles asked him, What new and precious Ware, after the Example
of other Princes, he had brought home with him? he answered, That he had
brought home incomparable Treasure for the good of his whole Dukedom, which he
preferred before all his Delights: and presently after he made him Bishop, and
Superintendant over all his Churches in that Country, with an ample Salary for
the same. Clark's Eccl. Hist. p. 190.

9. Capito was very dear to the Elector of Mentz, for his rare Wisdom, joined
with Piety, his Elocution and Mildness of Nature, so that by him he was sent
upon many Embassies. And February 7. he was by the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
endowed for himself and his Posterity, with the Ensigns of Nobility, under the
Imperial Seal. Ibid. p. 192. The Fame of Capito being spread abroad, Margaret
Queen of Navar, and SiSter to Francis King of France, sent James Faber
Stabulensis, and Gerard Rufus, privately to him, and Bucer, to be informed in
their Principles of Religion. Ibid. p. 192.

10. Spanhemius being chosen first of all Professor of Philosophy at Geneva,
and then Professor of Divinity, and next Rector of the University; at last the
Bernates consulted about drawing him to Lausanna, to succeed in the Place of
James a Portu; they of Groaning endeavored to get him to them; and the Prince
Elector Palatine sought also the same; at last Leiden obtained him, though with
much difficulty, the Magistrates and Church of Geneva much opposing it. Yet the
Curators of Leiden insisted so earnestly by their frequent Letters, to which
were added, the Request of the King of Bohemia, of the Illustrious States of
Holland, and West-Friesland, and lastly of the States General, that with much
ado at length they extorted, rather than obtained his Dismission from Geneva.
But it is worth observation, what Means they used to retain him, with what Grief
and Sorrow they parted with him, what a Confluence of People brought him forth
of the City, and with what Sighs and Tears they parted with him, as if in
losing him, they had lost a principal Member of their Body. -- He had almost as
many Friends as Acquaintance, especially of those that excelled in Learning, in
England, Usher, Seldom, Prideaux, Morton, and Twisse; in France, Molinaeus,
Trouchinus, Rivet, Parissaeins, Beaumontius, Mestrezatius, Drelincourtius,
Bonterovius, Muratus, Blondellus, Ferrius, Pelitus, Croius, Vincentius,
Bochartus, almost all of them famous for their Writings, in Germany, Zuingerus,
Vlricus, Buxtorfius, Crocius, etc. yea, out of Sweden, the Queen herself, the
Miracle of her Sex, did kindly Salute him by her Bishop, and by her Letters did
signify, how much she esteemed him, and was delighted with his Works.
Salmasius was his dear Friend: the Prince of Orange had a singular kindness for
him; and to the Queen of Bohemia he was most dear. Ibid. p. 503.

11. Constantine the Great, at the Council of Nice, when it was first opened,
coming in with an humble Countenance, and modest Aspect, all the Bishops and
Ministers rose up; but he continued to stand awhile at the upper end of the
Hall, and would not sit down, 'till he had given a Sign to the Bishops to sit
down also. He used to kiss the hollow of old Paphnutius's Eye, which he had
lost for the Cause of Christ, in the former Persecutions; and was so tender of
the Honor of the Clergy, that he used to say, If he saw a Bishop committing
Wickedness, he would rather cast the Skirt of his Gown over it, than by
speaking of it, dishonor his holy Calling. Clark in Vit. Constantin. Sparsim.

12. Erasmus, an Ingenious, Learned, and Good Man, when he was scarce crept out
of his Shell, pronounced a Panegyric of his own Composure before Philip,
Father to Charles the Fifth, as he came out of Spain into Germany; for which he
honored him with a yearly Pension during Life. King Henry the Eighth of
England wrote to him with his own Hand, offered him a goodly House (belike some
dissolved Abbey) worth 600 Florins yearly; and besides, gave him several
Tastes, rather than Surfeits of his Princely Bounty. Francis the French King,
wrote likewise unto him, offering him a Bishopric, and 1000 Florins per Annum,
to set up his rest in France. Charles the Fifth offered him a Bishopric in
Sicily, made him of his Council, and besides many other Expressions of his
Liberality, bestowed upon him a yearly Pension of 200 Florins. Ferdinand his
Brother, King of Hungary, made him a tender of 400 Florins yearly, with promise
to make them up 500, to profess at Vienna; Sigismund as much to come into
Poland; and further, with a Royal and Liberal Hand supplied his present
Necessities. Mary Queen of Hungary wrote to him often, and ever with her own
Hand; her Bounty, without question, equalled her exceeding Humanity. Anne
Princess Veriana, gave him a yearly Pension of 100 Florins. Frederick Duke of
Saxony, presented him with two Medals one of Gold, the other of Silver. George
Duke of Saxony, with diverse Ingots of Gold, dug out of his own Mines, and a
great Drinking-Bowl of the same. William Duke of Gulick imitated him in the
latter, but outstript him in the Capacity. Adrian the Sixth (to whom he
Consecrated Arnobius) wrote to him thrice; which Grand Respects from the Pope,
much abated the Fury of the Friars, his Enemies. He Congratulated the Papacy to
Clement the Seventh; who in requital sent him 500 Florins, and by his
Apostolical Letters invited him to Rome. Paul the Third had brought him into
the College of Cardinals, but that he was prevented by Death; in the Interim he
sent him a Collation to the Praepositure of Daventry; which he refused, saying,
He was now near the end of his Journey, and hoped to get thither without it.
William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, changed his Prebend into a Pension,
and scarce ever wrote to him, but in Letters of Gold: his last Token was a
Gelding; of whom he used to say, That though he wanted Original Sin, he was
guilty of two Mortal Ones, Sloth and Gluttony. Cardinal Wolsey, a stately
Prelate, yet wrote unto him Letters full of singular Humanity; and besides
other Remembrances, bestowed on him a Pension out of a Prebend in York. The
Bishop of Lincoln and Rochester, bountifully supplied him upon all occasions.
Hammond and Vrswick. sent him a Brace of Geldings: Polydore Virgil Money to buy
a Third. Cromwell the First, out of his Sacrilegious Brokage, at twice, Thirty
Angels. Montjoy, More, Tonstal, and Colet, were his containual Supporters: to
say nothing of many others within this Kingdom. Cardinal Matthaeus offered him
a yearly Pension of 500 Ducats, to live at Rome, and sent him a Cup of beaten
Gold. He received another from Albert, Archbishop, and Cardinal of Mentz, of
the same Metal, but greater and more curiously graven, with sundry Poetical
Fancies. Cardinal Gambegius, amongst other Tokens, sent him a Diamond Ring of
no mean value. Stanislaus Olmucensis, a Silver Bowl, double Gilt; with Four
Pieces of Gold, the Coin of Ancient Emperors. The Bishop of Basil offered him
for his Society, half his Bishopric, which (alluding to the Name) he termed
half his Kingdom. Thurxo Bishop of Vratislavia. went Ten Days Journey out of
his way, to see him; and you must not think, that he parted with him without
giving him any thing. Another of the same Name, sent him Four Watches. Four
Ingots of pure Gold, and a Muntero lined with rich Sables. Christopher
Sheidlovitz, Chancellor of Poland, a Clock, Spoon, and Fork, all of pure Gold.
Peter, Bishop of Cracovia, Thirty Duckers. Joh. Paungarnerus, a good Quantity
of Gold, uncoyned, with a large Silver Bowl: Rinkius, another: Fuggerus a
Third: All Gifts (as himself jested) not unbefitting a Hollander. Jacob Piso,
Two Pieces of Ancient Coin, one Gold, the other Silver, resembling Gratian and
Hercules. Vigilius Zuichemus, a Gold Ring; which explicated, became an exact
Celestial Sphere. And William, Earl of Eysenburg, a Dagger; which, by the
Inscription, he wished in the Heart of his Enemies. -- With a large
Nomenclatura, of many more Friends, Patrons, and Correspondents, Quos hic
parscribere longum esset. Fuller Alct. Rediv. p. 70. Out of the Bishop of
Kilmore's Life of Erasmus.

13. Bishop Usher was highly admired, and much honored by all the famous
Lights of his time, through the Christian World. Spanhemius, Divinity Professor
at Geneva, Anno Christi 1639, in his Epistle Dedicatory to him, before this
Third part, Dubiorum Evangelicorum, spends above Two Leaves in extolling him;
some of his Expressions are: Your very great Parts, most excellent Usher, are
known, not only within your own Country, but in ours; and wheresoever else
there is Honor given to Piety, or Price set upon Learning, etc. He speaks much
of his Charity to Strangers, his Humility, Piety, his Library, of which he made
such use for the Public Good, that it was not so much his own, as the Library
of all Learned Men, In a word (says he) the Name of Usher, with us, is, a Name
of Piety and Virtue, it was of great Renown at our Geneva, etc.

Gerard Vossius frequently admires him as a Man of vast Learning, worthy of an
everlasting Monument; The high Merits (said he) of this most excellent, and
throughout most Learned Man both of the Church, and of the whole Commonwealth
of Learning, deserved an everlasting greateful Memory: A Man so excelling in
the Knowledge both of Humane and Divine Things, that I cannot speak any thing
so high of him, but his Worth does surpass it.

Bochartus and Simplicus, call him frequently, Magnum Vsherium, Usher the Great.

Morus in his Oration at Geneva dedicated to him, styles him, The most
Excellent Servant of God; The most Reverend Man of God; The Athanasius of our
Age. Thy Breast (says he) is a Breathing Library: Thou art to Britain as
Austin was to Hippo: Farewell Britain 's great Honor.

Ludovicus de Dieu in his Animadversions on the Acts, dedicated to him, entitle
him, To the Excellent Prelate, worthy of Eternal Memory, etc.

Paulus Testardus Blesensis, styles him, The greatest Honor of the Church and
Age.

Arnoldus B^osius, says of him, That he did excel with a most singular
Judgment in the Oriental Languages, and in all other abstruse, and deep
Learning: Venerable to all Europe, whose Authority prevails much with all Men,
etc.

Master Seldom says of him, The most Reverend Prelate James Usher; A Man of
great Piety, singular Judgment, Learned to a Miracle, and born to promote the
more severe Studies, etc.

Dr. Prideaux calls him, The most rich Magazine of solid Learning, and of all
Antiquity.

Dr. Davenant speaks thus of him, A Man of singular Piety, abounding with all
manner of Learning.

Sir Roger Twisden, acknowledging the Assistance he had from him in his
History, says thus, This we owe to the most worthy Archbishop of Armagh; in
whom, with incredible Learning, and rare Knowledge of Antiquity, his most
courteous Conversation, and wonderful Sweetness, etc. See his Life written by
Dr. Bernard and by Mr. Clark.

Dr. Preston looked high, and aimed at Court-preferment, thinking it below him
to be a Minister; and accordingly got in with a Merchant, in order to a Removal
to Paris, to learn the Language and Garb of France; for this end, he sells some
Lands, that were fallen to him by the Death of Mr. Creswel of Northampton: But
the Merchant dies, and his blooming Hopes died with him. See his Life by Mr.
Clark, p. 77.

CHAP. LX. People loving and kind to their Ministers.
IT IS the Duty of People to know and value those who are set over them, and
watch for their Souls and labor among them, and to esteem them very highly for
their Works sake: And good People who love God, and have any care for their own
Souls, will do so; and according to their Respects and Faithfulness in this
point, they may expect the Divine Blessing: For as they sow, they shall reap,
sparingly or plentifully.

1. When Chrysostom was banished by the Empress, the People as he went along
burst into Tears, and cried out, It was better the Sun should not shine, than
that John Chrysostom should not preach.

2. Nazianzen, when willing to leave his Place at Constantinople, to live a
private Life, was besought with Tears by his People not to forsake his Flock.

3. Sir Henry Spelman having an Impropriation in his Estate, viz. Middleton in
Norfolk, took a course to dispose of it for the Augmentation of the Vicaridge,
and also a small Addition to Cougham. Spelm. de non temerandis Eccl. Preface.

4. Sir Ralph Hare of Norfolk upon reading Sir Henry's Treatise, restored a
good Parsonage which he had in his Estate to the Church, and gave the perpetual
Advowson to St. Johns-Colledge in Cambridge. Ibid.

5. Sir Roger Townsend in the same Country restored three Impropriations to the
Church, besides many singular Expressions of great respect to the Clergy. Ibid.

6. Sir William Dodington of Hampshire, a very religious Gentleman, restored no
less than six Impropriations out of his own Estate, to the full value of Six
hundred pounds yearly and more. Ibid.

7. Richard Knightley of Northamptonshire, restored two, Fansley and Preston.

8. The Right Honorable Baptist Lord Hicks, Viscount Campden, besides many
other Works of Charity to Hospitals and Churches, restored and purchased many
Impropriations, viz. one in Pembrokeshire, which cost 460 l. one in
Northumberland, which cost 760 l. one in Durham of 366 l. another in
Dorsetshire of 760 l. he redeemed certain Chantry-Lands which cost 240 l. and
gave Pensions to two Ministers, which cost 80 l. besides Legacies to several
Ministers. Ibid. Out of the Survey at London, p. 761.

9. Mrs. Ellen Goulston Relict of Theodore Goulston Doctor of Physic, gave the
Impropriate Parsonage of Bardwal in Suffolk to the Vicaridge, and gave the
Donation of the Vicaridge to St. Johns-Colledge. Ibid.

10. The Lord Scudamore Viscount Slego, restored much to some Vicaridges in
Herefordshire.

11. Dr. Moreton Bishop of Lincoln did abate a good part of his Fine to
increase the Portion of the Minister in the Vicaridge of Pitchley in
Northamtonshire. So did his Successor Dr. Wright for the Vicaridge of
Torcester. Ibid.

12. The late Earl of Rochester upon his Deathbed acknowledged how unworthily
he had treated the Clergy, reproaching them that they were proud, and
prophesied only for Rewards; but now he had learned how to value them; that he
esteemed them as the Servants of the most High God, who were to show Men the
Way to everlasting Life. Mr. Parsons, in his Funeral Sermon.

13. Mr. Whitaker was much beloved, his House frequented with many and friendly
Visits, his Sickness laid to heart, and many Prayers public and private put up
for him; some Fasts also kept with a special Reference to his Afflictions, and
his Funeral attended with many weeping Eyes. See his Life. Mr. Fairclough's
Ministry was thought to bring a Temporal Blessing to the Parish.

14. I think my candid Reader will easily pardon me, if for Gratitude's sake I
take an occasion here for the Glory of God, and the Commendation of the People,
to make mention of the Respects, Love and Kindnesses (much beyond my Desert)
which I received as from the Inhabitants of Arundel and Shipley in Sussex; so
especially from the Parishioners of Preston, Gubbals and Broughton, in
Shropshire; together with the adjacent Neighborhood, which were so freely and
plentifully showed me whilst I was their Minister, that I may testify of them,
they were kind to me even beyond their power, (some of them;) and I hope God
would return it into their Bosoms, and remember them in the day of their
Distress: for I speak this to their Praise, I never met with a more loving
People in my Life.

15. Mons. du Plessis on his Deathbed gave Thanks to the Minister that had
assisted him, prayed the Lord to prosper the Word in his Mouth; prayed for M.
Boucherean Minister of the Church in Saumur; and said he, Let it not trouble
him to be patient; he has to do with a troublesome People, the Lord impute not
their Sins unto them. Clark 's Examp. Vol. 2. c. 27.

16. Mrs. Drake on her Deathbed advised her Father to keep a Minister in his
House, and returned most affectionate Thanks to a Friend, (I suppose her
Minister) begging earnestly Forgiveness of him, and would needs have his Hand
and Promise for it. Mrs. Drake revived.

17. John Blacknal of Abington Esquire; by his last Will bequeathed certain Sums of
Money to several Ministers for Duties omitted by him in his Life. A. 1625.

CHAP. LXI. Remarkable Zeal and Devotion.
ZEal is a Composition of all the Passions, the Affections warmed and heated
into a lively Vigor and Activeness; and this is so far from being a Fault,
that if it be made regular with Prudence and a Christian Discretion, it is good
and commendable always in a good Matter: And certainly if ever it be seasonable
for us to kindle a fire upon the Altar, it is so, when we are about to do
sacrifice to God Almighty.

1. Polycarp going with S. John to a Bath at Ephesus, and espying Ceriathus the
Heretic in it, said, 'Let us depart speedily, for fear lest the Bath, where
the Lord's Adversary is, do fall upon us. Dr. Cave Prim Christ. and Clark 's
Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Origin, when a Boy, had an eager desire of Martyrdom: So had Cyprian, and
Gregory Nazianzen. Ibid. Dr. Cave Prim. Christ. etc.

3. The Venerable Bede was so devoutly affected in Reading the Scriptures, that
he would often shed Tears; and after he had ended reading conclude with
Prayers. Clark 's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 100.

4. Tertullian used to pray thrice a day, at the 3, 6, 9 hours. Clark.

5. Peter Chrysologus, before he penned any thing, would with great Ardency
humbly betake to Prayer, and seek unto God for Direction therein. Clark 's
Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 88.

6. Luther advised George Spalatinus always to begin his Studies with Prayer;
For, says he, there is no Master that can instruct us in Divine Matters, but
the Author of them. Ibid. p. 195. And Melancthon testifies of Luther, That he
has heard him so loud and earnest at his Prayers, as if some Person were in
company discoursing with him. Much the same Advice does Ludovicus Grotius give
to all Students in Divinity, To pray often: And Thomas Aquinas is reported to
use that Rule himself, always to pray for the Resolution of any difficult and
knotty Question; and commends to others that Motto, Been orasse est been
studuisse.

7. When Erasmus halted between two Opinions, Capito continually called upon
him, to put off that Nicodemus-like Temper. Clark 's Eccl. Hist. p. 193.

8. Cardinal Wolsey, when advanced to great Preferments in both Church and
State, having all State-business at his disposal, and most Church-preferments
in his power, the Deanery of Lincoln, the King's Almonership, a House near
Bridewel. Durham, Winchester, Bath, Worcester, Hereford, Tourney, Lincoln, S.
Albans and York, in his Possession, and all other Promotions in his Gift; was
so devout, that he neglected not one Collect of his Prayers, for all the
Cumbrances of his Place; wherein he deceived many of the People, who thought he
had no time for his Business; and his Servants, who wondered how he could gain
time for his Business from his Devotion. Lloyd 's State-Worthies, p. 8.

9. Luther was zealous in the Cause of the Reformation, that he preached,
wrote, and disputed publicly for it; and when, discouraged from going to
Worms, whither he had been invited by the Emperor, with a Promise of safe
Conduct, lest he should be served as John Husse, at the Council of Constance,
he made Answer, If there were as many Devils in the City, as Tiles on the
Houses, to shake the Kingdom of Satan, he would go thither. And so fervent was
he in Prayer, that Vitus Theodorus says of him, that no Day passed, wherein he
spent not at least Three Hours in Prayer. Once it fell out, says he, that I
heard him: Good God! what a Spirit, what a Confidence was in his very
Expression! with such a Reverence he sueth for any thing, as one begging of
God; and yet with such Hope and Assurance, as if he spoke with a Loving Father,
or Friend! Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 141.

10. Sir Thomas Moor was so devour, that the Duke of Norfolk coming on a time
to Chelsey, to Dine with him, happened to find him in the Church, singing in
the Quire, with a Surplice on his Back; to whom, after Service, as they went
homeward, hand in hand together, the Duke said, God's Body, my Lord Chancellor,
what a Parish-Clark! a Parish-Clark! you dishonor the King, and his Office.
Nay, said Sir Thomas, smiling upon the Duke, Your Grace may not think your
Master and mine will be offended with me, for serving of God, his Master, or
thereby count his Office dishonored. England's Worthies, by Will. Winstanley,
p. 201.

When the King sent for him once at Mass, he answered, That when he had done
with God, he would wait on His Majesty. Lloyd's Worthies, p. 43. The same
Answer Bishop Usher returned to Charles the Second. Vid. alibi.

11. Bishop Usher's Custom was to pray Four times a Day, in, and with his
Family; in the Morning at Six a Clock, in the Evening at Eight, and before
Dinner and Supper in his Chapel, at each of which he was always present. On
Friday in the Afternoons, there was constantly an Hour spent in his Chapel, in
Catechizing upon the Principles of Religion, for the Instructing of his Family;
and on Sabbaths in the Evening, the Sermon which he had preached in the
Afternoon, was repeated in his Chapel, by one of his Chaplains. See his Life.

12. It is recorded, to the everlasting Praise of the young Lord Harrington, so
famous for Piety, that it was his constant use to pray twice every Day in
secret, twice with some choice Friends and Servants, besides his Family Duties.
See his Life,

13. It was the Practice of Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston, to pour out his Soul
before the Lord in secret thrice every Day, and sometimes oftener, if he could
gain opportunity; besides his Family Duties, and Days of extraordinary
Humiliation, which he importunately embraced upon every occasion. This I can
testify (says Mr. Fairclough) upon mine own Experience, that for many Years
together, when I was first acquainted with him, I seldom visited him, but if
any convenient Place could be found, we might not part, except we had prayed
together. -- Nor was he more frequent in secret Prayer, than constant in secret
Reading the Scriptures. See his Life.

14. Mr. Samuel Fairclough, upon the escape of his Child, after a dangerous
Fall, made a solemn Vow, in the Public Congregation, to give all the
Tithe-Wool of the Parish to the Poor. The Vow was Registered, and Subscribed by
his Hand, and piously observed. See his Life.

15. Mr. Cotton Mather tells us, Such was the Piety of Mr. Eliot, that like
another Moses, he had upon his Face a continual Shine, arising from his
uninterrupted Communion with the Father of Spirits. Indeed, I cannot give a
fuller Description of him, than what was in a Paraphrase that I have heard
himself to make upon that Scripture, Our Conversation is in Heaven. I writ from
him, as he uttered it: Behold, said he, the Ancient and Excellent Character of
a true Christian; it is that which Peter calls Holiness in all manner of
Conversation; you shall not find a Christian out of the way of Godly
Conversation. For First, A Seventh part of our time is all spent in Heaven,
when we are duly zealous for, and zealous on the Sabbath of God. Besides, God
has written on the Head of the Sabbath, Remember; which looks both forwards and
backwards; and thus a good part of the Week will be spent in Sabbatizing. Well,
but for the rest of our time! Why, we shall have that spent in Heaven, e're we
have done. For, Secondly, We have have many Days for both Fasting and
Thanksgiving in our Pilgrimage; and here are so many Sabbaths more. Moreover,
Thirdly, we have our Lectures every Week; and pious People will not miss them, if
they can help it. Furthermore, Fourthly, We have our private Meetings wherein
we Pray and Sing, and repeat Sermons, and confer together about the Things of
God; and being now come thus far, we are in Heaven almost every day. But a
little farther, Fifthly, We perform Family Duties every Day; we have our
Morning and Evening Sacrifices, wherein having read the Scriptures to our
Families, we call upon the Name of God, and ever now and then carefully
Catechize those that are under our Charge. Sixthly, We shall also have our
daily Devotions in our Closets; wherein, unto Supplication before the Lord, we
shall add some serious Meditation upon his Word; a David will be at this Work
no less than thrice a Day. Seventhly, We have likewise many Scores of
Ejaculations in a Day; and these we have, like Nehemiah, in whatever place we
come into. Eighthly, We have our occasional Thoughts, and our occasional Talks
upon Spiritual Matters; and we have our occasional Acts of Charity, wherein we
do like the Inhabitants of Heaven every Day. Ninthly, In our Callings, in our
Civil Callings, we keep up heavenly Frames; we Buy, and Sell, and Toil; yea, we
Eat and Drink, with some Eye both to the Command, and the Honor of God in all.
Behold, I have not now left an Inch of Time to be carnal; it is all engrossed
for Heaven. And yet, lest here should not be enough. Lastly, We have our
Spiritual Warfare. We are always encountering the Enemies of our Souls, which
continually raises our Hearts unto our Helper and Leader in the Heavens. Let no
Man say, It Is impossible to live at this rate: for we have known some live
thus, and others that have written of such a Life, have but spun a Web out of
their own blessed Experiences. New England has Examples of this Life; tho,
alas, it is to be lamented, that the Distractions of the World, in too many
Professors, do becloud the Beauty of an Heavenly Conversation. In fine, our
Employment lies in Heaven. In the Morning, if we ask, Where am I to be to Day?
Our Souls must answer, In Heaven. In the Evening, if we ask, Where have I been
to Day? Our Souls may answer, In Heaven. If thou art a Believer, thou art no
Stranger to Heaven while thou live; and when thou die, Heaven will be no
strange place to thee; no, thou have been there a thousand times before. In
this Language have I heard him express himself; and he did what he said, he was
a Boniface as well as a Benedict; and he was one of those, Qui faciendo docert,
quae facienda docent. Thus far Mr. Cotton Mather.

15. Mr. Henry Gearing's Covenant with GOD: As I find it in his Life, Published
by Mr. John Shower.
O Most Dreadful GOD! for the Passion of Thy Son, I beseech Thee accept of Thy
poor Prodigal, now prostrating himself at Thy Door: I have fallen from Thee by
mine Iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Death, and a Thousand-fold more the
Child of Hell by my wicked Practice; but of Thine Infinite Grace Thou have
promised Mercy to me in Christ, if I will but turn to Thee with all my Heart!
Therefore upon the Call of thy Gospel, I am now come in, and throwing down my
Weapons, submit myself to thy Mercy! And because Thou requirest, as the
Condition of my Peace with Thee, that I should put away mine Idols, and be at
Defiance with all Thine Enemies, which I acknowledge I have wickedly sided with
against Thee; I here, from the bottom of my Heart, renounce them all, firmly
Covenanting with Thee, not to allow myself in any known Sin, but to use
Conscientiously all the Means that I know Thou have prescribed, for the Death
and utter Destruction of all my Corruptions. And whereas I have formerly,
inordinately, and idolatrously let out my Affections upon the World, I do here
resign my Heart to Thee that made it, humbly protesting before Thy Glorious
Majesty, That it is the firm Resolution of my Heart, and that I do unfeignedly
desire Grace from Thee; that when thou shall call me hereunto, I may practice
this my Resolution, through Thy Assistance, to forsake all that is dear unto me
in this World, rather than to turn from Thee to the Ways of Sin; and that I
will watch against all its Temptations, whether of Prosperity or Adversity,
lest they should withdraw my Heart from Thee; beseeching Thee also to help me
against the Temptations of Satan, to whose wicked Suggestions, I resolve, by
thy Grace, never to yield myself a Servant. And because my own Righteousness is
but menstruous Rags, I renounce all Confidence therein, and acknowledge that I
am of my self, a hopeless, helpless, undone Creature, without Righteousness or
Strength.

And for as much as Thou have of Thy bottomless Mercy, offered most graciously
to me, wretched Sinner, to be again my God through Christ, if I would accept of
Thee: I call Heaven and Earth to Record this Day, that I do here solemnly
avouch Thee for the Lord my God; and with all possible Veneration, bowing the
Neck of my Soul under the Feet of Thy most Sacred Majesty. I do here take Thee,
the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my Portion and Chief Good;
and do give up myself, Body and Soul, for Thy Servant, promising and vowing to
serve Thee in Holiness and Righteousness all the Days of my Life. And since
Thou have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, the only Means of coming unto Thee,
I do here upon the bended Knees of my Soul, accept of him as the only new and
living Way, by which Sinners may have Access to Thee, and do here solemnly join
myself in a Marriage-Covenant to him.

O blessed Jesus! I come to Thee hungry and hardy, bestead, poor, and wretched,
and miserable, and blind and naked; a most loathsome polluted Wretch, a guilty
condemned Malefactor, unworthy for ever to wash the Feet of the Servants of my
Lord, much more to be solemnly married to the King of Glory: but since such is
thine unparalleled Love, I do here with all my Power accept Thee, and do take
thee for my Head and Husband, for better for worse, for richer for poorer, for
all Times and Conditions, to love, and honor, and obey Thee before all others,
and this to the Death. I embrace Thee in all Thine Offices; I renounce my own
Worthiness, and do here avow Thee for the Lord my Righteousness; I renounce
mine own Wisdom, and do here take Thee for my only Guide; I renounce my own
Will, and take Thy Will for my Law. And since Thou have told me, that I must
Suffer, if I will Reign, I do here Covenant with Thee, to take my Lot as it
falls with Thee, and by Thy Grace assisting, to run all Hazards with Thee,
verily purposing, that neither Life nor Death shall part between Thee and Me.

And because Thou have been pleased to give me Thy Holy Laws, as the Rule of my
Life, and the Way in which I should walk to Thy Kingdom; I do here willingly
put my Neck under Thy Yoke, and set my Shoulder to Thy Burden; and subscribing
to all Thy Laws, as holy, just, and good, I solemnly take them as the Rule of
my Words, Thoughts, and Actions, promising, that though my Flesh contradict and
rebel, yet I will endeavor to order and govern my whole Life, according to thy
Direction, and will not allow myself in the neglect of any thing that I know to
be my Duty: Only because through the frailty of my Flesh, I am subject to many
Failings, I am bold humbly to protest, that unallowed Miscarriages, contrary to
the settled Bent and Resolution of my Heart, shall not make void this Covenant;
for so Thou have said.

Now Almighty GOD. Searcher of all Hearts, Thou know that I make this
Covenant with Thee this Day, without any known Guile or Reservation, beseeching
Thee, that if Thou espiest any Flaw or Falsehood therein, thou would discover
it to me, and help me to do it aright.

And now Glory be to Thee, O God the Father, whom I shall be bold from this Day
forward, to look upon as my God and Father, that ever thou should find out
such a way for the Recovery of undone Sinners! Glory be to Thee, O God the Son,
who have loved me, and washed me from my Sins in thy own Blood, and art now
become my Savior and Redeemer! Glory be to Thee, O God, the Holy Ghost, who by
the Finger of Thine Almighty Power, have turned about my Heart from Sin to God.

O dreadful Jehovah! the Lord God Omnipotent. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Thou
art now become my Covenant-Friend, and I, through Thine Infinite Grace, am
become thy Covenant-Servant. Amen: So be it. And the Covenant which I have made
on Earth, let it be ratified in Heaven.

HENRY GEARING.
April 11. 1667.
16. For the Christians better Help, for the keeping of this Covenant, Mr.
Allen, in his Allarm to the Unconverted, gives this Advice about it. This
Covenant (says he) I advise you to make, not only in Heart, but in Word, not
only in Word, but in Writing; and that you would, with all possible Reverence,
spread the Writing before the Lord, as if you would present it to him, as your
Act and Deed; and when you have done this, set your Hand to it, keep it as a
Memorial of the solemn Transactions, that have passed between God and you, that
you may have Recourse to it, in Doubts and Temptations.

Mr. Corbet, in his Enquiry into the State of his Soul, has these Expressions;
I do not cease (says he) to lament the more heinous Sins of my Life, and cannot
forbear the continual imploring of the Pardon of them. I do not return again to
them, and I resolve never so to do; I Watch and Pray, and strive against all
Sin, but especially against those Sins, to which I am more especially inclined;
my Conflicts are daily, and am put hard to it. But I do not yield up my self to
any Sin, nor lie down in it; yea, I do not suffer sinful Cogitations to lodge
in me. I find upon the review of my Life past, according to the clearest
Judgment that I can make, that I have not gone backward, but proceeded forward,
in the ways of Godliness. I have been grieved, that I am no more elevated in
the hope of Heaven, and that I cannot attain to a longing desire to be gone
hence, and to be there with Christ. I think with my self sometimes, were my
Evidences clear for Heaven, I would exult to be gone hence this very Hour; but
I find not this readiness at all times. O Lord, forgive my ten Thousand
Talents. I come to Jesus Christ, who has made satisfaction, and lay this heavy
Reckoning to his Account. Lord forgive my Iniquity, for it is exceeding great.
I have done what in me lies, to call to remembrance all my remarkable Sins,
from my Childhood and Youth till now: And as far as I can judge, I have
repented of them, both generally and particularly. And I now repent of them
all, from the bottom of my Heart, with a self Abhorrence. Upon the best
Judgment that I can make of the Nature of Sin, and the Frame of my own Heart,
and Course of Life; I know no Sin lying upon me, which does not consist with
habitual Repentance. By Prayer and Endeavors long continued, I have in some
measure, overcome a special, very sinful Distemper of Mind, and gained the
contrary Temper, against a natural Propensity. Though my Faith in Christ be
weak, yet to have part in his Promises, I am ready to part with all that is
dear in this World, and I have no hope of Happiness, but in Christ. My Temporal
Estate is mean and low, yet I am contented with it, and humbly bless God for
what I have. Though I have not as yet overcome the fear of Death, yet I am
sure, that the unwillingness that is in me to Die, is not, that I might enjoy
the Pleasures of Sense, or any Gratification of the Animal Life.

Thus I am searching and trying my Heart and Ways; and what I find by my self,
I write down, that I may have it by me, for my Relief in an evil Day, and an
hour of Temptation! For I must expect the time, when by Weakness, or Anguish of
Body or Mind, I may be disabled to recollect my self, and duly to state the
Case of my own Soul; Lord be merciful to me a Sinner, to me, one of the
chiefest of Sinners. I put my sinful distressed Soul into the Hands of Jesus
Christ, and I rest on the Covenant of Grace made in him, as all my Salvation,
and all my Desire. Amen.

O the wonderful Mercy of God toward me, a most vile and wretched Sinner, in
convincing, rebuking, and awakening me, unto a Self-abhorrence, and an utter
Detestation of my Sins, my special Sins, so that I cannot be reconciled to
them. Self-applauding, self-seeking, in matter of Praise and Honor before Men,
I strive against. I desire to be as sincere to another Reputation, as to my
own, I would not value others, by their regard to me, but by their true worth;
I would be contented to be little in the eyes of others: This I unfeignedly
desire and endeavor, and I hope, that I have it in some good degree. I
narrowly watch my Heart, that it may not lodge, or admit a vain Thought. When I
am surprised with Vanity, I suppress it as soon as I observe it. Surely Christ
has my Heart; whenever I swerve from Christ, in a Thought, Word, or Deed, it
is by Inadvertency and Surprizal against my fixed Principle; and I have great
regret at it, and loath my self for it.

The Workings of my Heart in my Affliction, Aug. the 5th. 1680. The Will of
God, in laying this Affliction upon me, I unfeignedly approve as Holy, Just,
and Good; and I am unfeignedly willing to bear the Affliction, as it is an Evil
laid upon me by his Will: I feel my self better in the Inner-Man, by his
Chastening; it has furthered Mortification and Self-denial, and done much to
the breaking of the heart of Pride, and to bring me on toward that more
perfect Self-examination, for which I Labor; it has much deadned the World to
me, and my Desire to the World; it makes me know in earnest, the Emptiness of
all Creatures, and how great my Concern is in God; it drives me close to him,
and makes me to fetch all my Comforts from him: I see of how little value all
outward Contentments are, and not only in my present afflicted State, but if I
were at Ease, and in full Prosperity. When I walk in Darkness, and see no Light
of outward Comfort, human Helps, and visible Means, I will trust in the Name of
the Lord, and stay my self upon my God; I strive with my own Spirit, to subdue
it to the Will of God; and in whatsoever I am tempted to be most impatient,
therein I labor most for Patience. My great Care is, that I may not sin
against my God in any kind; and more especially, that I may not sin by a
rebellious Impatience, under his correcting Hand: In this present Distress, I
look upon my self, as being upon my Trial, and therefore I look more diligently
to my Behavior in it: Now a Price is put into my Hand, for the Proof of my
Sincerity, and I Labor accordingly, to make good Proof of it. Hear my cry, O
God, attend upto my Prayer; I will cry unto thee, when my Heart is overwhelmed;
lead me to the Rock that is higher than I. God the infinite Goodness and Love,
will not cast off a poor Soul that lies at his Feet, and cries for the help of
his Grace, when it is ready to sink under the Burden, and is willing to have
Mercy upon his Terms. Can I be in a better Hand? As my professed Judgment is
concerning God's Proceeding, so let me stand affected toward it.

Notes for my self. Entertain not a sensual Imagination for a Moment, and give
not way to the least Glance of the Eye toward Vanity; be always expecting some
trouble or other, to interrupt thy outward Peace and Rest; never expect any
thing from the World, and when it offers thee any thing that is good for thee,
receive it, but catch not at it greedily; be always mindful what thou may do
for thine own, and others Salvation, in every Instant, upon every Occasion, Die
daily; when a sensual Imagination, or Passion breaks in, then excite a Taste of
the Powers of the World to come, and delay not to recover the Divine Frame. If
any despise thee, do not bear a Grudge against him for it; and be not offended
with any, merely because they do not humor thee; watch against all secret
Pleasure, in the lessening of another, for advanceing thy self; be not
transported with Passion against those Conformists, who are more sober than
many others; yet manifest too little Compassion to their suffering Brethren:
For even in the Regenerate, there is a remainder of the Spirit of Envy
partiality, and Selfishness, and too much of Wrath and bitterness, and other
parts of the serpentine Nature, though in a mortified degree; and we are to
yield grains of Allowance for the Temptations of Prejudice, Interest, etc. to
which good Men, as well as others, are obnoxious. My own exceeding Faultiness
ingages me in seeing and hearing the Faults and Follies of others, to pity
them, rather than to rejoice or glory over them; and to cover or lessen those
Faults, rather than to aggravate or display them. Fetch thy Comforts from
Heaven, and not from Pleasures or Hopes here below; if any slight thee, be
neither dejected nor provoked. Thus far Mr. Corbet.

17. Mr. Cotton Mather, gives this Account of his Brother Nathaniel Mather. --
This Year did not roll about (says he) before he had in a manner very solemn,
entered into Covenant with God; this weighty and awful thing was not rashly done
by him, or in a sudden flash and pang of Devotion; he Thought, he Read, he
Wrote, and he Prayed, not a little before this glorious Transaction between God
and him; and upon mature Deliberation, he judged it most advisable for him to
make his Covenant with God, as Explicit as Writing and Signing could render it,
that so it might leave the more Impression upon his Heart and Life, and be an
Evidence likewise, which in Temptation or Desertion, he might have recourse
unto: Wherefore he set apart a time for (I think) secret Fasting and Prayer
before the Lord; and then behold how this young Man counting it high time for
hime to be bound out unto some Service, took a course for it; he subscribed an
Holy Covenant, of which this was the Matter, this the Form.

The Covenant between God and my Soul, renewed, confirmed, and signed, Nov. 22.
1683. Whereas, not only the Commands of God, [who has often called upon me, by
his Word preached, to give up my self, both Body and Soul, to be at his
Disposal, which calls by the public Ministry, were enough to engage me unto
this] but also the Christian Religion which I profess, and my Baptism in which
I took the Lord to be my God, and promised to renounce the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil, and to dedicate my self unto the Service, Work, and Will of God,
do bind me hereunto; in that, God is such a God as deserves this, yea,
infinitely more than this at my Hands; my Creator, the Fountain of my Being, my
Preserver, my Benefactor, my Lord, my Soveraig, my Judge; he, in whose Hands my
Life, my Breath, and all my Concerns are; he that does protect me from all
Dangers, and supply me in all Wants, support me under all Burdens, and direct
me in all Streights; he alone, that can make me Happy or Miserable; he alone,
that can Save me or Damn me; he alone, that can give inward Peace and Joy, that
is my Friend, my God; in that Self-dedication is the Creatures Advancement;
these First Fruits, if in Sincerity, putting upon me a Gloriousness and
Excellency; in that Felicity hereafter, depends upon my dedicating of my self
unto God now; in that this is the highest piece of Gratitude I am capable of
expressing unto God, and I know no better way to obey the Will of God, than
first to give up my self unto him. And whereas the Mercies which the Lord has
been pleased graciously to bestow upon me, are so many, that even bare Morality
does show me, that I can never enough requite one that has done so much for
me, except by giving up my self wholly to him. [1669.] Whereas God has given
me a godly Father and Mother. [1674.] In that when I was like to die, being
twice sick of a Fever, God was pleased to bless means for my Recovery, and
lengthen out the Thread of my Life. [1675.] Whereas, when I by an Accident fell
down, and had like to have been deprived of the use of my Tongue, God was in
his good Providence, graciously pleased to give me the use of it. [1678.]
Whereas, when I was sick of the Small Pox, God was pleased to bless means for
my Recovery; whereas, then I made Promises unto God, that if he would give me
my Health, I would endeavor to become a new Creature, and he has done so for
these five Years: And whereas God has of late been bestowing many and
wonderful Mercies upon me. What can I do less than give up my self wholly to
him? which now I do. And, O Lord God, I beseech thee to accept of thy poor
Prodigal, now prostrating of himself before thee: I confess, O Lord, I have
fallen from thee by my Iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Hell; but of thy
infinite Grace, thou have promised Mercy to me in Christ, If I will but turn
unto thee with all my Heart; therefore upon the call of thy Gospel I come in,
and from the bottom of my Heart I renounce all thy Enemies, with whom I confess
I have wickedly sided against thee, firmly Covenanting with thee, not to allow
my self in any known Sin, but conscientiously to use all means which thou have
prescribed, for the utter Destruction of all my Corruptions. And whereas I have
inordinately let out my Affections upon the World, I here resign my Heart unto
thee that made it, humbly protesting before thy glorious Majesty, that it is
the firm Resolution of my Heart (and that I do unfeignedly desire Grace from
thee, that when thou shall call me thereunto, I may put in Practice my
Resolution) through thine Assistance, to forsake all that is dear unto me in
the World, rather then to turn from thee to the ways of Sin, and that I will
watch over all its Temptations, whether of Prosperity or Adversity, lest they
should withdraw my Heart from thee, beseeching thee to help me. I renounce all
my own Righteousness, and acknowledge that of my self I am helpless and undone,
and without Righteousness; and whereas of thy bottomless Mercy, thou have
offered to accept of me, and to be reconciled to me, and to be my God, through
Christ, if I would accept of thee, I do this day avouch thee to be the Lord my
God; I do here take the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my
Portion and chief Good, and do give up my self, Body and Soul for thy Servant,
promising to endeavor to serve thee in Righteousness and Holiness. I do here
also on the bended Knees of my Soul, accept of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the
only and living Way, by which Sinners may have access to thee, and do here join
my self in a Marriage-Covenant with him. O Lord Jesus, I come to thee, hungry,
poor, miserable, blind, and naked, and a most loathsome Creature, a condemned
Malefactor; Who am I, that I should be Married unto the King of Glory? I do
accept of thee for my Head and Husband, and embrace thee in all they Offices: I
renounce my own Worthiness, and do choose thee the Lord my Righteousness: I do
renounce my own Wisdom, and do take thine for my Guide: I take thy Will for my
Will, and thy Word for my Law: I do here willingly put my Neck under thy Yoke;
I do subscribe to all the Laws as Holy, Just and Good; and do promise to take
them as the Rule of my Thoughts, Words and Actions; but because I am subject to
many Failings through frailty; I do here protest, here before thee, that
unallowed Miscarriages, contrary to the constant Bent of my Heart, shall not
disannul this everlasting Covenant.

NATHANAEL MATHER.

It may justly be taken for granted, that such a Work as this, would have an
Influence into his Conversation afterward; and so it had, producing in him, a
Conversation which became the Gospel of Christ. He kept waiting upon God, not
only in the Family, but also under the Ministry of Two that were near akin
unto him; namely, his Father and his Brother, whereby the Grace thus begun in
him was not a little cherished and promoted: and unto all known Sins he now
kept saying, as I find once in Shorthand, written by him.

To my Lusts: I have had Communion with you all this while, but I dare not have
so any longer: wherefore I renounce all Communion with you any more; I will
cleave to the God that made me.

My Account of him will be an unfinished Piece, unless all the ensuing Strokes
go to make it up. These things he was exemplary for:

First, He was one that walked by Rule. He was very studious to learn the way
of Conversing with God in every Duty, and there was a Rule which he attended
still unto.

In his private Papers, I find a wise Collection of Rules, by which he governed
himself in the several Duties of Christianity, and in all the Seasons and
Stations of his Life. He consulted the best Authors for Instruction in the
Affairs of Practical Religion; and not into Paper only, but into Action to be
transcribed what he most approved: in all which, the Will of God was the bright
Pole Star, by which he steered his Course.

The Reader shall enjoy (and O that he would follow) Two of this Young Man's
Directories. One of them was this:

I. O that I might lead a Spiritual Life? Wherefore let me regulate my Life by
the Word of God, and by such Scriptures as these:

1. For regulating my Thoughts, Jer. 4.14. Isa. 55.7. Mal. 3.17. Psalm. 104.34.
Phil. 4.8. Prove. 23.26. Deuteronomy. 15.9. Eccles. 10.20. Prove. 24.9. Mat. 9.4. Zech.
8.17.

2. For Regulating my Affections, Col. 3.2, 5. Gal. 5.24.

For my Delight, Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 37.5. For my Joy, Phil. 4.4. Psalm. 43.4. My
Desire, Isa. 26.8, 9. Ezekiel. 7.16. My Love, Mat. 22.37. Psalm. 119.97. My Hatred,
Psalm. 97.10. My Fear, Luke 12.4, 5. My Hope, Psalm. 39.7. My Trust, Psalm. 62.8.
Isa. 26.4.

3. For Regulating my Speech, Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 4.6. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Psalm. 119.46.
Psalm. 71.8, 24. Prove. 31.26.

4. For Regulating my Work, Tit. 3.8. 2 Timothy 2.12. 1 Timothy 5.10. Titus 2.14.
Mat. 5.47. 1 Timothy 6.8. Rev. 3.2. Romans 13.12. Acts 26.20.

Another of them was formed into an Hymn, the singing of which might produce
fresher and stronger Efforts of Soul toward the thing that is good.

Besides these Rules which concerned his whole Walk, he treasured up many more,
that referred to this and that Step in it; and it was the predominant Care and
Watch of his Heart, not to tread awry. Thus one might see askilful Christian in
him. And as he was desirous to live by Precept, so he was to live by Promise
too.

He sell into a particular Consideration, how to improve the Promises of God in
all the Occasions of Life; which is indeed one of the most sanctifying
Exercises in the World.

It was a Proposal which I find he made unto himself.

Let me Salute these Promises once a Day.

1. For Supplying the Wants of the Day, Phil. 4.19. 2. For Growth in Grace,
Hos. 14.5. 3. For Subduing my Sins, Mic. 7.19. 4. For Success in my
Undertakings, Psalm. 1.3. 5 For Turning all the Events of the Day for good, Romans
8.28. 6. For Audience of my Prayers, John 14.13, 14. 7. For Strength to manage
all the Work of the Day, Zech. 10.12. 8. For Direction in Difficulty, Psalm.
32.8. 9. For Life Eternal, Luke 12.31. John 3.16.
Besides these Two, Mat. 11.28. and Isa. 44.3.

Certainly that Man must quickly grow another Enoch, who does thus walk with
God.

Secondly, He was one that lived in Prayer; he was often and long in the Mount
with God. It was his Custom every Day to enter into his Closet, and shut his
Door, and pray to his Father in secret. And And I guess from some of his
Writings, that he did thus no less than thrice a Day, when he met with no
Obstruction in it: nor did he slubber over his Prayers with hasty Amputations,
but wrestie in them for a good part of an Hour together.

It was a most refreshing Communion with God, which his Devotions brought him
sometimes unto.

October 1. he meditated on that, If a Man does intend to be truly Religious,
he must expect nothing but to save his Soul.

But how can this be true? Must I lose my Body altogether? Must I be willing
that the Union between my Body and Soul should for evermore be loosed? Must I
be willing to be for ever without a Body? No, no. All that the Lord requires of
me, is, to have my Body for a few Days, or Years (a few I say, for they cannot
be many) to be wholly at the Service of my Soul, and to be willing that the
Union between these two Mates, then should be dissolved; the Soul first taking
its Progress into everlasting Bliss; the Body being laid in the Dust, to rise
at the Resurrection, accompanying the Soul into its eternal Felicity.

My present Notion of this thing is this: This Dissolution of the Union between
the Soul and Body, is but a Dismission of the Spirit into its Happiness, after
a wearisome Conflict here. And as long as it shall be best for me to be here,
here I shall continue. Infinite Wisdom is to be the Orderer of this; and it
will be a grievous and shameful Reflection thereupon, for me to say, It will be
better for me to live than to die, at such a time when I am called thereunto.

With my Body I must expect to lose all the pleasant Enjoyments of this World,
Liberty, Library, Study, and Relations. But yet neither shall I lose these. As
for my Liberty, by True Religion, and by dying for it too, when need requires,
I shall gain the only Liberty, even from the Body of Sin. As for my Library, if
I die for Christ, or in the Lord, I shall have no need of it; my Understanding
shall be enough enlarged, and I shall not need to turn over Books for Learning.
As for my Study (my Paradise) I shall have a better, a larger, and a more
complete than this. As for my Relations, those of them that are truly pious, I
shall only go before them; and if there should be any of them not pious, the
longer I should stay with them here, (if they continue impenitent) it would but
make my Grief more intolerable, I think when I leave them, that I shall have no
Hopes to see them again for ever.

But this is not all neither. -- My Body must be used as the Soul's Instrument;
and here all that Strength and Ease which I have, must be used for the Soul:
and truly there is Reason enough for it, that so there may be Eternal Happiness
for both together.

In Marriage, the Husband and Wife should have the same Design: Would it not be
inhumane, for the one to have a Design which tends to the Ruin of the other?
Just so my Soul and Body should have the same Design; and the Body being the
more vile of the two, should be subordinate to the Soul. And it is a necessary
Disjunction, either the Body, the Strength and Ease, and Members of it, must be
used for the good, or for the hurt of the Soul; there is no Medium here. Let me
then herein make my Body useful to my Soul, in accomplishing all the good
Designs of it, which it is capable of being interested in. Nor is there any
thing else worth speaking of that must be foregone, except Health, and the
Momentaneousness of all Bodily Torments, will make them very tolerable.

My Resolutions be, That I will not expect, by devoting myself unto the Fear of
God, to gain any thing as to my Body in this World. That through the Grace of
Christ, I will use the Strength, Ease, Health of my Body; yea, my whole Body,
in subordination to my Soul, in the Service of the Lord Jesus.

With such Meditations as these, he kept mellowing of his own Soul, and
preparing it for the State wherein Faith is turned into Sight. But there was
yet a more delightful and surprising way of Thinking, after which he did
aspire. He considered, that the whole Creation was full of God; and that there
was not a Leaf of Grass in the Field, which might not make an Observer to be
sensible of the Lord. He apprehended, that the idle Minutes of our Lives, were
many more than a short Liver should allow: that the very Filings of Gold, and
of Time, were exceeding precious; and that there were little Fragments of Hours
intervening between our more stated Businesses, wherein Thoughts of God might
be no less pleasant than frequent with us. Thus far Mr. Mather.

17. A short Account of Mrs. Elizabeth Moore's Evidences for Heaven: as I find
'em in Mr. Calamy's Godly Man's Ark.
I. Her Design in this Collection.
IN the Examination of myself, I find that my Aims and Ends, why I desire to
gather together, and clear up my Evidences for Heaven, (if my deceitful Heart
does not deceive me) are these following: 1. That hereby (as a means) I may be
enabled to glorify God in the great Work of Believing. 2. My Aim is to
strengthen that longed-for Grace of Assurance; a Grace, which though it be not
of absolute necessity for the Being and Salvation, yet is of absolute necessity
for the Well-being and Consolation of a Christian: without this Grace, I can
neither live nor die comfortably. 3. My Aim is to obey God in his Word, who
has commanded me by his Apostle, To work out my own salvation with fear and
trembling, and to give all diligence to make my calling and election sure.


A brief Collection of her Evidences for Heaven.
I. Evidence. BLessed be God, who has, through his free Mercy, begotten me to
a hope, that I am regenerated and born from above, and converted unto God.

Reason. Because the Lord has gone the same usual way with me, as with those
he pleases to convert to himself, and this I shall make to appear in five or
six particulars.

1. The Lord by his Spirit accompanying the Preaching of his Word, caused the
Scales to fall from my Eyes, and opened them, and set up a clear Light in my
Understanding, and made me to see Sin to be exceeding sinful.

2. The Lord brought me to see the Misery that I was in, by reason of my Sins.
I thought I was utterly forsaken of God, and I thought that God would never
accept of such a Wretch as I saw myself to be.

3. The Lord brought me to a Spiritual Astonishment, that I cried out, What
shall I do to be saved? and said with Paul, Lord! What would thou have me to
do? Do but make known to thy poor Creature, what thy Will is, and I thought I
could do any thing, or suffer any thing for the Lord.

4. The Lord took me off my own bottom, off my own Righteousness, and made me
to see that that was but a sandy Foundation, and would not hold out.

5. The Lord brought me to see a Soul-sanctification in the Lord Jesus Christ
alone; and I think I should be as fully satisfied with Christ alone, as my
Heart can desire. If I know my Heart, it pants after Christ, and Christ
alone: None but Christ, none but Christ.

II. My Second Scripture-Evidence is taken from Mark 2.17. where Christ says,
They that are whole, have no need of the Physician, but they that are sick; and
he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Now through God's
Mercy I can say, I am a Sin-sick-Sinner.

III. From Mat. 11.28, 29. I am weary and heavy laden. Now Christ has promised
to give Ease to such.

IV. I can say with David, That my Sins are a heavy Burden to me, they are too
heavy for me, Psalm. 38.4. And I can say that I mourn, because I can mourn no
more for my Sins.

V. From Mat. 5.3. I think (if my Heart do not deceive me) I am poor in spirit;
now, theirs is the kingdom of heaven, says Christ.

VI. From Mat. 12.20. I am a bruised reed, and smeaking flax. And therefore
Christ has promised, he will not break such a Reed, nor quench the Smoke of
Grace, if it be true Grace; but he will increase it more and more.

VII. From 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, (says Paul) that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners. And so say I too; it is worthy all acceptance, that Christ should
come from the Bosom of his Father, who was infinitely glorious and happy, that
he should come into the World to save me, me a sinner, me the chief of sinners.

VIII. I can say with Paul, that I delight in the Law of God, after the inward
man, and I am grieved that I cannot keep it. I find that Spiritual War in me,
between Flesh and Spirit, which Paul complains of, and I can say that Paul does
confess over my Heart in his Confessions, Romans 7.

IX. I can say, that the Lord has in some measure put his fear into my Heart,
and I fear to offend him.

X. I can say with the Church to Christ, Cant. 1.7. O thou whom my soul loves!
(And if I know any thing at all of mine own Heart) Christ is altogether lovely,
and most desirable to my Soul. I think I can truly say with David, That I have
none in heaven but thee, and there is nothing on earth that I desire besides
thee, in comparison of thee, in competition with thee.

XI. I find my Heart much inflamed with Love to all the Children of God,
because they are God's Children; and the more I see, or find, or hear of God in
them, the more I find my Heart cleaving to them; and I think I can truly say
with David, That my delight is in the saints, and those that excel in grace.

XII. I do not only love God, and the Children of God, but I labor to keep his
Commandments, and they are not grievous to me.

XIII. I find I am one that is very thirty after Jesus Christ, and the Grace of
Christ: and I thirst to have his Image more and more stamped upon me; and I
would fain be assured by God's Spirit, that I am transplanted into Christ, and
therefore I long and endeavor after a true and lively Faith.

XIV. I am willing to confess, and with all my Heart to forsake all my Sins. I
am willing to give Glory to God, in taking Shame unto myself. I acknowledge
myself a guilty Malefactor, and judge myself worthy of the just Condemnation of
the Righteous Judge of all the Earth.

XV. I hope I am one whom God has taken into Covenant with himself, because he
has bestowed upon me the Fruits of the Covenant, because he has circumcised
my Heart to love him, and has put his Fear into me, and has wrought an
universal change in me, and has given me a new Heart, and a new Spirit.

XVI. As for my Affliction that lies upon me, (though it be in itself very
heavy) I much more desire the sanctification of it, than the removal. I
earnestly labor to learn all those Lessons which God teaches me by Affliction.

XVII. Faith is the Condition of Salvation: Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thou shall be saved. And this is his commandment, that we should believe in
his Son Jesus Christ. Now I find nothing so hard to me as to believe aright.
Yet I must and will give Glory to God and say, Lord, I believe, help thou my
unbelief.

Thus I have, according to the Apostle's Exhortation, endeavored to give a
Reason of the Hope that is in me.

Thus far Mr. Edm. Calamy.
18. Mr. Albyn's Evidences for Heaven (which take in his own Words) viz. --
Some Observations upon my own Heart, which I humbly hope, are true Evidences of
a Work of saving Grace, and that my Soul has a real Interest in Jesus Christ,
and I desire to deal plainly, sincerely, and truly, as in the presence of the
Heart, searching God in this great and weighty Work of Self-Examination; humbly
and heartily imploring the Grace and Assistance of God's most Holy Spirit
therein.

1. I desire every day to attain unto a most clear and distinct Knowledge of
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with all their Properties and Attributes,
and to have more high and reverend Thoughts of him, and to be more enlarged in
Thankfulness in Heart and Life, for my Creation and Preservation, but
especially for my Redemption.

2. I desire a true sanctified Knowledge of the whole Will of God, and the full
Latitude of every Commandment.

3. I heartily desire and endeavor to yield constant and cheerful Obedience to
every one of his Commandments; and particularly I endeavor to consecrate the
Sabbath Day in the Service of God only, and I embrace all opportunities
besides, that I conveniently may, to hear the Word of God Preached, and to Read
and Meditate on it in private, and I would not willingly omit any opportunity
for coming to the Table of the Lord, nor neglect Praying in my Family, or alone
in private; in and by all which Ordinances, it is the unfeigned Desire of my
Soul, to enjoy true Spiritual Communion with God, through Jesus Christ; and
that every Grace of God may by them be strengthened in me, and evdry Sin and
Lust mortified; and though I do most miserably and sinfully miscarry in the
Performance of every Holy Duty, being continually haunted with many sinful
Wanderings, and Indispositions of Heart, for which I unfeignedly humble my self,
'twixt God and my own Soul, confessing the same, and Judging and Condemning my
self for them in his Presence; yet through the infinite Mercy and Bounty of my
gracious God, through Jesus Christ, I feel, and experimentally find, some
sensible Abatements of the one, and a comfortable Addition to the Strength of
the other.

4. I do desire, and in some poor Measure, endeavor constantly to watch and
observe the Actings and Motions of my own Heart, and would not allow of any
sinful Project or Design whatsoever, to be contrived and harbored therein, and
am more careful to keep my Heart from contemplative Iniquity, then to order my
outward Actions to the Liking and Approbation of Men.

5. I desire to know the Duties of every one of my Relations, and
conscientiously to walk in all of them, to Magistrates, Ministers, Parents,
Wife, Children, Servarts, and all others; and in reference to the present
Distractions of our Land, I humbly desire that the Lord would be pleased to set
up such a Magistracy, as I may with a good Conscience yield cheerful Obedience
to all its Lawful Commands, and such, under whom Religion may flourish, the
Power of Godliness be countenanced, and the Government of Jesus Christ be
erected and submitted unto; for the Effecting whereof I pray, that God would
cast out the Spirit of Error, Profaneness, and Divisions that is almongst us.

6. For the Duties of my particular Calling, I desire faithfully to discharge
the same; and pray that God would give me such a Measure of Grace, and true
Heavenly Wisdom, as that I may not be carried away with Covetousness, Ambition,
or Deceitfulness, on the one hand, nor with Pride, Idleness, or Presumption, on
the other, but that I may conscientiously Labor diligently in my Calling, so
as to provide for my Family, and that I may have to give to him that needs:
Praying that I may be kept from all those Sins and Temptations that do attend
my Calling at any time.

7. I do often, though with much Frailty and Weakness, reflect on my own ways,
acknowledging before God, and bewailing my own Miscarriages, and beg Pardon for
them, and all my secret unknown Sins, through the Merits of Jesus Christ; and
still desire the Lord to keep me from the Deceits of my own Heart, and from all
the Temptations I do or may meet with, in reference to the Sins of the present
evil Times: And in my Judgment and Affections (so far as I know my own Heart) I
would rather loose all my outward Comforts and Accommodations, then sin against
my God, by a sinful Submission to any unlawful Injunctions for the Preservation
thereof; and pray, thatas the Lord has hitherto (I hope in some good measure
kept me) so he would still preserve me upright in Heart before him, and
unspotted in Life before Men; and that if I should be called thereunto, he
would give me Grace and Strength to make public Profession of my Resolution,
to persevere in well doing, and to keep close to my Duty, whatsoever Sufferings
I meet withal; and that the carnal Reasoning of my corrupt Flesh and Blood,
which I find to be exceeding strong, and often assaulting of me, may never
prevail over me, to make me sin against my God, on whose Promises I desire
(above all other things) Grace to rest, and commit my self to his gracious
Providence to take care for me and mine, rather then to use and sinful means to
secure or provide for my self or them.

8. In all Streights and Difficulties I meet with in my Calling, and in all
Hazards in my Estate by Sea, or otherwise; I first of all make my Addresses to
the Throne of Grace, for Strength and Courage to trust and rely upon the
faithful Promises, and gracious Providence of God -- and for Direction and
Assistance for the conscientious using of all lawful Means for the managing of
my Affairs.

9. My Heart does truly rejoice and bleS God, when I see or hear of the Courage
of his faithful Ministers or other private Christians, in opposing or
withstanding the Storm of these wicked Times, and upon serious deliberate
Consideration, I had abundantly rather suffer with them, then enjoy Peace and
Prosperity upon the sinful Terms of these wicked Times.

10. I most of all desire and delight to hear such Preaching as is most
searching, and that gives most plain and practical Directions for the leading
of a holy Life.

11. I have the highest Esteem of, and most affection are Love to those, in
whom I see the most hopeful Signs and Fruits of a Work of Grace in their Hearts.

12. I endeavor to shun and avoid all loose and vain Company, and Associate my
self with those that are more solid and prositable in their Conversation for
Religious Advantages.

13. I humbly and heartily desire the gracious Assistance of God's most holy
Spirit; to discover unto me the true and real worth of my own Soul; and that of
all other Evils, I may be preserved from Errors and Mistakes in this Business
of such Weighty and infinite Concernment.

14. I have often heard in many Sermons, diverse distinguishing Characters of
true saving Grace, and upon serious Reflection upon my own Soul, I find that my
Heart does not totally condemn me in any of them, but that God has wrought
some real, though weak Impressions of them in me, for which I humbly desire more
and more Strength and Ability to Praise him in Heart and Life.

15. Notwithstanding all which wherein I have truly, so far as I am able,
expressed the Truth, yet fear and tremble, least my own Heart should deceive me
herein; and though I daily beg of God, a renewing of an Addition to Spiritual
Strength, yet desire to rely only upon the free and rich Mercy of God, through
the All-sufficient Merits of Jesus Christ, for the Pardon of my Sins, and
Salvation of my Soul; desiring to receive him upon his own Terms, as my King,
Priest, and Prophet.

Mr. Albyn sent these his Evidences for Heaven, to Mr. Calamy, with this Letter.
Mr. Calamy,
I Humbly entreat you to Peruse and Consider the Particulars afore-written, and
to afford me your Judgment in Writing, under your own, and some other godly
Ministers Hands subscribed thereunto;

Yours, in all Christian Obligations, B. A.
London, July 4th 1650.

To which Mr. Calamy returned his Answer.

I Am verily persuaded from infallible Grounds out of God's Word, that
whosoever can own these fifteen Particulars abovementioned, in Truth, and in
Sincerity, is a true Child of God, and shall certainly inherit everlasting Life.

Edm. Calamy,

Minister of God's Word, in Aldermanbury.


We whose Names are under Written, are of the same Persuasion with our Reverend
Brother Mr. Calamy above Written.

John Fuller, Matthew. Newcomen.


These Evidences for Heaven, were delivered to me by the very Person who
Transcribed them from Mr. Albyn 's own Writing, which he kept by him to his
Death.

19. The Heavenly Instructions, senthy Mrs. Lydia Carter, in several Letters to
her Relations, which being Writ whilst she was very Young, deserve a place
under our present Head of Extraordinary Zeal and Devotion.
The Letters were Five in Number, and were Directed to Benjamin Carter,
Jeremiah Carter, her Sister Child, her Aunt Child, and to her Sister Desborrow;
all of Chesham in Buckingham-shire.

Mrs. Lydia Carter's Letter to her Brother Benjamin Carter.
Loving Brother,
WHen you consider how Priscilla expounded the Way of God more perfectly unto
Apollos, I hope you will take in good part, the sincere and cordial Wishes of a
weaker Vessel. Providence has set our Bodies at a great Distance, yet how near
and dear you are unto my Soul the Lord knows, whose eternal Welfare I as
vehemently desire, as my own; and should be unspeakably glad, if (as we have
lain in one Mothers Belly and Bosom together) we might also lie down in the
same Divine Embraces of infinite Love. Brother, I know not whether I shall ever
see your Face any more, not that I speak in respect of present Sickness, but in
regard of the uncertain brevity of Life. Man gives up the Ghost, and where is
he? Oh that same Expression, And where is he? has often put my Soul into a
wondering Frame, because the Scripture says, after Death comes Judgment.
Brother, I humbly and ingeniously confess, that I am less then the least of all
those who look Heavenward, yet that I am a bruised Reed, or as smoking Flax,
I cannot deny: But, oh Brother! I would have you a tall Cedar in Religion, a
Pillar in the Church of God, a valiant Champion for the Truth, one that may
attain unto the full Stature of a perfect Man in Christ. Brother, believe me, I
blush at these Scriblings of mine; yet how fain would I write unto you, (seeing
I cannot speak with you) that I might put you in mind of Eternity, of Eternity,
that little Word of the greatest Concernment. But when this thought first
entered into my Heart, I bewailed, oh I bewailed mine own Ignorance, Unbelief,
Inconsideration, and want of Zeal; and I thought you might justly smile at my
forwardness in exhorting you (who am so unable myself) and might say, Who is
this that darkneth Counsel with Words, without Knowledge? Yet because the
Widow's Mite was kindly accepted of by Christ, Brother, do you vouchsafe a
benign Aspect upon this weak Attempt, otherwise you will discourage a young
Writer quite. Indeed I want skill to write my Words, and Words to express my
Mind. What shall I say? Oh would to God, the grave and gracious Counsels of
that holy Man (now in Heaven) might always sound in both our Ears! Shall I wish
he were alive again, that we might be blessed with his Fatherly Admonitions and
Instructions, concerning that one thing necessary? Or may not we be known to be
the Spiritual Children of our Father Abraham, if we walk in the Steps of his
Faith, though he knows us not, being Dead! Alas, alas, I am sure (I may speak
it of my self) tho one should arise from the Dead! it would be nothing
available, unless God did bring my unsensible and unteachable Heart under the
powerful Convincements of his Word, which is a more sure Word of Prophecy,
(then a ghostly Relation) unto which we are all bound to take good heed.
Brother, search the Scriptures, for in them you shall find eternal Life; and
they testified of Christ. I profess unto you, I know nothing in all this World
worth the knowing, but a Crucified Christ; and to be fully persuaded upon
unquestionable Grounds of a saving Interest in him. Undoubtedly the pale Horse
is prancing up and down in the World, upon which Death Rides; and we know not
how soon he may have us under his Feet: But that we may escape out of the Hands
of that Horsemans Page ( Rev. 6. ver. 8.) that we may so live in Christ, that
Death may be an Advantage to us; that we may so walk in the Faith, that we may
have this Testimony in our own Consciences, that all our Ways and Paths are
well-pleasing to the Lord, our great Sovereign; that we may so, even so run, as
to obtain an immortal Crown at last, though the Righteous shall scarcely be
saved; and that we might be found upon Mount Sion with the Lamb, among the
Sealed ones of God, is the earnest and daily Prayer of,

Your loving Sister, Lydia Carter.


Mrs. Lydia Carter's Letter to her Brother Jeremiah Carter.
Loving Brother Jeremiah,
YOU are a young Man; and you read of the young Man in the Gospel, concerning
whom it is said Christ looking upon him, loved him. I think that was but a
common Love, because of some hopefulness of more good, or of less discovery of
more evil in him, than in many others. The Lord knows, that I do most tenderly
love you, as a Brother in the Flesh; but oh! how much more should I love you,
as a Brother in Christ! Now that you may have a share in the Soul-saving Love
of Christ, that you may be more intimately acquainted with the deep Mystery of
the Gospel, that you may consecrate the Flower of your Youth to God, that you
may fly all Sins incident to your present State, that you may be sensible of
continued Mercies, that you may improve all Opportunities and Abilities which
you have received from God, for God; that you may earnestly contend for the
Faith, once delivered to the Saints; that you may follow the Lord fully in your
Generation, and that you and I, with all our Relations, may one Day sit down in
heavenly places together, with Jesus Christ, is the uncessant Prayer of,

Your very Loving Sister, Lydia Carter.
August 10. 1655.

Mrs. Lydia Carter's Letter to her Sister Child.
Loving Sister Child,
YOU are a Mother; it is a Blessing, yet but an earthly Blessing. Children are
certain Cares, uncertain Comforts. Now that you may bear Christ in your Spirit,
as you have born Children in your Body, that you may have further Experience of
the preserving Love of God, which passes the Tenderness of Maternal Affection
(Isai. 49.14, 15.) that you may always enjoy the Light of God's Countenance,
that you may be strengthened with all Might, according to the glorious Power of
God in your inward Man, unto all Patience and Long-suffering, with Joyfulness,
that you may by your heavenly Conversation adorn the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
that you may be counseled and comforted by the sweet Influences of the Spirit
of Grace, and that you may be one of those who shall be caught up in the
Clouds, together with all the Saints, to meet the Lord in the Air, and before
ever with him, is the fervent Prayer of,

Your very Loving Sister, Lydia Carter.


Mrs. Lydia Carter's Letter to her Aunt Child.
Most endeared Aunt,
WHom I love in the Truth, and not I only, but also all they that have known
the Truth, Grace be with you, Mercy and Peace be multiplied unto you, through
the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord. I wish above all things, that you
may prosper, and be in Health, even as your Soul prospers. I have no greater
Joy, than to hear that all the Lord's People walk in the Power of Godliness,
showing forth the Praises of him, who has called us out of Darkness, into his
marvelous Light. It is true, I have need to be more fully instructed of those
who have attained unto a full Age, and by reason of use have their Senses
exercised to discern both Good and Evil; yet as one who has obtained this
Grace of the Lord, as to be faithful in a few things, I shall not be negligent
to put you in remembrance of these things, though you know them, and are
established in the present Truth. That which the Lord expects at our Hands, is,
that we should walk worthy of him, who has called us unto a Kingdom; that we
should live unto the praise of his rich Grace, who has so freely poured out
his Soul unto Death for us. Dying Love justly merits an humble, holy, thankful,
and fruitful Conversation. Truly we live in a crooked and perverse Generation;
Satan has his Seat in every place; great is the subtilty of Sin, the
deceitfulness of our own Hearts, the power and malice of our Spiritual
Adversary; it nearly concerns us therefore, to give all diligence to make our
calling and election sure, before we go away from hence, and be no more. Aunt,
My continual and fervent Desire is, That we may be every Day more and more
enlightened into the Depths of Special and Distinguishing Love, and that I may
be helped forward in my Faith and Joy in the Holy Ghost, by your Experiences,
is the Prayer of,

Your Affectionate Cousin, Lydia Carter.
My Love unto all my Cousins, praying that they may be blessed with all
Spiritual Blessings, in the common Savior.




Mrs. Lydia Carter's Letter to her Sister Desborrow.
Loving Sister Desborrow,
THat we should exhort one another daily, consider one another, and provoke one
another unto Love and Good Works, is the Exhortation of the Scripture, and such
Counsel as I desire might be written upon your Heart and mine. Sister, You are
now entered into the World with me; but that an abundant entrance may be
administered into the Kingdom of God unto us both; that we may with Mary; choose
the better part, which shall never be taken from us; that we may grow in Grace,
and in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; that we may not be weary of Well-doing;
that we may approve our Hearts unto God, in all manner of Holiness; that we may
be filled with Spiritual Graces, suitable to our Relations and Conditions; that
we may persevere unto the End; that we may have the Sense of God's Love kept
alive, and warm upon our Hearts; that we may bring forth much Fruit
proportionable to the precious Enjoyments of Divine Mercy; that we may make it
our Business to praise, exalt, and glorify him, who has abundantly loved us
in his Son; that we may have a continual Eye upon him, who is the Author and
Finisher of our Faith; that we may earnestly strive to attain unto the
Resurrection of the Dead; and that we may learn Christ, love Christ, and live
Christ, is the restless Desire of,

Your very Loving Sister, Lydia Carter.
Your Husband, and you, shall not be forgotten by me, in my Pleadings at the
Throne of Grace.

Farewell.



These Letters were all sent me by her own Son, who received 'em from his
Father, a little before his Death. He also sent him the following Letter, and
Directions for the Management of his whole Life; which being full of pious
Instructions may properly come under this Head. His Letter was this following:

My dear Child,
THY Master's Letter to me, last Week, gives me great Encouragement to think
that (if please God I live) I shall receive a great deal of Comfort from thee,
he writes so fully (that I profess I never read more written concerning any one
in my Life) of thy cheerfulness, tractableness, industriousness, willingly to
learn and obey, of thy Truth and honesty, and especially of thy Desire and
Endeavor to know and serve the Lord. Oh Child! this good Character of thee, is
the most comfortable and reviving Cordial that I have taken all the time of my
late and long Sickness. I pray God continue thy good Resolutions, of living up
to thy Master's (wonderful) Commendations of thee. Now, dear Child, if thy
Deserts answer these Praises, I shall not fear, but I shall meet thy Face in
Heaven hereafter, though (through my corporal Indisposition) I fear I shall see
thy Face no more on Earth; and in the new Jerusalem (if thou die in the Arms
of Divine Embraces) I shall see thee, not disfigured with Pock-holes, but
dignified with celestial Glory; and there will thou see thine own Mother's
Face, who killed herself with excessive Love to thee, and who died Praying so
earnestly for thy everlasting Salvation. But I must subscribe in have, (being
much indisposed, through a Cold I caught last Lord's Day, in Preaching.)

Your real loving Father, Still Praying for the Welfare of your Soul and Body.
May 10. 1675.

I shall next add his pious Counsel to his Son, (which he gave him at his own
House, December 25th, 1675.) which here follows in his own Words, viz.

Concerning your SOUL.
1. AS you have been a Son of many Prayers and Tears, being a long time
earnestly begged of God, and against all Human Hope, being brought forth into
the World by God's Special Hand of Providence, and being wonderfully restored
to Life again, after some Hours seeming Death, which immediately ensued after
your Birth; and being likewise as signally delivered from the nearest hazard
and likelihood of Death, when you had the Smallpox; I do therefore exhort and
charge you, in the Presence of the All-seeing God, and as you will answer it
before Jesus Christ, the Judge of the Quick and Dead, that you make it your
primary and principal Care and Endeavor, to know, fear, love, obey, and serve
God, your Creator and Deliverer, as he has revealed himself, through his Son,
by his Spirit, in his Holy Word.

2. I do likewise counsel you to read God's Holy Word, both in the Latin and
English Bible, as often as you have opportunity; and I also counsel you to read
over, Wollebius's Compendium of Theology, in Latin and English, 'till you well
understand both, at such Seasons as you may most conveniently do it.

3. I do likewise counsel you, constantly every Morning and Evening, to pray
unto God for his Direction, Protection, and Benediction in all that you do, and
that with an audible Voice, when you may conveniently do it; or at least
mentally, expressing all possible Reverence, Affection, Joy, and Thankfulness
to God, through Christ therein.

4. I counsel you likewise manfully to resist all Extremes, sinful Sadness and
Despondency of Spirit, and to exercise Faith, Cheerfulness, and Delight, in the
remembrance of all God's Mercies and Deliverances.

5. I do likewise counsel you, carefully to shun all evil Company, with all
Temptations to, and Occasions of Evil.

6. I do likewise counsel you, to be Dutiful to your Mother, Loving to your
Brother and Sisters, Obedient to your Master, diligently and faithfully to
serve the Lord in all Relations and Conditions, as he requires.

Concerning your BODY.
1. I Counsel you to use moderate Exercise, and lawful Recreations, for the
necessary Health of your Body; being always moderate in your Eating, Drinking,
and Sleeping. Never spend too much Time of Cost in any Exercise or Recreation.

Concerning your ESTATE.
1. I Do counsel you, never to desert your Trade, or Calling, which you have by
God's special Providence been called unto.

2. I do counsel you to serve out your full time with cheerfulness and delight,
endeavoring to acquaint your self with all the Mysteries and Improvements of
your Trade: and, if you find not convincing Reasons to the contrary, to serve
as Journey-man for One Year; because I judge you may by that means gain more
Acquaintance and Interest, and a further Insight into your Trade.

3. I do counsel you, not to marry before you be Twenty five Years of age,
unless some remarkable Providence shall induce you thereunto.

4. I do likewise counsel you to use all possible Prudence in your Choice of a
Wife; that she be truly Religious, or at least eminently Virtuous, that is born
of honest Parents, and who is of Age and Estate suitable unto your self.

5. I do likewise counsel you, not to sell any part of your Estate in Land, if
either your Wife's Portion, or your borrowing of Money upon Interest, may
conveniently serve to set up your Trade.

6. I do likewise counsel you, to have a convenient Shop, in a convenient
Place, at your own Charge, which will very much facilitate, and make way for
your suitable and comfortable Marriage; yet if you shall by some remarkable
Providence, meet with a Wife of a considerable Estate, you may, by her Portion,
set up your Trade, without Mortgaging of your Land.

7. Lastly, I likewise counsel you in all Things, and in all Times, so to
Think, and Speak, and Act, as you may be willing to appear before God at Death
and Judgment.

December. 25. Anno Dom. 1675.

20. Constantine the Great, did so honor the Countenance of old Paphnutias,
though disfigured by the loss of his Eye, that he often, with delight, did kiss
the Hollow of that Eye, which was lost for the Cause of Christ. Chetwind's
Historical Collections.

21. I have read of one Chilion, a Dutch Schoolmaster, who being persuaded to
recant, and save his Life for the sake of his Wife, and poor Children,
answered, If the whole Earth was turned into a Globe of Gold, and all mine own,
I would part with it, rather than with my Wife and Children, and yet these I
can part with for the sake of Jesus Christ. The like was said by George
Carpenter; as Mr. Fox relates, Part 2. p. 113. Mr. Barker's Flores.

22. A young Man condemned and brought to the Block, and then remitted by
Julian, as he rose, spoke these Words: Ah sweet Jesus! am not I worthy to
suffer for thy sake? Luther's Coll. p. 247.

CHAP. LXII. Remarkable Zeal and Charity, in Propagating Religion.
EVery thing is naturally apt to communicate its own Qualities, Earth, Air,
Fire, and Water; the Sun, Moon, and all the Planets: the Light makes an Infant
smile, and the Night affects us with dullness and sleepiness. God would make us
good and happy as himself is, and the Devil bad and miserable. Jews and
Mahometans, and Heretics, have a Zeal many times to promote their particular
and unsound Principles: but we have some Examples of good Christians, who have
been forward and zealous to propagate the Gospel in sincerity.

1. Mr. Tho. Gouge having a compassion for those parts of Wales, which were
distressed with Ignorance, and wanted the Means of Knowledge, made a Journey
into South Wales, and in every Town where he came, he enquired what poor People
there were, that had any Children, whom they were willing to have taught
English, and to Read and Write, and to learn the Catechism: and where he met
with a competent Number, he enquired for fit Persons to instruct them; a Man
for the Boys, and a Woman for the Girls, and agreed with them, as before for a
Penny, or Twopence a Week, which he undertook to pay.

It was a great Work incumbent upon Mr. Gouge, not only to have poor Children
taught to Read and Write, and to be carefully instructed in the Principles of
Religion, but the Persons of grown Age, the Poor especially, should be
furnished with necessary Helps, and Means of Knowledge, as the Bible, and other
good Books, in their own Language: among which were, The Practice of Piety, The
Church Catechism, The Duty of Man, with some other pious and useful Treatises,
of which he caused a great Number to be Translated and Printed, and to be sent
down to all the chief Towns in Wales, to be sold at easy Rates to those that
were able to buy them, and to be freely given to such Poor as were not able. In
both these Designs, through the Blessing of God upon his unwearied Endeavors,
he found very great and good Success: for by the large and bountiful
Contributions, which chiefly by his Industry and prudent Application, were
obtained from charitable Persons of all Ranks and Conditions; from some of the
Nobility and Gentry of Wales, and of the Neighboring Counties, and of several
of that Quality in and about London: as also from some of the Reverend Bishops
and Clergy; and from the Inexhausted Fountain of Charity, (the City of London)
led on and encouraged by the most bountiful Example of the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen; to all which he constantly added Two Thirds
of his Estate (which was very considerable;) I say, by all these together,
there were every Year Eight hundred, and sometimes a Thousand poor Children
Educated, as before is expressed. And by his Example and Persuasions, with the
Magistrates in all the chief Towns in Wales, he prevailed with them to maintain
and bring up, at their own Charges, the like Number of poor Children, and under
his Inspection and Care. He also gave a very great Number of Books, before
spoken of, both in the Welsh and in the English Tongues, to such of the poorer
sort as were unable to buy, and willing to read, and make use of them. But that
which was the greatest Work of all, and amounted indeed to a mighty Charge, was
this: He procured a new and very fair Impression of the Bible, and Liturgy of
the Church of England, in the Welsh Tongue, to the Number of Eight thousand;
One thousand whereof were freely given to the Poor, and the rest were sent to
the Cities, and principal Towns in Wales, to be sold to the Rich at very
reasonable and low Prizes, viz. at Four Shillings a piece, well Bound and
Clasped; which was much cheaper than any English Bible, that was of so fair a
Print and Paper, was ever sold for. See the Narrative of his Life.

2. For the Highlands in Scotland. -- The Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire;
commiserating the Ignorance of the poor Highlanders, agreed with one Mr. W.
Hewsdon, M. A. formerly of Edinburgh, for 10 l. and the Defraying of all his
Charges, to make a Journey into those Parts, and procure a fit Person, to
Translate, for him, the New Testament, Psalter, and Church Catechism, into
Irish; who accordingly went, and procured one Mr. Kirk for the purpose. The
Translation being finished, and Printed at Mr. Boyle's Charge, he, with Mr.
Kirk, made a Journey into those Highlands, dispersed the Books according to
Discretion: Mr. Kirk stayed there many Years, 'till about a Year or two ago, he
died there; but not 'till he had seen the great Success of the Translation, and
his own Pains amongst them. Insomuch, that though before they had not any Books
of Religion in their own Language, yet in a short time many Schools were set
up; and so greedy were the People to learn the Contents of these new Books,
that in the Schools near Port O Kirk. Seventeen of the Scholars turned Masters,
and so bred Seventeen Scholars more, for the East, West, and North Highlands;
old People redeeming their time, from their ordinary Labor to get Knowledge;
and in two Years and a half, they came ordinarily to Church with their Psalters
in their Hand, viz. to South-End, in Kentaire, to the North of Sunderland, in
Kaithness, Backham, etc. where there has been a Sermon every Lord's Day since
1684, and a Lecture on a Weekday. There are Schools Erected for the Teaching
of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew; People very industrious to learn; a great
Emendation of Manners; the People extremely thankful to God Almighty, for
raising up such a one as Mr. Boil, to distribute his Charity among them. I am
informed there is a Printed Relation of this Great Work, and the Success of it;
but not being able to procure it. I am satisfied with this Account of it,
signed with the aforesaid Mr. Hewsdon's own Hand, and attested by Sir Peter
Pett.

3. For the East-Indians, in the Isle Formosa, near China. -- Mr. Robert
Junius, late of Delpht in Holland, was Nominated by the Honored and Pious
Senate, of the famous Expedition of the United Provinces, for the Conversion of
the Eastern Indians, and particularly in Formosa: who accordingly undertook the
Charge, went over to the Place, bestowed much Pains in laying the Groundwork,
and Principles of Religion amongst them; so that of Persons grown up (Adult) in
that Isle of Formosa, 5900 of both Sexes, gave up their Names to Christ; and
professing their Faith, and giving fit Answers to Questions propounded out of
the Word of God, were baptized by him. He set up Schoolmasters to instruct
others, and gained Six hundred Scholars to Read and Write; collected the chief
Heads of Religion, and composed several Prayers, and translated certain Psalms
into the Formosan Language; this in the Northern Parts mostly: but in the
Southern also he planted Churches in Three and twenty Towns, and promoted the
Worship of the True God. At last having set diverse Pastors over them, being
grown weak and unserviceable in Body, and desirous to see his Aged Mother, and
Native Country, he returned home again. This Narration is Published in Latin,
by Casp. Sabellius, and prefixed to his Book called, Antidotum Ambition^^, and
Printed at the Charge of J. Jansonius, Amsterdam; and attested by several
others. See the Narrative published at London, 1650.

4. Foro the Indians in New England, Mr. Winslow, in several Relations, gives
this following Account:

First Time. October. 28. 1646. Four of us, (says he) having sought God, went
according to Appointment to the Wigwam (or Tent made of Boughs and Mats) of
Waaubon, (an Indian Governor) who had given up his Eldest Son before, to be
Educated by the English in the Knowledge of GOD; where we found many Indians
gathered together from all Quarters, to learn of us the Knowledge of GOD. We
Preached in the Indian Tongue above an Hour; the Indians attended very
diligently, professing they understood all that was taught them. Then we
propounded Questions, and desired them to propound Questions to us: which they
readily did.

1. Quest. How may we come to know Jesus Christ? 2. Quest. Whether God, or
Jesus Christ did understand Indian Prayers? 3. Quest. Whether Englishmen were
at any time so ignorant of God and Jesus, as they?
These Questions being answered, and we demanding, If they were not weary? They
answering, No: and a time being agreed upon, for our coming again.

Second Time. Nov. 11. 1646. Meeting again at Waaubon's Wigwam, we found more
Indians than at the first. After Prayer, we asked them Three Questions, which
were thus answered.

1. Quest. Who made you and all the World?

Answ. God.

2. Quest. Who do you look should save you from Sin and Hell?

Answ. Jesus Christ.

3. Quest. How many Commandments?

Answ. Ten.

After this we Preached of God, Christ, Sin, Punishment of Sin, God's now
offering Salvation to them; with which some were much affected; one wept much.
They propounded Questions to us.

1. An old Man asked, Is it not too late, for one so old as I am, to repent?
etc. 2. Seeing we all come from one Father, how came the English to know God
more than we? 3. How may we come to serve God? 4. If a Man have stolen, and
restored again, and was not punished by the Sachim (Indian Governor) what
then?
Answ. God's Angers burns like Fire against all such Sins, but if he fly to
God's Mercy in Christ, and repent, God will forgive him. Upon this the Man drew
back, hung down his Head, as smitten at the Heart, and his Eyes ready to drop,
saying, Me little know Jesus Christ, else I should seek him better.

Third Time. Nov. 26. -- 46. We met again, found more Wigwams built, the
Preacher hearing that other Indians had discouraged these, he encouraged them.
The same Week one Wimpas, a Sage Indian, with Two stout young Men, brought his
Son, and Three other Indian Children, to be taught English, and the Knowledge
of God; the Two young men offering their Service for the like end; and
certifying, that the Old Man, (who had asked, if such a one could be saved) his
Wife and one of his Six Sons, (who were Pawaws, or Charming Witches) were
resolved to hear the Word, and seek to the Devil no more.

Fourth Time. At the next Meeting they made Laws, December. 4.

1. If any be idle a Week, he stall pay, 5 s. 2. A Man that commits Whoredom
shall pay, 20 s. 3. He that beats his Wife, his Hand shall be tied behind him,
and be punished. 4. Young Men without Service, shall set up Wigwams, and Plant.
5. Women that cut their Hair, or let it hang loose, shall pay, 5 s. 6. Women
with naked Breasts, shall pay, 2 s. 6 d. 7. Men that wear long Hair, 5 s. 8.
They that kill Lice between their Teeth, 5 s. This was to oblige the English.
Fifth Time. December. 9. 1646. After Catechizing and Preaching, the Indians
offered all their Children to be brought up by the English, complained of their
naughty Hearts, resolved to Keep the Sabbath. etc. See more at large, in the
Book called the Daybreak, in another called the Sunshine; in Mr. Matthew's
Letters; and concerning the great Pains and Success of Mr. Elliot, and the
large spreading of the Gospel amongst them.

II. A LETTER, concerning the Success of the Gospel amongst the Indians in
New England: Written by Mr. Increase Mather, Minister of the Word of God, at
Boston, and Rector of the College at Cambridge, in New England, to Doctor John
Leusden, Hebrew Professor, in the University af Utrecht. Translated out of
Latin into English.
Worthy and much Honored Sir,
YOur Letter were very grateful to me, by which I undestand, that you, and
others in your famous University of Vtrecht, desire to be Informed, concerning
the Converted Indians in America: take therefore a true Account of them in a
few Words. It is above Forty Years since that truly Godly Man, Mr. John Elliot,
Pastor of the Church at Roxborough (about a Mile from Boston in New England)
being warmed with a holy Zeal of Converting the Americans, set himself to learn
the Indian Tongue, that he might more easily and successfully (open to them the
Mysteries of the Gospel; upon account of which he has been (and not
underservedly) called, The Apostle of the American Indians. This Reverend
Person, not without very great Labor, Translated the whole Bible into the
Indian Tongue: he Translated also several English Treatises of Practical
Divinity and Catechisms into their Language. About 26 Years ago, he gathered a
Church of Converted Indians, in a Town called Natick; these Indians confessed
their Sins with Tears, and professed their Faith in Christ; and afterward they
and their Children were Baptized, and they were solemnly joined together in a
Church Covenant: The said Mr. Elliot, was the first that Administered the Lord's
Supper to them: the Pastor of that Church now is an Indian, his name is Daniel.
Besides this Church at Natick, among our Inhabitants in the Massachusetts
Colony, there are four Indian Assemblies, where the Name of the True God and
Jesus Christ is solemnly called upon; these Assemblies have some American
Preachers. Mr. Elliot formerly used to Preach to them once every Fortnight, but
now he is weakened with Labors and Old Age, being in the eighty fourth Year of
his Age, and Preaches not to the Indians oftener than once in two Months. There
is another Church, consisting only of Converted Indians, about fifty Miles from
hence, in an Indian Town, called Mashippaug: The first first Pastor of that
Church was an English Man, who being skilful in the American Language, Preached
the Gospel to them in their own Tongue; this English Pastor is dead, and
instead of him, that Church has an Indian Preacher. There are, besides that,
five Assemblies of Indians professing the Name of Christ, not far distant from
Mashippang, which have Indian Preachers; John Cotton, Pastor of the Church at
Plymouth (Son of my venerable Father-in-Law, John Cotton, formerly the famous
Teacher of the Church at Boston) has made very great Progress in learning the
Indian Tongue, and is very skillful in it; he Preaches in their own Language to
the last five mentioned Congregations every Week. Moreover, of the Inhabitants
of Saconet in Plymouth Colony, there is a great Congregation of those, who for
distinction sake are called Praying Indians, because they Pray to God in
Christ. Not far from 2 Promontory called Cape-Cod, there are six Assemblies of
Heathens, who are to be reckoned as Catechumens, amongst whom there are six
Indian Preachers; Samuel Treat, Pastor of a Church at Eastham, Preaches to
those Congregations in their own Language. There are likewise amongst the
Islanders of Nantucket, a Church, with a Pastor who was lately a Heathen, and
several Meetings of Catechumens, who are instructed by the Converted Indians.
There is also another Island about seven Leagues long (called Martha's
Vineyard) where are two American Churches planted, which are more famous than
the rest, over one of which, there presides an ancient Indian as Pastor, called
Hiacooms: John Hiacooms, Son of the said Indian Pastor, also Preaches the
Gospel to his Countrymen. In another Church in that place, John Tockinosh, a
Converted Indian Teaches: in these Churches, ruling Elders of the Indians are
joined to the Pastors; the Pastors were chosen by the People, and when they had
Fasted and Prayed, Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton laid their Hands on them, so that
they were solemnly Ordained. All the Congregations of the Converted Indians
(both the Catechumens, and those in Church Order) every Lord's Day meet
together; the Pastor or Preacher always begins with Prayer, and without a Form,
because from the Heart; when the Ruler of the Assembly has ended Prayer, the
whole Congregation of Indians Praise God with Singing; some of them are
excellent Singers: After the Psalm, he that Preaches, Reads a place of
Scripture (one or more Verses, as he will) and expounds it, gathers Doctrines
from it, proves them by Scriptures and Reasons, and infers Uses from them after
the manner of the English, of whom they have been taught; then another Prayer
to God in the Name of Christ, concludes the whole Service. Thus do they meet
together twice every Lord's Day; they observe no Holy Days but the Lord's Day,
except upon some extraordinary Occasion; and then they solemnly set a part
whole Days, either in giving Thanks, or Fasting and Praying, with great Fervor
of Mind.

Before the English came into these Coasts, these barbarous Nations were
altogether ignorant of the true God; hence it is, that in their Prayers and
Sermons they used English Words and Terms; he that calls upon the most holy
Name of God, says Jehovah, or God, or Lord; and also they have learned and
borrowed many other theosogical Phrases from us. In short, there are six
Churches of Baptized Indians in New England, and eighteen Assemblies of
Catechumens, professing the Name of Christ; Of the Indians, there are Four and
Twenty who are Preachers of the Word of God; and besides these, there are four
English Ministers who Preach the Gospel in the Indian Tongue. I am now my self
weary with Writing, and I fear, lest if I should add more, I should also be
tedious to you; yet one thing I must add (which I had almost forgot) that there
are many of the Indians Children, who have learned by Heart the Catechism,
either of that famous Divine William Perkins, or that put forth by the
Assemblies of Divines at Westminister, and in their own Mother Tongue, can
answer to all the Questions in (...) But I must end: I salute the famous
Professors in your University, to whom I desire you to communicate this Letter,
as Written to them also.

Farewell, worthy Sir; the Lord preserve your Health for the Benefit of your
Country, his Church, and of Learning.

Yours ever, Increase Mather.
Boston in New England, July 12th, 1687.

Mr. Hammond in his Sermon, in the Casuistical Morning Exercise, gives us (out
of Ecclesiastical History) two remarkable Passages of the Promotion of the
Gospel by private Christians.
1. THE one is related by Ruffinus, who gives this account of the Conversion of
the Kingdom of the Iberians to the Faith. There was, says he, a certain poor
Woman, who had been taken Captive, and lived among them: she was at first taken
notice of, for her Sobriety and Modesty, and then for her spending so much time
in Prayer: these raised a great admiration of her in the Minds of the
Barbarians. At last, they brought to her a sick Child, which upon her Prayers
was restored to Health: This spread her Fame abroad, so that the Queen of the
Country was brought to her, and by her Prayers recovered: Whereupon the King
and Kingdom were won over to Christ; and the King sent to Constantine the
Great, for some to instruct them farther in the Christian Religion; Ruffin.
Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 10. The holy Conversation, and the ardent Devotions of
private Chistians, are excellent means to recommend the Gospel, and to
represent it, as most amiable and desirable.

2. The other is of Frumentius and Aedecius. These being Christians, were left
young in one of the Kingdoms of the inner India, and were after some time, for
their excellent Parts and unspotted Life, honored and employed by the Queen of
the Country, during the Minority of her Son. In Process of time, some Roman
Merchants came to Traffic among them; then Frumentius understanding that there
were some Christians among them, invited them to reside with him, and provided
a place for them, where they might offer up their Prayers to God, after the
Christian manner; and himself, having obtained leave of the Queen, went to
Athanasius in Alexandria, requesting him to send some Bishop to that Kingdom,
to promote the farther Entertainment of the Gospel among them, to which they
were well inclined and disposed for the reception of it Athanasius ordained
Frumentius himself, who returned, and by God's Blessing, met with wonderful
Success, Ruffin. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 9. Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 15.
Sozomen. l. 2. c. 23. If Providence (says my Author) shall bring these Lines to
the view of Christian Travelers, Merchants, and Mariners, who come among the
poor Heathen, let the Examples laid before them, excite and encourage them to
use their Endeavors to bring them to the Knowledge of Christ, and the
Entertainment of the Gospel.

The Reverend Mr. Annesly (whose non-such Zeal in promoting the Gospel, has
been so successful in this part of the World) gives the following Account of
the Reverend Mr. Brand, in the Narrative of his Life, wherein he seems to have
been actuated by a double Portion of the same Spirit, whilst he writes the
Story of that is Friend. -- He tells us, His Zeal for promoting the Gospel was
so extensive, that besides his constant weekly Catechizing where he resided, he
promoted the constancy of it in all Schools, and places to which he was a
Benefactor; and engaged all Ministers, to whose support he Contributed, to be
diligent in it, often examining the Conduct and Success of those he trusted
with it: And besides these, again, he hired several other Persons in distant
places, to catechize Children, and all others willing to Learn; and once a
Month, or oftener, rode to visit and catechize them himself. And to encourage
them to do well, and especially those who were Old, and yet Ignorant, and
therefore ashamed to come to frequent those Exercises, he gave them Books or
Money, according to their Quality. And to allure Masters and Parents to send
their Children or Servants, he would also present them with Books curiously
Bound and Guilt, and to such as were Poor, he would give more Money than they
could earn in the time spent in Learning. His Discourse with Parents and
Masters themselves was Catechistical, and yet not disparaging: All his
Questions to all sorts so instructively Worded, that they could not miss a
right Answer, and his whole Method charming and welcome in Families, Schools,
and public Assemblies, to both Old and Young, Ignorant and Knowing: He
exhorted all he came near to become Catechists, or Catechumens: He gave away
many Thousands of Catechisms, and many Hundreds with Expositions, not only of
those of the Assemblies, but very many of Dr. Combers, and of Mr. Thomas
Adams's Principles of Christian Religion, cleared and confirmed by the Articles
and Homilies of the Church of England; neither would he be quiet till he made
his Disciples thoroughly understand the Points he put to them. In short, our
Author says, His Heart was on his Exercise living and dying, and that he never
knew any one so painful, and at such care and cost about it, as he.

He dispersed incredible Numbers of the most practical pious Books of all sorts,
not only of Small, but considerable Price, viz. some Thousands, if not ten
Thousands of Catechisms, many with Expositions, some Thousands of Shepherd's
Sincere Convert, R. Allein's Vindiciae Pietatis, Mr. Joseph Allein of
Conversion, several of Mr. Baxter's Works, as his Call to the Unconverted, his
Now or Never, his Saints Rest, etc. Particularly he and some others, of whom he
was chief, having agreed for an Impression of 20000 of Mr. Joseph Allein's Book
of Conversion, he paid down 50 l. himself, as Earnest, for the Printing and
Dispersing them through England and Wales, and afterward procured an
Impression of 20000 more, to be Sold at under Rates. He also disposed some
Writings of Conformists, viz. Pink 's Trial of sincere Love to Christ, Caley,
of Eternity, Wade, of Redemption of Time, Dent 's Plain Man's Pathway to
Heaven, Scudder 's Daily Walk, Reiner 's Precepts, etc. also Fox's Martyrs in
3, and Charnock's Works in 2 Volumes. Several Annotations and Commentaries on
the Scripture, and several Libraries to young Students, and Candidates for the
Ministry; but he remembers not he dispersed any Books of Controversy, but
Pool's Nullity of the Roman Faith, and his Dialogue between a Popish Priest,
and an English Protestant, being more for promoting Practical Godliness: Above
all, his Care and Policy was to disperse Bibles, by giving away, perhaps, some
Thousands, and when he found some were so tender of charging him with such
Gifts, that they had rather be without, he contrived between his Friends and
himself, to distribute them at 1 s. 6 d. a piece, on condition not to sell them
again, by which means he caught many that refused them Gratis, and returned
some Money toward buying more; and he not only gave such Books to assist the
Poor, but to allure and oblige the Rich, he presented them also with Books most
proper for them, richly Bound, to render them more acceptable, which was a
powerful Artillery to subdue their Minds to Piety, his only Aim. In a word, all
Houses and Places where ever he came, or could send, were stored with pious
Books, where they would accept them; and he never made Journey, but in every
Inn, or other place where he lodged or stopped, he employed all the little time
he had, and all opportunities he could find, to fasten good Counsel, or good
Books, or both, on all he met with, of what condition soever, of which our
Author gives several Instances in p. 60, etc. to 65.

To Sum up his charitable Expenses, a notable prying, intelligent Person, who
lived some Years in the same House with him, affirms, That to his Knowledge, he
spent above 300 l. per Annum, that way, besides what he could not find out,
which could not but be very considerable, besides the many large Charities he
continually procured from others, which no Man was more successful in doing,
even from the most covetous Persons; he sometimes using to say, He would not
sell his Estate, because entailed, but he would squeese it as long as he lived;
and that he would accept of no Man's Estate, if he must be tied from using it on
Spiritual accounts; and he would often pity the condition of wicked Rich Men.

In fine, His Zeal for doing good was such, he could as soon cease to live, as
cease to attempt it; there being one place where he was contriving to settle a
Minister, notwithstanding his Weakness when he died. Such was the Life, and
such the Exit of this Godly Man. The Author applies the whole, with the same
Counsel to the Reader, that our Savior gave the Lawyer, Go thou, and do
likewise.

CHAP. LXIII. Remarkable Devotion, in singing Psalms, and Hymns of Praise.
SInging of Divine Hymns and Praises to God, as the Author of all our Comforts
and Benefits, has been ever looked upon, as a very proper Exercise; even
Bruits do somewhat toward the acknowledgement of a Deity, and the Praising of
him for his Benificence: But Man is High Priest to the rest of the Creation,
and is bound to a more express, particular, pleasant Discharge of this Office.
Psalms and Hymns, were accounted a considerable part of Divine Worship, says
Dr. Cave, in his Prim. Christianity. And Pliny says, The Christians met
together in his time before day, to sing a Hymn to Christ. Plin. l. 10. ep. 97.

1. Theodosius the Second, at the dawning of the Day, used with his Sisters, to
sing Psalms and Hymns of Praise to God; Dr. Cave, in his Prim. Christian.
Clark, in the Life of Theod. etc.

2. One day, as the same Emperor was celebrating a public Show at
Constantinople, he had news brought him of Asper's Success, and of the Death of
the Tyrant John, whereupon he spoke thus to the People; Let us give over this
vain Pastime, and repair unto Church, and serve God devoutly, pouring one our
zealous Prayers to him, and Praise him for his wonderful Mercy, who by his own
Hand and outstretched Arm, has deprived the Tyrant of his Life. No sooner had
he made an end of speaking, but all the People left off, and passing through
the Theater, sang Praises together with the Emperor unto God; and so going
directly to Church, spent the whole Day in those religious Exercises, Clark in
his Life.

3. They sing Hymns and Psalms at Dinner, a Custom which Clem. Alex. commends,
Paedag. l. 2. c. 4. Chrysostom greatly pleads for it, to be used as ordinary
Works, at Meals, after Meals, as an excellent Antidote against Temptations. in
Ps. 41. Tom. 3. Cypr. Ep. 1. p. 7.

4. St. Augustine says, We have the Precept and Example of our Savior Christ
and his Apostles, for Singing in our Assemblies. Orig. Brit.

Also he says, The Customs of Churches were very different about these
Matters. In the Churches of Afric. he says, The confined themselves to the
prophetical Hymns, for which they were upbraided by the Donatists, as too Grave
and Formal; but he allows Singing, for one of the solemn Parts of, Divine
Service, with which he joins Reading the Lessons, Preaching, and Praying,
either aloud by the Bishop, or in common by the Deacons giving notice. Ibid.

5. In the Ancient Church, the Christians were much exercised in repeating the
Psalms of David; many had them by Heart, and used to be reciting them when they
went about their Work. -- ( A. C. 1548.) They were Translated into English
Verse, and much Sung by all who loved the Reformation, Dr. Burn. Hist.
Reformation.

6. Hierom relates of the place where be lived -- You could not go into the
Field, but you might hear the Plowman at his Halelujahs, the Mower at his
Hymns, and the Vine-dresser singing David 's Psalms. Dr. Cave's Prim.
Christianity.

It would take up a great deal of time, to recount over the many Instances of
Persons singly, or Families conjunctly, using this Exercise of Devotion; many
Persons on their Deathbeds, some in Prison, and others at their Execution,
have cheared themselves with this Exercise, and have taken a mighty Pleasure,
even in the midst of their Troubles, and most bitter and heavy Afflictions, to
ease their Minds, and give their Devotions full Vent and Play, by singing
Praises to the God of Jacob: Though I know very well, that the Children of this
World, who have no comfort but in things of this Life, cannot dance to, nor
well digest (without some Scoff or Censure) this Music.

7. Dr. W. Johnson, in the Story of his Deliverance at Sea, tells us, That
after his second Shipwreck upon the Coast of Norway, being got upon a Rock to
save their Lives, they betook themselves to their old Remedy, (...) their
Prayers; the Danes (with them) first began their Devotions, who having sung one
of Luther 's Psalms, fell to their Prayers; and then (says the Doctor) me sung
one of our own Psalms, and as long as I was able to speak, Prayed with the
Company. Dr. Johnson's Deus Nobiscum. p. 34.

8. In the Life of Mr. Herbert, writ by Isaac Walton (if I mistake not) we are
told of a Gentleman of good Estate, who after his Travels, came home, with a
Resolution to devote the remainder of his time, to a close and spiritual
Devotion; and the Method which he pitched upon, was to Sing over David's Psalms
every four and twenty Hours; which was so ordered, that while some were
refreshing themselves, and attending upon the Necessities of Life, others
should continue in the Chapel, and keep on the Devotion. To this Society, Mr.
Herbert, who was a Man both Devout and Musical, joined himself for some time. I
have not the Book by me, but the Relation may be seen in Mr. Herbert's Life,
before his Poems.

9. Thomas Hudson, Martyr in Queen Mary's Reign, after walking abroad for
certain days openly in the Town crying against Popery, at last returned home,
and seting himself down on his Knees, having his Book by him, read and sung
Psalms continually, without ceasing, for three Days and three Nights together,
refusing Meat, and other talk, to the great wonder of many. Fox's Martyrol.

10. George Eagles, Martyr, likewise in the same Reign, when he was drawn on a
Sled to Execution, had in his Hand a Psalm-book, wherein he read very devoutly
all the way, with a loud Voice till he came there. Ibid.

11. Five Martyrs in Canterbury, viz. John Lucas (a young Man) Ann Albright,
John Catmer, Agnes Sn^th (Widow) Joan Soale (Wife) when the Fire was flaming
about their Ears, did sing Psalms; whereat the good Knight, Sir John Norton,
being present, wept bitterly at the sight. Ibid.

12. Mr. John Denly, being set in the Fire, with a burning Flame about him,
sung a Psalm; but being interrupted by occasion of a Faggot thrown in his Face,
which made him bleed, he left off, and clapped both his Hands on his Face: Truly,
quoth Dr. Story to him that hurled the Faggot, thou have marred a good old Song;
at which, Mr. Denley, still in the Flames, resumed Courage, put his Hands
abroad and sung again. Ibid.

13. St. Augustine, speaking of the time when he was Baptized at Milan,
professes, That the sweet, Music and Melody of the Church, provoked his
Affections so far, that the Tears run down his Checks, and he was mightily
pleased with it. Confess. l. 9. c. 6, 7.

14. St. Hierom, speaking not of the universal Church in solemn Assemblies, but
what the company of the solitary Virgins were wont to do of their own accord in
his time, says, That in the Morning at three, six, and nine a Clock, at
evening, and at Midnight, they sung Psalms, only on Sunday; they went into the
Church. Bullinger 's Decads.

15. The first Act of Uniformity in King Edward the Sixth's Reign, gives leave
for the using of any Psalm, agreeable to the Word of God: Which Act is not
annulled by any subsequent Act, but rather confirmed by those which have
followed.

16. Te Deum's are in Fashion all over Christian Europe, at least, the
Protestant and Popish Churches at this day.

See more of the Singing, and religious Music of other Churches, in my History
of all Religions.

17. Mr. John Bruen in singing of Psalms, had his Spirit so ravished with Joy,
that his Heart would even spring and leap in his Body; was so affected with
Praising of God, that he took the word Hallelujah for his Motto. See his Life,
in Mr. Clark's second Volume of Lives, p. 176.

18. Mr. Peacock, after his great Afflictions, being at last joyfully delivered
and comforted, a three Chapter read to him, Rev. 19. Rev. 21. Romans 8. Oh!
(says he) they be glorious Comforts: Will you have any more read? said his
Friends, yea, says he, a Psalm if you please; and named the 23d. one beginning
to read it, he desired that it might be sung; one asking, Will you sing? yea,
said he, as well as I can. The Psalm being sung, and then John 17. being read,
Blessed be God, said he, I am a Thousand times happy, to have such Felicity
thrown upon me, a poor wretched Miscreant, etc. See his last Conflicts, by E.
B, from the Copy of Mr. Rob. Bolton, 1646.

19. Mrs. Katherine Stubs, on her Deathbed, sang Psalms with a sweet and
pleasant Voice, and desired that the 133 Psalm might be sung before her to
Church; and desired that there might be no Mourning for her. See her Life.

20. Mr. J. Janeway on his Deathbed, cries out thus, Come help me with
Praises, yet all is too little; come help me, all ye mighty and glorious
Angels, who are so well skilled in the haavenly Work of Praise! Praise him all
ye Creatures upon Earth; let every thing that has Being, help me to Praise
God. Hallelujah! Hallelujah! hallelujah! Praise is now my Work, and I shall be
engaged in this sweet Work now and for ever. Bring the Bible, turn to David 's
Psalms, and let us sing a Psalm of Praise. Come, let us lift up our Voice in
the Praises of the most High. I will sing with you as long as my Breath does
last, and when I have none I shall do it better. See his Life.

CHAP. LXIV. Persons Remarkable for Good Discourse.
OUR Savior has told us, we must be accountable for every idle word: and the
Apostle has exploded all corrupt Communication, and requires strictly of all
Christians, that their Speech be seasoned (and made savoury) with Grace, to the
edification of others: and it is certain, that out Tongues are but the Signs and
Indications of our Thoughts; and therefore as the Heart thinks, the Tongue
speaks, commonly. A pure Fountain does not send out dirty Streams, nor a good
Tree bring forth evil Fruit. Besides, our Language does not only expose our
selves, but has a great Influence in disposing of others, either to Good or
Evil, to Truth or Error; and therefore we had need be cautious, and use a sober
Prudence and Piety in the Government of that little Member. And wise and good
People are so, sparing and discreet in their Words.

1. Bembo, a Primitive Christian, coming to a Friend to learn a Psalm, he began
to him the 39th: I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my
tongue. Upon hearing of which Words, he stop his Tutor, saying, This is enough,
if I learn it as I ought. And being after Six Months rebuked for not coming
again, replied, That he had not learnt his first Lesson: Nay, after Fifteen
Years he professed, That in that time he had scarce learned to fulfill that one
Line. Anonym.

2. Dr. Potter, when Fellow of Queen's College, Oxon, observing the Fellows
after Dinner, according to their usual manner, talking together of many trivial
things, said nothing; but carefully remarked what they said; and when they had
done talking, he thus bespake them: Now, my Masters, will you hear all your
extravagant Discourses? for I have strictly observed and marked what you said:
and thereupon gave them a perfect Rehearsal of all their Discourses; which they
admired and wondered at. See his Life, by Mr. Clark, p. 155. Much the like Story
is reported of Mr. J. Janeway, in his Life.

3. The Essaeans are toward God very Religious: for before the Sun rise, they
speak of nothing but Holy Things; and then they make certain Prayers and Vows,
after the manner of their Country, etc. Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 7.

4. The Council of Trent (because Bishops must be blameless) exhorts, that to
prevent idle Discourses, which might arise at the Table of Bishop's themselves,
the Holy Scriptures be read. Conc. Trid. Decret. 1. Sess.

5. John Picus, Earl of Mirandula, usually discoursed amongst his Friends, of
the Vanity and Uncertainty of all Earthly Things, and of the Stability of
Heavenly Things; and therefore he would often call upon them to love the Lord
above all, etc. Clark in his Life.

6. One of Bishop Latimer's Injunctions to the Prior and Convent of St. Mary's
House, in Worcester, 1537, was thus: -- Item, That the Prior have at his
Dinner, or Supper, every Day, a Chapter read, and to have edifying
Communication of the same. History of the Reformation, by Dr. Burnet.

7. Cardinal Pool, in the Platform of his Reformation, requires Bishops to have
at their Table, the Scriptures, or other good Books read, mixed with pious
Discourses. Ibid.

8. The Conferences of (Mr. John Eliot) were like those which Tertullian
affirms to have been common among the Saints in his Days, Vt qui sciret Dominum
audire: as knowing that the Ear of God was open to them all; and he managed his
Rudder, so as to manifest that he was bound Heavenward in his whole
Communication. He had a particular Art at Spiritualizing of Earthly Objects,
and raising of high Thoughts from very mean Things: As once going with some
feebleness up the Hill to Church, he said unto the Person that led him, This is
very like the way to Heaven, it is up Hill: the Lord by his Grace fetch us up.
And instantly spying a Bush near him, he as nimbly added, And truly there are
Briars and Thorns in the way too. -- As a Friend of the famous Vrsin could say,
That he never went unto him, without coming away, Aut doctior aut melior;
either the wiser or better from him. So it is an Animadversion, which more than
One Friend of our Eliot's, has made concerning him: I was never with him, but
I got, or might have got some good from him. Cott. Mather in the Life of Mr. J.
Eliot, p. 19.

9. Oh! says Dr. Bolton, that worthless Subjects should so often take up our
Tongues, and Thoughts! And Christ so full, so sweet, so delightful, and so
profitable a Subject, which shall be Matter for our Soul's Discourse to all
Eternity, shall be thrown aside, as not worth taking up! In Vit. ejus.

10. Mr. Giles Firmin speaking of Mr. Daniel Rogers says, He was a Man of
great Parts, great Grace, and great Infirmities. My Father Ward would often say
of him, My Brother Roger, has Grace enough for Two Men, and not half enough
for himself: a most woeful Temper, or rather Distemper in his Constitution,
which hindered much the Luster of that Grace which was in him. By one passage we
may judge of his Grace; he Dined One Day at a Knight's Table, what Company was
there, I know not; but he had not that liberty to be a seasoning his Meat with
Savoury and Spiritual Discourse, as he was wont to do; to sit at Meals, and not
one Word for God, was to him strange: the next Day he comes to my House; the
Man was sadly dejected, in such a manner, that those who fall into gross Sins,
scarce know so much Sorrow: What is the matter? said I. This was the Reason,
that he was a Man of such a base, dastardly Spirit, that he could not speak for
God. I told him, Your Father would say, in such Companies, If you cannot sow
any Good, you do well if you can keep out evil. Much ado I had to get up his
Spirit. Firmin's Real Christian, Preface to the Reader.

11. The late Countess of Warwick would perfume the Company with good
Discourse, to prevent idle or worse Communication; not abruptly, upbraidingly,
or importunely, which is very nauseous and fulsome, and spoils a good Game, by
bad Playing; but she was like? Spiritual Stove, you should feel the Heat, and
not see the Fire, and find yourself in other Company, among the same Persons;
and rather wonder, than perceive, how you came there: for she would drop a wise
Sentence, or moral, holy Apothegm, (with which she was admirably furnished)
that suited with, at least not far remote from what was talked of, and
commending or improving it, that she would wind about the whole Discourse without
offense, yea, with pleasure, Dr. Walker, in her Life.

12. The Discourses which daily fell from Bishop Usher at his Table, in
clearing Difficulties in the Scripture, and other Subjects (especially when
learned Men came to visit him) tended exceedingly to the Edification of the
Heaters; so that it might well be said of him, as the Queen of Sheba said to
Solomon, Happy are these thy Servants that stand continually about thee, and
hear thy Wisdom. See his Life.

13. Mr. Samuel Fairclough, made such a Reform in his Parish, that diverse
Persons who had lived many Years in the place, said, That in the whole time,
they never heard an Oath sworn, nor ever saw a Person drunk: Nay, it was often
said, That every Inhabitant of Kerton, should be distinguished from others, not
only by the more savouriness of their Discourse, but also by the universal
Strictness and Piety of their Lives. See his Life.

CHAP. LXV. Remarkable Devotion on the Lord's Day.
THE first Observation of the Christian Sabbath, was more by the Providence and
Design of God, then the Apostles own Inclination, Joh. 20.19. the second was
performed voluntarily, Job. 20.26. So afterward, upon the day of Pentecost,
being the first day, they were all with one accord, in one place, Acts 2.1. And
again, Acts 20.7. On the first day of the week the Disciples came together to
break bread, and Paul preached unto them. Rev. 1.10. St. John was in the Spirit
on the Lord's Day. And thus the Observation of the Lord's-Day-Sabbath being
commenced, it has been continued by all good Christians to the present Age.

1. Pliny tells the Emperor Trajan, that it was the use of the Christians in
his time, on a stated Day, before it was light, to meet together, to sing a
Hymn to Christ, as to God, secum invicem, among themselves by turns; and to
bind themselves by a Sacrament, not to do any Wickedness, but that they commit
not Thefts, Robberies, Adulteries; that they break not their Word; that they
deny not the Pledge: which being ended, they used to depart, and to come again
together to take Meat, but promiscuous and harmless. Plin. Epist. 97. p. 306,
307.

2. Constantine the Great, made Laws for the strict Observation of the Lord's
Days, commanding, That through all the Roman Empire, all servile Employment
should cease on those Days: He prescribed also a Form for the Legions of his
Soldiers, to be used, both on the Sabbaths and other Days. And himself used to
show much Reverence and Attention to the Word of God Preached, so that many
times he would stand up all the Sermon-while; and when some of his Courtiers
told him that it would tend to his Disparagement, he answered, That it was in
the Service of the great God, who was no respecter of Persons. Clarmar. in vit.
Constantin. p. 11.

5. Bid, speaking of Bishop Tuda, says, On the Lord's Days the People flocked
by Crowds together, either to the Church or to the Monasteries, not to refresh
their Bodies, but to learn the Word of God; and if any Priest happened to come
into any Village, the People presently gathered together, and took care to seek
from him the Word of Life. Bid Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 26.

4. The Bohemians sanctified the Lord's Day in this manner, First, by resting
from outward Labors, from Carrying, etc. from Dealing in any thing that
belongs to outward Works and Negotiation; that their Servants and Beasts might
have a Breathing-time, Exodus 20.10. But much more by abstaining from the Works
of the Flesh, Drunkenness, Dancing, Dice, idle Walkings and Trifles; as also
from nuptial Feasts, Fairs, Markets. This also was out Custom (especially under
a Magistrate favoring the Church) that on the Saturday betimes, before the Sun
set, all should des^^t from external Labors, and with the Evening begin the
sanctification of the Day consecrated to God. Secondly, by dealing in Divine
and Spiritual things; by singing Psalms and reading Scriptures on the Evening
of the Sabbath; but in the Morning, and the whole Lord's Day, by frequenting
the Assemblys, meditating on, and practicing Holy things, not once only, or
twice, but four or five times, for because, etc. therefore we dehort from
reviewing and looking over Tables of Receipts and Expenses; that all forgetting
things Temporary, may learn to meditate on things Eternal. Comoenius de
Fratrib. Bohem. p. 55, 56.

5. Mr. Elliot of New England, had such an exact Remembrance of the Lord's Day,
that the Sun did not set the Evening before the Sabbath, 'till he had begun his
Preparation for it; and when the Lord's Day came, you might have seen John in
the Spirit upon the Lord's Day. Every day was a sort of Sabbath to him; but the
Sabbath Day was a Sign, a Type, a Fore-tast of Heaven with him. He Labored,
that on this day he might have to Words or Thoughts, but such as were agreeable
thereunto; he then allowed in himself no Actions, but those of a Raised Soul.
-- If he beheld in any Person old or young, any Profanation of this Day, he
would be sure to bestow lively Rebutes upon it. And hence also to the general
Engagements of a Covenant with God, which 'twas his desire to bring the Indians
into, he added a particular Article wherein they bound themselves,
Mequontamouat Sabbath, packeteaunat tohschke pomantamog, i. e. To remember the
Sabbath Day, to keep it Holy as long as they lived. See his Life.

6. Bishop Jos. Hall, speaking of this Day, says, Prayer, Meditation, Reading,
Hearing, Preaching, Singing, good Conference, are the Businesses of this Day,
which I dare not bestow on any Work or Pleasure, but Heavenly. -- I find it
hard to offend in too much Devotion, easy in Profaneness.

7. Before I went to the University, from the Month of August, till the latter
end of February following, I was a Boarder in the House of one Mr. Philip
Henry, where I had the opportunity of observing his manner of Life and
Conversation. He was formerly Student of Christ Church in Oxford, Junior of the
Act, Chaplain to Judge Puleston, and Minister of Warthenbury. But afterward
not conforming, he married an Heiress, and lived at Broad-Oke in Hanmer Parish
in Flint-shire. Bishop Wilkins sent twice for him in my time, with a design to
draw him over to Conformity, as he had done many of his Brethren before in his
own Diocese. Dr. Bridgeman Bishop of Man, and his Successor at Worthenbury,
spoke very honorably of him to Major Trevers and me, at is own Table at
Chester; Bishop Fell of Oxford lamented his going off from the Communion of the
Church of England as by Law established; and the present learned and ingenious
Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry is ready to give an honorable Testimony to
his Sincerity, I doubt not (having some Knowledge of the Correspondence between
them). This Man (ever since I knew him, and whilst I was his Neighbor) was
careful to rise early on the Sunday Mornings, to spend a considerable portion
of time in his Private Devotions and Preparations, then to come down and call
his Family together, and after some short preparatory Prayer to sing a Psalm
(commonly the 100) and then read some part of the Sacred Scripture and expound
it very largely and particularly, and at last kneel down with all his Family
and pray devoutly; with particular references to the day and the Duties of it,
and the Minister that was to Officiate. After which, and a short refection for
Breakfast, he made have to Church, and took care that all his Family that
could be spared should go in due time likewise: Sometime he was before the
Preacher, and often before the rest of the Congregation (as once particularly,
when I gave them a Sermon in that place, he and I walked together a
considerable time before the People came); he behaved himself reverently and
very gravely in the Church during the Service; stood up commonly at Prayers,
and always in my time wrote a Sermon after the Minister: when the
Morning-Service was ended, he commonly invited the Minister to Dine with him,
who seldom refused; and many others, who either lived at distance, as Mrs.
Hanmer, Sir Job Charleton's Daughter, married to a Justice of Peace in that
Country; of else such as were poor and needy. His Discourse homewards was sweet
and spiritual; at Table it was seasoned as well as his meat; edifying, and yet
pleasant and taking; never wild or inoffensive. After Meat, and Thanks
returned, they commonly (I think constantly) before departure from Table sung
the 23d. Psalm: Sometime after, when the Servants had dined, he propounded to
such Guests as he thought in prudence he should not be too free with, to retire
into the Parlour for a while till he had attended upon his Family, repeated
over the Sermon, and prayed with them; after which he returned to his Guests
again, and having entertained them with some short Discourse he retired a while
himself, and by and by called upon his Family to go to Church. After Evening
Service and Sermon ended, he retired again till six a Clock (then called for
Prayers, catechized, took an account of Children and Servants of what they
remembered at Church (which accounts were given sometimes very largely and
particularly) sung a Psalm, kneeled down to Prayers (which consisted more of
Praise and Benediction then at other times) and at last his Children kneeling
down before him (to beg his Blessing) he blessed them all, and concluded the
Service of the day with the 123 Psalm; save that after Supper he retired for
about half an hour more into his Study before Bedtime. Sometimes after the
public Service ended at Church, he gave some spiritual Instructions, and
Preached in his House to as many as would come to hear him; and in his last
Years, when the Incumbents grew careless in providing Supplys for two or three
neighboring Churches and Chapels, and the People cried out for lack of
Vision, he set up a constant Ministration and Preaching at home, never taking
any thing by way of Reward for his Pains, unless with a purpose to give it away
to those who were in greater necessities.

See more in my Christians Companion, and History of all Religions.

CHAP. LXVI. Remarkable Love of the Holy Scripture.
THE Sacred Scriptures were written for our Learning, and contain in them such
Doctrines, Precepts, Prophecies, Promises, Threatenings, and Judgments, as
concern us all; and therefore we are commanded to study the Law, to search the
Scriptures, to meditate on the Word of God, to make it our delight, to talk of
it to our Children, and acquaint our selves with the Will of God. And it is good
Advice which a worthy Divine gives us in this case: In Reading Holy Scripture,
(says he) take heed, that an holy and humble Mind always bear thee company; be
humble, and not proud; sober, and not curious; study to obey, not to dispute;
turn not Conscience into Questions and Controversies; draw not all to Reason,
leave something for Faith; where thou can not sound the Bottom, admire the
Depth; kiss the Book, and lay it down; weep over thine Ignorance, and send one
hearty Wish to Heaven, Oh! when shall I come to know, as I am known! Go not
without, nor before thy Guide: but let thine Eye be always toward the Lamb, who
only can open this Book, and thy Understanding; and then, blessed is he that
reads, etc.

1. Theodosius Sen. wrote out the whole New Testament with his own Hand,
accounting it a great Jewel, and read a part of it every Day. Clark in his Life.

2. Theodosius Jun. learned much of the Holy Scriptures without Book; and so
reasoned of them with the Bishops, as if himself had been an experienced
Minister. Clark in his Life.

3. Origin, when a Child, was very inquisitive into the recondite meaning of
the Scriptures. D. Cave's Prim. Christianity.

4. King Alphonsus read over the Bible Fourteen times, with Commentaries.

5. John Picus Mirandula, addicted himself seriously to the study of Sacred
Scripture, and at Eight and twenty Years of Age, wrote a learned Tractate of
the Six Days Work of God, and another of the Sabbath, for the Public Benefit
of the Church: he was mightily affected with the Elegancy of the Scriptures in
their Original, especially of Paul's Epistles, which he preferred before all
humane Eloquence whatsoever; professing, that the Writings of Tully,
Demosthenes, etc. were not to be compared with them: he wrote much also for
interpreting the Old Testament, and reconciling seeming Differences: he
justified the Translation of Hierome against the Calumnies of the Jews: He also
defended the Septuagint Translation, principally with respect to the Psalms.
Clark in his Life.

6. Tho. Cromwell, Earl of Essex, in a Journey to, and from Rome, learned the
whole Testament, translated by Erasmus, without Book. Clark in his Life.

7. Beza, when about Eighteen Years old, could say by Heart, perfectly, any
Greek Chapter in St. Paul's Epistles.

8. Cranmer and Ridley learnt the New Testament by Heart; the former in his
Journey to Rome, the other in Pembroke-Hall Walks, in Cambridge. Fox's Martyrol.

9. The Council of Trent (because Bishops must be blameless) exhorts, that
above all things, every one keep Sobriety at his Table, etc. And because
oftentimes idle Discourses are wont to arise, that at the Tables of Bishops
themselves, the Holy Scriptures be read, Decret. 1. Sess.

10. One of Bishop Latimer's Injunctions to the Prior and Convent of St. Mary's
House, in Worcester, was thus: -- Item, That the Prior have at his Dinner or
Supper, every Day a Chapter read, and to have edifying Communication of the
same. Hist. of the Reformation, by Dr. Burnet.

11. Cardinal Pool, in the Platform of his Reformation, requires Bishops to
have at their Tables, the Scriptures, or other good Books read, mixed with pious
Discourses, Ibid.

12. We had the same Exercise in my time, appointed by Dr. Tully, then
Principal of St. Edmond-Hall, in Oxford, viz. a Part, or Paragraph of the Latin
Testament, read by some Servitor, when we were at Dinner.

13. Bishop Jewel had usually a Chapter read at Meals, after which he would
recreate himself with Scholastical Wars between young Scholars, whom he
maintained at his Table. See his Life.

14. King Edward the Sixth, when very young, and one of his Play-fellows, or
Servants, being about to take something down that was above his reach, took a
great Bible to stand upon, with a holy indignation, reproved him for it (some
say, he took it up, and kissed it) saying, That it was unfit, that he should
trample that under his Feet, which he ought to treasure up in his Head and
Heart. Fuller's Chapter Hist, p. 424.

15. Hierom calls the Books of Kings, his own; because by frequent use and
reading, he had got them by Heart, and, as it were, made them his own. He
testifies likewise of Paula, that she had most of the Bible by Heart; and of
Nepotian, that with daily reading and meditating, he had made his Heart
Bibliothecani Christi, The Library of Christ. Clark's Examp.

16. Constantine the Great used to show so much Reverence and Attention to the
Word of God preached, that many times he would stand up all the Sermon-time;
and when some of his Courtiers told him, That it would tend to his
Disparagement: he answered, That it was in the Service of the Great God, who is
no Respecter of Persons. Clark in his Life.

17. Charles the Great used to set his Crown upon the Bible, as our Canutus
sometime put his Crown upon the Rood, both of them to intimate their Reverence,
etc. Clark's Exam. Vol. 1. C. 119.

18. King Edward the Sixth was a diligent Attender upon Sermons, heard them
with great Reverence, and penned them with his own Hand, and studied them
diligently afterward. Ibid.

19. The greatest delight of Queen Elizabeth, was often to read the Bible, and
hear Sermons. Ibid.

20. The young Lord Harrington was mighty attentive in hearing the Word of God,
preached, or read. Ibid.

21. Bugenhagius, a Dutch Divine, was so joyful, when Luther and he, and some
others, had finished the Translation of the Bible into Dutch, that on that Day
whereon they finished their Work, he ever after invited his Friends to a Feast,
which he called, A Feast of the Translation of the Bible. Ibid.

22. Chrysostom preaching to his People, used this Expression, Get you Bibles
by all means, whatever they cost you: you may better want Bread, Light, and
than the Knowledge of the Scriptures. Ibid. ex Trapp.

23. I can speak it by Experience (says Erasmus) that there is little good to
be got by the Scripture, if a Man read it cursorily, and carelessly; but if he
exercise himself therein constantly, and conscionably, he shall find such an
efficacy in it, as is not to be found in any other Book whatsoever. Ibid.

24. Robert, King of Sicily, was so wonderfully affected with the Scriptures,
that speaking to Franc. Petrarcha, he thus said of them, I swear to you,
Petrarch, that my Learning is more dear to me than my Kingdom; and if I must
want the one, or the other, I had much rather want my Diadem than my Learning.
Idem ex Cornel. de Lapide.

25. I know, says Peter Martyr, there are many, that will never believe what
we say of the Power of God's Word hidden in the Heart; and not a few that will
jeer us, and think that we are mad for saying so: But oh! that they would be
pleased but to make Trial: Male mihi sit (ita enim in tanta causa juvare ausim)
nisi tandem capiantur: Let it never go well with me (for I am bold to swear in
so weighty a Business) if they find not themselves strangely taken and
transformed into the same Image, if they pass not into the Likeness of this
Heavenly Pattern. So Ephesians. 1.13. 1 These. 1.5, 8. Ibid.

26. In all the Bible, (says the Reverend Mr. Burgess, in his Sermon in the
Coll. Morn. Exercise) though it be an History of more than 4000 Years, we read
of but of One that was converted just before his Death. And we do believe that
he also did convert at his first Convincing Call. Rarely do any savingly
convert, who do not upon their first Convictions convert. St. Austin's stifled
Convictions cost him dear. You that will make so bold with Conscience as Spira
did, should expect to roar for it here as he did; or hereafter to fare worse
than many hope him to do. They are considerable Divines, who are not hopeless
of his Salvation. Thus far Mr. Burgess.

27. John, an Egyptian Confessor, whom Eusebius saw and heard, though his Eyes
were out, and his Body mangled, could repeat any passages out of the Old or New
Testament; whom I supposed (says he) to be reading in a Book, 'till coming
near, I was struck with great admiration. Dr. Cave' s Primitive Christian.

28. Nazianzen professes, that he had willingly relinquished all other things
for the sake of this Book. Ibid.

29. Luther said, He would not live in Paradise without the Word, but with it
he could live well enough in Hell. Mr. Calamy 's Godly Man's Ark.

30. Gildas has scarce one Paragraph in his Epistle unstored with Scripture,
and one of his chief Lamentations in Dioclesian's Persecution is, for their
Bibles being burnt in the Public Markets. Tho. Jones Sovereign of the Heart.

31. Mr. Bradford to Willerton, Bishop Bonner's Chaplain, when he told him, The
People must learn all at the Priests, not meddling with the Scriptures;
answered: Then I see you would bring the People to hang up Christ, and let
Barabbas go, as the Priests persuaded the People to do. At which words
Willerton was so offended, that he had no lust to talk with him any more. Fox
Martyr.

32. The Christians at the beginning of the Reformation were so in love with
the Bible, and studied it so diligently, and used it in their Discourses and
Disputations so frequently and boldly, that Darbyshire, Principal of
Broadgates, told Mr. Hawks, in Bishop Bonner's House, You will have nothing
but your little pretty God's Book. Ibid.

33. Blesilla, a devout Widow, weak and sickly, was never found without a Bible
in her Hands. S. Hierom.

34. Olympia Fulvia Morata, born at Ferrara, in a Letter to the young Princess
of that place (after getting out of the Idolatry of that Country) says, It may
seem incredible to you, what a change the Lord then made upon my Spirit; that
former aversion I had to read the Scripture, was then turned to have it as the
greatest delight and pleasure in the World. Anonym.

35. One Captain Knox, being a Prisoner in Ceilon, in the East Indies, for near
Twenty Years, was extremely pleased when he found there an English Bible, which
he purchased at a Rate, and professes, That he never found Prayer so sweet to
him, as it was then. See his Description of Ceilon.

36. The Lady Jane Gray, the Night before her Execution, sent her Sister, the
Lady Catherine, the Greek Testament, in the end of which she wrote thus:

I Have here sent you, Good Sister Catherine, a Book, which although it be not
outwardly Printed with Gold, yet inwardly it is more worth than precious
Stones: It is the Book, dear Sister, of the Law of the Lord; it is his
Testament and Last Will, which he bequeathed to us Wretches, which shall lead
you to the Path of Eternal Joy; and if you with a good Mind read it, and with
an earnest Heart purpose to follow it, it shall bring you to an immortal and
everlasting Life; it shall teach you to live, and learn you to die; it shall
win you more than you would have gained by the possession of your woeful
Father's Lands, which if God had prospered you, you should have inherited: so
that if you apply diligently this Book, seeking to direct your Life after it,
you shall be an Inheritour of such Riches, as neither the Covetous shall take
from you, neither shall Thieves steal, nor Moth corrupt. Desire with David,
dear Sister, to understand the Law of the Lord God; live still to die, that by
Death you may purchase Eternal Life: and trust not, that the tenderness of your
Age shall lengthen your Life; for as soon, if God calls, goes the Young as the
Old. Labor therefore always to learn to die. Defy the World, deny the Devil,
despise the Flesh, and delight your self wholly in the Lord; be penitent for
your Sins, and yet despair not; be strong in Faith, and yet presume not, and
desire, with St. Paul, to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: with whom even
in Death there is Life. Be like the good Servant, and even at Midnight he
waking, lest when Death comes and steals upon you, you be with the evil Servant
found sleeping; and lest for lack of Oil, you be found like the foolish
Virgins, and like him that had not on the Wedding Garment, and so you be shut
out from the Marriage. Rejoice in Christ, as I do; follow the Steps of your
Master Christ, and take up his Cross; lay your Sins upon him, and always
embrace him. And as touching my Death, rejoice as I do, Good Sister, that I
shall be delivered of this Corruption, and put on Incorruption: for I am
assured, that I shall for losing a Mortal Life, win an Immortal Life; the which
I pray God to grant you, and send you of his Grace to live in his Fear, and die
in the True Faith of Christ: from which, in the Name of God, I exhort you, that
you never swerve, neither for Hope of Life, nor Fear of Death: for if you deny
his Truth, to lengthen your Life, God will deny you, and shorten your Days; and
if you cleave unto him, he will prolong your Days to his Glory, and your
Comfort. To which Glory God bring me now, and you hereafter, when it shall
please him to call you. Fare you well, Good Sister, and put your only Trust in
God, who only must help you.

The next Morning, with a Book in her Hand, she made a pathetical Speech upon
the Scaffold, kneeled down to Prayers, repeated over the 51st Psalm, prayed for
the Executioner, laid her Head upon the Block, and ended her Life with these
words, Lord into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. Aged Sixteen. Fox Martyrol.

Concerning the Respect of the Jews to the Law, the Mahometans to their
Alchoran, etc. see my History of all Religions.

37. I had almost forgot to make mention of the Practice of my dear Friend and
Correspondent Mr. Henry, spoken of in the last Chapter, (which I am very
unwilling to omit, because I would provoke myself, and others, to some degree
of Emulation in the Case): besides his Exercise on the Lord's Days, mentioned
before, every Day of the week his Custom was, every Morning and Night to Read a
Chapter to his Family, and Expound it distinctly and clearly, and after Singing
a Psalm, and Prayers, to appoint his Children to retire by themselves, and
write over a Copy of his Exposition; by which means, as himself once told me,
every one of his Children, Five in Number, (One Son, and Four Daughters) had
the Exposition of the whole Bible by them, written with their own Hands. This
Custom he kept up constantly in his own House for above Twenty, if not above
Thirty Years together, without any intermission, except in Cases of Absence
from Home; which happened but seldom.

38. Dr. Harris, in all his Wills, always renewed this Legacy; -- Item, I
bequeath to all my Children, and to my Childrens Children, to each of them a
Bible, with this Inscription, None but Christ. See his Life.

39. Philip Melancthon always used to carry his Bible along with him, wherein
he read often. Clark's Exampl Vol. II. p. 336.

40. Mr. William Garaway has told me of a certain English Gentleman, a Member
of the House of Commons, that never came into the Parliament House, without a
Bible in his Pocket, which he used to consult upon occasions.

41. Mrs. Catherine Stubbs was seldom seen without a Bible, or a good Book in
her Hands. See her Life.

42. John Prince of Saxony had Six Pages attending on him in his Chambers, that
every day read to him Six Hours out of the Bible. Luther Coll. Men's. p. 462.

43. Mr. Fox tells a Story of one Crow a Seaman, who being Shipwrecked, lost
all his Money and Goods, but put his Bible about his Neck, and swam with it to
Shore. Mr. Barker's Flores.

44. After Ptolomy had furnished his Library with so many Thousand Books,
Aristaeus told him. It was but a poor Library, being without the Sacred Volume
of God, the Book of Books, the Holy Scripture. So is all Knowledge but poor
Knowledge, without the Right Knowledge of God revealed in his Word, Mr.
Barker's Flores.

45. I have read of one Cramerus, a Schoolmaster, who had a Scholar, who had
in a Writing, in his own Blood, promised to give his Soul on certain Conditions
to the Devil: which Writing Cramerus got from him: and the Devil in the Night
knocked at his Chamber Door, and demanded the Paper of him; but he answered, I
have laid the Paper in my Bible, and in that Page where it is written, The Seed
of the Woman shall bruise the Head of the Serpent; and take it thence Satan if
thou can. And thereupon the Devil departed, and left the Paper behind him,
and came no more. Mr. Barker's Flores.

46. Mr. Cotton Mather tell us in the Life of Mr. Nathaniel Mather -- That this
young Man had a principle regard unto the Scriptures for the Subjects of his
Meditations, and he was very expensive of his Thoughts on the Book of God. He
was daily digging in the sacred Mines, and with deligh he fetched thence
Riches, better then those of both the India's; and he could say, O how I love
thy Law! it is my Meditation every day!

Even in the time of his mortal Sickness, he was very angry at himself if he
had not heard a Portion of the Bible read unto him from day to day.

Once when he was near his End, a good part of a day having passed before he
had enjoyed his Meal of Scripture, be said unto his Sister with some
impatience, Alas! What an ungodly Life do I lead? pray come and read my Bible
to me, and read me the forty ninth Psalm. Indeed he read the Scripture, not
cursorily, but very deliberately and considerately; and as an effect of his
doing so, he could give such an account of the Difficulties in it, as the most,
not only of Christians, but of Divines too, would judge an Attainment
extraordinary. Not long before he died, he had read over all the large and
great Annotations on the Bible, lately published by Mr. Pool, and some other
Nonconformist Ministers; but having dispatched those two noble Folio's, he
said unto one that was intimate with him, Thus have I read the Bible, but I
have now learnt a better way! And that way was this; He would oblige himself in
reading to fetch a Note and a Prayer out of every Verse in all the Bible; to
dwell upon every Verse until it had afforded at least one Observation, and one
Ejaculation to him.

He imagined that an incredible deal both the Truth and Grace, would in this
way make its Impression upon his Mind (besides what exercise of Wit it must
have called for) and so most certainly it would have done; but before he had
made much Progress in it, the Chariots of God fetched him away to that place, in
which a Jesus is a Bible to the there perfect Spirits of the Righteous.

I cannot forbear adding here (what the Reverend Mr. Mead tells us) -- That
about fourteen Years old, Mr. Nathaniel Mather did dedicate himself wholly to
God and his Service, and entered into a solemn Covenant with God to that
purpose; which as he did not begin rashly, and without great deliberation, so
he did not transact it slightly, but with great Sense and Seriousness: The
Matter and Form of which Covenant you have in this Work, signed with his own
Hand, according to that Word of the Prophet ( Isa. 44.5.) One shall say, I am
the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another
shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord. And with what Care and Conscience he
performed this Covenant in Fasting, in Prayer, in Watchings, in
self-examination, in Meditation, in Thanksgiving, in Walking with God in all,
is fully witnessed in his Life; which shows that he was a true Nathanael, and
Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile: not like those Israelites which the
Prophet reproves, for that they flattered God with their Mouth -- lied to him
with their Tongues, their Hearts not being right with him, nor steadfast in his
Covenant. For having once given up himself to God, He kept the ways of the
Lord, and did not wickedly depart from his God. Thus far Mr. Mead, in his
prefatory Epistle to Mr. Mather 's Life.

Mr. John Machin kept a constant watch over his Thoughts, especially of his
last Thoughts that he slept with, and his first Thoughts that he waked with;
and usually they were some precious Scripture or other, which he would
discourse of to his Friends with great Alacrity. He kept a Diary of his Life,
wherein every day he wrote in Characters where he was, what Scriptures he found
any sweetness from, what was the state of his Soul toward God; and such other
remarkable Passages that did occur each day, from the Year 1650, to the Year he
died.

His love to the Word of God was superlative; it was his Meditation Day and
Night. He did constantly in a Morning pitch upon some Verse, which he would
endeavor to infuse into his Heart; ever unwilling to leave it, till he bad
sucked some Virtue from it. He was chewing by Meditation the 119th Psalm at the
time of his Sickness, daily squeezing the Virtue of one Verse thereof into his
Soul, as appears by his Dairy; and this he did, not formally as a Task, but
with that effectual Seriousness and Relish, that his Family at home, and
Friends at a distance, in his Letters might perceive exactly what Dainties he
had tasted; and at every vacant time, he would be looking for a Word, and would
find out by the casual turning down a Leaf in his Bible (which was his usual
way) such Passages as were very remarkable and not observed before. A Scripture
thus met with, was as Food to him, exceeding sweet to his Taste, he would make
much of it, and usually would not leave it, till he had improved it to the good
of others by speaking or writing, that others might see what he saw, and feel
what he felt in the Word of God.

Another usage he had also, which showed him to be both a good Textuary, and a
good Christian; and that was usually to take leave with his Friends and
Relations by leaving some Scripture with them, and those most suitable to their
Condition; nay he hardly sent Commendations to a Friend, but it was accompanied
with some pertinent Scripture, that he seemed to breath no other Air but
Scripture. His Bible was his constant Companion in the Day, and usually his
Pillow at Night; and many Scores of emphaticallively Expressions he had found
therein, which the constant reading and diligence of others could never light
on. And where ever he came, he was engraving some Scripture or other on the
Mantle Posts, and Walls, and Trees; which was so constant and peculiar a Course
with him, that his acquaintance often knew he had been in such a place, by the
Marks he usually left. His design therein being the advantage of all men's
Souls; that the very novelty of seeing such things, might set People upon
enquiring and looking those Scriptures in their Bibles, not knowing what good
one Verse of the Scripture (thus met with) might do upon a Soul if God set it
on at least he found this Advantage to himself, that when he came to a review
of them, he was put in mind of that frame of Heart he had when he was there
before; and might taste over again what he had before felt, in that Passage of
the Word of God. He seldom wrote a Note or Letter, but he made it up with some
suitable Scripture (the Word of God dwelling plentifully in him) and in the
Memorials forementioned, he inserts Scriptures upon every occasion, saying in
the Conclusion, The Texts of Scripture herein mentioned, are best worth thy
finding and noting in thy Life as they were in mine. See his Life.

Do not for your Lives (says the Reverend Mr. Burgess in his Sermon in the last
Morning Exercise) ever neglect reading the Scriptures; take some portion of
God's Word, as daily as you eat of his Bread: It Is very honorably that I do
remember a poor Soul who sometimes burned the Thatch of her House to read her
Bible by the Light of it. And no less a Saint than Mr. Richard Fairclough, told
me she died a glorious one. It was Luther's saying, The reading of the
Scriptures is the Terror of Devils.

Mr. Adams tells us in his Sermon in the late Morning Exercise, That Gregory
(called the Great) gives an account of an illiterate Man, who bought a Bible,
hired one to read to him out of it, and thereby became a great proficient in
the School of Christianity. Luther by reading of it was turned from Popery; so
was John Hus by reading of our Wickliff's Books, proving his Doctrine from it.
We know Augustine was converted by taking it up and reading. And it is said,
Crprian by reading the Prophet Jonas: And Junius by the first Chapter of John's
Gospel, though it is supposed neither of them then had much skill in the
Originals, but were beholding to Translations.

Consider (says Mr. Boil) the Holy Bible, as an harmonious System, though written
by parts and piece-meals in several Ages. It being like a fair Fruit of Arras,
of which, though a shred may assure us of the fineness of the Colors and the
richness of the Stuff, yet the Hangings never appear to their true advantage,
but when they are displayed to their full Dimensions and seen together. Be sure
the Scriptures (to which we do well to take heed, as to a light shining in a
dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19.) will in this prospect clearly show their Author and
Original, namely, that they came from him who is the Light of Men, and shines
in Darkness, John 1.4, 5.1 John 1.4, 5. to the good satisfaction of the
Consciences of the honest Beholders themselves, whatever Objections may be made
by carnal Reasonings to the contrary; hereby being far more effectual to
convert the Soul, and rejoice the Heart, Psalm 19.7, 8. than any appearances of
prodigious Specter giving some notice of what passes in the other World could
ever do. Since the read Resurrection of Lazarus had no other Influence on some
of the Jews, than only to give them occasion of turning Informers to the
Pharisees against Christ, who had just before their Eyes, wrought that most
notable Miracle, John 11.46. In the dispensation of the Word, there is an
Evidence of Divinity in it, commending it self to the Consciences of
unprejudiced Men. The ordinary means of Crace being mighty through God, to the
pulling down of the strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. yea, every thing that
exalts is self against the knowledge of God, from whom it came, and unto whom
it directs us. Even great ones have been astonished at the Doctrine of the
Lord, Acts 13.12. Psalm. 119.111. drawn from vicious Courses into virtuous and
holy Practices; from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan to God,
Acts 26.18. when little good comparatively was done by Christ himself preaching
at Capernaum, Matt. 11. -- 23.13.58. The Magazine of his Miracles, those
extraordinary Discoveries of their Author; in the use of the ordinary means of
Grace, even at one Sermon of Peter's, we find three Thousand converted, Acts
2.41. And afterward upon hearing of the Word, we meet with about five Thousand
more that believed, Acts 4.4. which may well evidence who was the Author of it,
and in whose Hand it was an Instrument, Ephesians. 2.20. Many have been built upon
this Foundation, enlightened and directed by this Light, Psalm. 119.105. fed with
this Meat, Heb. 5.13, 14. regenerated by this Seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. which as a
grain of Mustard Seed in a matter of sixty six Years space, after the sowing of
it, grew into a great Tree, which Pliny, the Proconsul in Bythinia, employed by
Trajan to root up Christianity (which they accounted a Crime) did acknowledge.
Tertullian and others prove the spreading of it in the second and third
Centuries: So mightily grew the Word of God, and prevailed, Acts 19.20. in the
Primitive times, ingenerating unconquered Constancy of Faith and Godliness in
the minds of the Hearers; and always victoriously triumphing over the Kingdom
of Satan, and false Religions. In the beginning of the Reformation, said
Luther, We do everywhere experience in the Church, in the Commonwealth, in the
Family, certain Fruits of the Word, which as Leaven does spread it self into
all the parts of the Commonwealth, the Offices, and all the States. * Mr. Boil
Style of Scripture, p. 72. Plin, Secund. l. 10. Epist. mox ipso tractu us fieri
solet, diffundente se crimine, etc. Adversus gentes ipsa multitudine
perturbatus. Tom. 4.282. Vbique experimur in Templo, in Rep. etc.

Afterward we find hoe it did diffuse it self in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, etc. * Notwithstanding they of the Antichristian state have labored
to keep up their Superstition and Idolatry, by feigned Apparitions, as may be
seen in later Collections of Popish Miracles, the History of Jetzer, Thus far
Mr. Adams. and See the fulfilling of Scriptures, p. 401.

Stand fast and fixed (says the Reverend Mr. Woodcock, in his Sermon in the
Casuistical Morning Exercise) in the good Word of God, which is settled for
ever in Heaven, Psalm. 119.89. as the Copy of the Divine Nature and Law. Stand,
having your Loins girt about with Truth, Ephesians. 6.14. and having on the
Breast Plate of Righteousness. This is the grand and perfect Rule of Faith,
Worship and Life, Keep within these Trenches, and you have an assurance of
Protection. I remember an Ear-witness told me, he heard Dr. Hammond Preach
before King Charles the First at Oxford, when his Affairs were at a low ebb,
and he told him, While God-dam-me led the Van, and the Devil confound me
brought up the Rear, he would be routed in all his Designs. And they are very
unlikely to be good Subjects to Princes, who are open Rebels to the Laws of God
and Men, and their own Reason. Thus far Mr. Woodcock.

Many useful Sayings, good Precepts and Rules, may be fetched from Heathen
Authors, Plato, Seneca, Tully, Plutarch, etc. But we need not (says the
Reverend Mr. Slater, in his Sermon in the last Morning Exercise) borrow Jewels
of Egyptians, blessed be God, nor go down to the Philistines for the sharpening
of our Mattocks. It is the Gospel of Christ, which is the Power of God to
Salvation. There is no need of quoting a Philosopher when we have a Paul. What
Examples can we produce and propound, so exact and curious as is that of
Christ, who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth! He spoke so as
never Man spoke, and he walked so as never Man walked. What Arguments can we
find more convincing than those of the Scripture, which are mighty for casting
down the (...), Imaginations, Conceits, Reasonings of a carnal, vain, and proud
Mind? What Motives more persuasive and alluring than those of the Gospel, which
are indeed the Cords of a Man? What Thunderclaps can be thought of more
terrible, or what Terrors more amazing and affrighting then the Terrors of the
Lord? What Promises more inviting and encouraging than those he has given us,
which are exceeding great and precious? Where, if any one can, let him tell us
where we shall see sin so clearly and fully in its Deformity and Ugliness, in
order to a real and thorough aversation from it, or Religion, Godliness, and a
Conversation ordered aright, more in its Loveliness and enamouring Beauty, in
order to our setting our Hearts upon it, than we do, or at least may see it in
the Gospel? When all is said and done that can be, it is the Grace of God, Tit.
2.14. The Doctrine, the Gospel of Grace, which brings Salvation, and has
appears to all men. Jews and Gentiles, Men of all sorts and ranks, it is
that, yea it is that which teaches us, and all that sit under it, to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live seberly, righteously and godly in
this present World.

CHAP. LXVII. Present Retribution to the Faithful.
BY Faithful, I mean here, such as dare trust in God, whilst they faithfully
discharge their Duties, though they offend Man, and expose themselves to the
disfavour of the World; as Abraham believed, contrary to all apparent Sense and
common Reason, and yet was blessed: Or as Daniel and the three children
ventured to Worship God in the prospect of temporal Dangers! and yet were
delivered: Or as the Apostles left all to follow Christ, and yet were rewarded.
For God is not unrighteous to forget our Works of Faith, and Labors of Love,
which we show toward his Name, Heb. 6.10. This Subject is of a large Extent,
and therefore I must of necessity narrow it, or it would carry me into all the
particular Duties of our Religion.

1. Mr. Lloyd speaking of Dr. Nicholas Wotton, Doctor of the Civil Laws, and
first Dean of the two Metropolitan Churches of Canterbury and York says,
Augustus lamented for Varus his Death; because he said, Now I have none in my
Country to tell me the Truth: with Wotton went off that Faithfulness that
Peasants have and Princes want. None more resolute abroad, none more hold and
downright at home. His plain Dealing saved King Henry some Treasure, King
Edward the North, Queen Mary Calice for a while, and Queen Elizabeth her Faith
and Crown: A Virtue that made him the Overseer of most foreign Ministers
Actions abroad, and one of the Eighteen Executors of King Henry's Will and
Testament at home.

He was Privy Counselor to four successive Sovereigns, viz. King Henry the
VIII, King Edward the VI, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth.

He was employed thirteen several times in Embassies to foreign Princes.

Five times to Charles the Fifth Emperor.

Once to Philip his Son King of Spain.

Once to Francis the First King of France.

Once to Mary Queen of Hungary, Governess of the Netherlands.

Twice to William Duke of Cleve.

Once to renew the Peace between England, France, and Scotland, Anno. 1540.

Again to the same purpose at Cambray, Anno 1549.

Once sent Commissioner with others to Edinburgh in Scotland, 1560.

He refused the Archbishopric of Canterbury, proffered him in the first of
Queen Elizabeth. Lloyd's Worthies, p. 107.108, 109.

2. Mr. Dod, when single, thinking how he should maintain a Wife and Children,
was encouraged by looking upon a Hen and Chickens scratching for their living,
and considering that the Hen did but live before, now she was able to maintain
all that Family. And accordingly himself fared, for God provided plentifully
for him and his. See his Life.

3. One John Stewart, Provost of Aaire in Scotland, having lent or given a
great part of his Estate to the Poor in Charity, and at last being himself in
straits, he was called a Fool, and reproached for what he had done; upon which
he goes over to France, adventures to Freight a Ship at Rochel, with Salt, etc.
upon his Credit, returns home and vends the Commodities; with which he paid his
Debts, and had 20000 Marks over to his own Pocket. Clark's Leg.

CHAP. LXVIII. Present Retribution to Plain and Faithful Reprovers.
HE that rebukes a Man, afterward shall find more Favor then he that
flattereth with his Tongue, says Solomon, Prove. 28.23. That this effect does
not always follow, is easily deducible from the Admonition of our Savior, who
advises us not to give that which is Holy unto Dogs, nor to cast Pearls before
Swine; lest they turn again and rent us, etc. But that when our Reproofs meet
with fit and capable Subjects, it is so, is often proved by Experience.

1. Bishop Barnes having suspended Nr. Bernard Gilpin, requires him suddenly
upon his return from a Journey out of the North, to Preach a Visitation Sermon
at Chester; Mr. Gilpin desired to be excused, as being not provided, and being
suspended: But the Bishop accepting no denial, at last Mr. Gilpin answered,
Seeing it cannot be otherwise, your Lordship's Will be done: And after a little
pawse began his Sermon; in the Application whereof he proceeded thus -- And now
Reverend Father, my Speech must be directed to your Fatherhood; God has
exalted you to be Bishop of this Diocese, and God requires an account of your
Government hereof, etc. And (so proceeding to tax the Faults of the Diocese)
Let not (says he) your Lordship say these Crimes have been committed by the
Fault of others without your Knowledge; for whatsoever your self shall do in
Person, or suffer by your Connivency to be done, is wholly your own; therefore
in the presence of God, his Angels, and Men, I pronounce your Fatherhood to be
the Author of all these Evils; yea and in that strict Day of the General
Account, I shall be a Witness to testify against you, etc. After which pungent
Admonition contrary to expectation) the Bishop brought Mr. Gilpin home, and
there walking with him in his Parlour, takes him by the Hand, and thus bespeaks
him, Father Gilpin, I acknowledge you are fitter to be Bishop of Durham, than
myself to be Parson of this Church of yours: I ask forgiveness for Errors past:
forgive me, Father: I know you have hatched up some Chickens, that now seek to
pick out your Eyes; but so long as I shall live Bishop of Durham, be secure, no
Man shall injure you. See his Life, by Bishop Carleton, p. 58.

2. Bishop Latimer, who sent K. Henry the Eighth the New Testament for a
New Year's Gift, with this Inscription, Marriage is honorable among all Men,
and the Bed undefiled; but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, etc. Who
preached such pungent Sermons to the Court, to the Judges, to the Clergy, to
all, yet lived well, died comfortably, put on the Crown of Martyrdom at his
Exit out of this World, and since his departure has escaped the Lash of
envious and reproachful Tongues, much better than his then prosperous
Adversaries and Persecutors.

See the Story of Dr. Wotton in the foregoing Chapter, how his Fidelity and
Veracity were rewarded with present Preferments, and honorable Offices.

CHAP. LXIX. Present Retribution to the Humble and Modest.
MOdesty is a Virtue, say some, the will starve a Man: and indeed among some
undiscerning Persons it goes under no better Notion than Cowardice, and
Sneakingness of Spirit; when Audaciousness and Arrogance are valued at a high
rate among Fools. But all the World is not foolish, there are some wise and
judicious Men dispersed here and there among us; and these know how to judge of
true Modesty and Humbleness of Spirit, and with them these Qualities are of
great Price. But however God Almighty has an especial Favor for them, and
does value them, and will reward them either here or hereafter. He exalts the
humble and meek, and fills the hungry Soul with good things.

1. Dr. Sanderson was a Man of great Modesty, as well as Judgment, and yet
purely by the Dint of Merit and Modesty together, made his way, not only to
considerable Preferment in the Church, but gained upon the Estimation and
Affections of all Parties in England, and lived peaceably all his Days, and now
being dead, has escaped better the Bitings of virulent Tongues, than some
other bigoted Persons, and of great Note too, that I could name.

2. The Reverend Mr. Hooker, a Man so bashful and modest by natural
Disposition, that he was not able to outface his own Pupils, yet has been
rewarded with a competent Estate whilst living and a good Name, and glorious
Elogiums since his Death.

3. Mr. Thomas Gouge was great in Modesty, yet it never appeared by word or
action, that he put any value upon himself, or hunted for any applause from
Man; and this was very observable in him, that the Charities which were
procured chiefly by his Interest and Industry, where he had occasion to speak,
or to give an Account of them, he would rather impute it to any one that had
but the least hands and part in the procuring of them, than assume any thing of
it to himself.

Another Instance of his Modesty was, that when he was ejected out of his
Living of Sepulchers Parish, he forbore Preaching, saying, That there was no
need of his Labors in London, where there were so many godly, able, and
painful Ministers to carry on that Work.

According to the Apostle's Exhortation, he was clothed with Humility, and had
in a very eminent degree that Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which St.
Peter tells us, is in the sight of God of great Price: so that there was not
the least appearance either of Pride or Passion in any of his Words or Actions.
He was not only free from Anger and Bitterness, but from all affected Gravity
and Moroseness. His Society and Converse was affable and pleasant. He had a
very great serenity of Mind, and evenness of Temper, which was visible in his
very Countenance; and according his Humility was rewarded with Honor and
Respect from Men, with the Love of all Parties, though of different Sentiments;
with a great Tranquillity of Mind, with a peaceable and quiet Possession of the
Good Things of this Life, and at last with an (...) a gentle and easy Death;
for in a good old Age (of Seventy seven Years) he died in his Sleep, without
any sensible Pain or Sickness, A. C. 1681. See his Life.

See more in the Chapter The Humble strangely advanced.

4. Mr. John Fox in his younger Days, and toward the latter and of King Henry
the Eighth's Reign went to London, where he lived humbly and obscurely, and
soon spent what his Friends had given him, and his own Industry got him, and
began to be in want, one Day sitting disconsolate in St. Paul's Church, almost
spent with long Fasting, his Countenance being thin, his Eyes hollow, after the
ghastful manner of dying Men; insomuch, that every Body shunned a Spectacle of
so much horror: there came one to him, as he was sitting in this humble and
homely Posture, and despicable Condition, and thrust an untold Sum of Money
into his Hand, bidding him be of good Cheer, and accept that as a common
Courtesy from his countrymen; wishing him to make much of himself, for within
a few Days new Hopes were at hand. Mr. Fox could never learn who this was; but
within Three Days after, the Duchess of Richmond sent for him to live in her
House, and be Tutor to the Earl of Surrey's Children, then under her Charge.
Clark's Examp. Vol. 2. p. 610.

5. Humility, (says the Reverend Mr. Steel) makes a Man think meanly of
himself, moderately of his own Notions and Apprehensions, highly of those that
deserve it, and respectfully of all. It was this which taught excellent Bishop
Ridley when he was in Prison, thus to accost honest Bishop Hooper: However in
some By-matters and Circumstances of Religion, your Wisdom and my Simplicity, I
grant, has a little jarr'd -- yet now, etc. More Comfort to them, if they had
been on these Terms in the time of their Liberty and Prosperity. Humility is a
great step to Unity, Ephesians. 4.2. I beseech you, that ye walk with all lowliuess
and meekness, with long-suffering, for hearing one another in love:
endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Pray behold
how these Graces are here linked together, lowliness, meekness, unity, and
peace. The humble Man will not endure that his Reputation shall outweigh the
Peace of the Church; and therefore is more willing that Truth should be
victorious than himself. He Will go Two Miles for One, to meet his Adversary in
an honest way of Accommodation; and when he cannot make his Judgment to bend,
yet his Heart shall stoop to you with all sincerity. This Virtue made
Aristippus come to Eschines, when they were at fend, with this greeting,
Eschines, Shall we be Friends? And this dictated his Answer. Yes, Sir, with all
my Heart. But remember, says Aristippus, That I being elder than you, do make
the first motion: Yea, said the other, and therefore I conclude you to be the
worthier Man: for I began the Strife, and you began the Peace. Let us all then
be clothed with Humility, assume not in regard of your Learning, Wit, or
Parts; consider you are but Sharers in our Common Benefactor; neither let your
Riches or Dignities make you speak or write otherwise than you would do without
them; and this will go a great way to prevent our biting and devouring one
another. See Mr. Steel 's Sermon in the Casuistical Morning Exercises.

CHAP. LXX. Present Retribution to the Just.
THE Unjust, Oppressors, Extortioners, Felons, Thieves, and fraudulent Persons,
think with their crooked Policy, their crafty Dealings, their Dissimulation and
Tricks, to impose upon the World, to delude the Senses of Men, and enrich
themselves, and be secure: but upon a fair Examination it will be certainly
found, that Righteousness stands upon much the surer Ground, and bids fair both
for the Love of Man, and the Blessing of God. Righteousness exalts a Nation,
when Sin in general, and Injustice in particular, is the Reproach and Ruin of
any People.

1. Sir John Fitz-James, of whom we have mentioned before in remarkable
Justice, was by King Henry the Eighth advanced to be Chief Justice of the
King's Bench.

2. Sir Matthew Hale, of whom we have mentioned as another Great Example of
Justice, was presently so taken Notice of by the Eye of the World, that he was
employed in his Practice by all the King's Party: he was assigned Council to
the Earl of Strafford, Archbishop Laud, King Charles the First, the Duke of
Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and the Lord Capel. Afterward being Council for
the Lord Craven, he pleaded with that force of Argument, that the then
Attorney General threarned him for appearing against the Government: To whom he
answered, He was Pleading in Defense of those Laws, which they declared they
would maintain and preserve; and he was doing his Duty to his Client; so that
he was not to be daunted with Threatenings. Upon all these occasions he had
discharged himself with so much Learning, Fidelity, and Courage, that he came
to be generally employed for all that Party: and afterward Cromwell resolving
to take him off from that Party, endeavored to promote him to a Judge's place
in the Common Pleas; and he was much urged to accept of it by some eminent Men
of his own Profession, who was of the King's Party, as Sir Orlando Bridgeman,
and Sir Geoffery Palmer. He accepted of the place, and was afterward chosen a
Parliament Man. Thus he continued administering Justice 'till the Protector
died; but then he both refused the Mournings that were sent to him and his
Servants for the Funeral, and likewise to accept of the New Commission that was
offered him by Richard; and when the rest of the Judges urged it upon him, and
employed others to press him to accept of it, be rejected all their
Importunities, and said, He could act no longer under such Authority.

He lived a private Man, 'till the Parliament met that called home the King, to
which he was returned Knight of the Shire from the County of Gloucester.

Soon after this, when the Courts in Westminster Hall came to be settled, he
was made Lord Chief Baron; and when the Earl of Clarendon (then Lord
Chancellor) delivered him his Commission, in the Speech he made, according to
the Custom on such occasions, he expressed his Esteem of him in a very singular
manner telling him, among other things, That if the King could have found out
an honester and fitter Man for that Employment, he would not have advanced him
to it; and that he had therefore preferred him, because he knew none that
deserved it so well. As last, 1671, he was proved to the Lord Chief Justice of
England. See his Life, by Dr. Burnet.

CHAP. LXXI. Present Retribution to the Temperate.
SOlomon amongst the Elogiums he bestows upon Spiritual Wisdom, gives this for
one; That length of days is in her right hand: and upon Observation it will be
found true. For (besides other Considerations) the Rules of Temperance
prescribed by our Religion, for the Government of our Appetites, de mightily
conduce to the preservation of Health and long Life, and many other
Commodities, which shall be hinted at in the following Paragraphs.

1. Johannes de Temporibus may justly go for an Antesignanus, in the Front of
this Chapter, Armor-bearer to Charles the Great, a Man of great Temperance,
Sobriety, and Contentment of Mind, and lived to the Age of 361. Hackwel. Apol.
L. 3. C. 1. Sect. 6, etc.

2. Lescius, in his Hygiasticon, speaking concerning Sobriety, reckons up the
several Commodities of it thus: 1. It frees from almost all Diseases; Catarrhs,
Coughs, Wheezings, Dizziness, Pains of Head and Stomach, Apoplexies, etc. 2. It
fortifies against outward Causes; Heat, Cold, Labor, Wounds, Bruises, putting
out of Joint, breaking of Bones, (for Flux of Humors does much hinder the
Cure, and causes Inflammations) against the Plague, etc. 3. It mitigates
incurable Diseases; as ulcers in the Lungs, Hardness in the Liver and Spleen,
etc. 4. It conduces to long Life, and an easy Death, except in Cases
extraordinary. 5. It makes the Body agile, lightsome, fresh. 6. It maintains
the Senses in their integrity and vigor. 7. It mitigates the Passions,
especially Anger and Melancholy. 8. It preserves the Memory. 9. It helps the
Wit and Understanding. 10. It quenches Lust, and does wonderfully prevent the
Temptations of the Flesh, etc.


3. Hippocrates, to one asking his Advice concerning the preservation of his
Health, made Answer, Let Meat, Drink, Sleep, Venery, all be moderate. Nor did
he only prescribe so to others, but practiced himself; and accordingly he lived
One hundred and Four Years, Verulam. History of Life and Death.

4. Galen, who lived in Health, except One Day's Sickness, the space of an
Hundred Years, being asked what Diet he used, answered, I have drank no Wine,
touched no Woman, eat nothing raw or unripe, kept my Body warm, and my Breath
sweet. Some say he lived One hundred and forty Years Fulgos. L. 8. C. 14.

5. Cicero prescribes thus for the Health: Concoction, Cheerfulness, Walking,
Temperance, Recreation, and the Belly soluble. Marcil. in Pyth. Carm.

6. Sir Matthew Hale, with some other young Students, being invited to be merry
out of Town, one of the Company called for so much Wine, that notwithstanding
all that Sir Matthew Hale could do to prevent it, he went on in his excess,
'till he fell down as dead before them; Mr. Hale thereupon went into another
Room, shut the Door, and prayed earnestly to God, both for himself and his
Friend, making a Vow to God, That he would never again keep Company in that
manner, nor drink a Health while he lived. His Friend recovered, and he
religiously kept his Vow to his dying Day, and though sometimes roughly
treated, because he would drink no Health, but especially the King's; yet he
fared never the worse, either in God's Favor, or the King's: as appears by the
Divine Blessing upon his Practice, and the Preferments he had at Court. See his
Life.

7. Ludovicus Cornarius, a Venetian, and a Learned Man, wrote a Book of the
benefit of a Sober Life, and produces himself as a Testimony thereof, saying,
Unto the Fortieth Year of my Age I was continually vexed with variety of
Infirmities; I was sick at Stomach of a Fever, a Pleurisy, and lay ill of the
Gout. At last this Man by the Persuasion of Physicians, took up a way of living
with such Temperance, that in the space of One Year, he was freed almost of all
his Diseases. In the Seventieth Year of his Age he had a fall, whereby he brake
his Arm and Leg, so that upon the Third Day nothing but Death was expected; yet
he recovered without Physic: for his Abstinence was to him instead of all
other means; and that was it which hindered a recurrency of malignant Humors to
the Parts affected. In the Eighty third Year of his Age, he was so sound and
cheerful, so vegete, and so entire in his Strength, that he could climb Hills,
leap upon his Horse from the even Ground, write Comedies, and do most of those
things he used to do when he was young. If you ask how much Meat and Drink this
Man took, his daily Allowance for Bread, and all manner of other Food, was
Twelve Ounces: this was his usual Measure; and the said Cornarius did seriously
affirm, That if he chanced to exceed but a few Ounces, he was thereby apt to
relapse into his former Diseases. All this he has set down of himself in
Writing, and it is annexed to the Book of Leonardus Lescius, a Physician, which
was Printed at Amsterdam, Anno Dom. 1631. Drexel. Oper. Tom. 2. p. 794. Lescius
Hygiastic. C. 4. Sect. 25. p. 86.

8. Mr. W. Garaway, of whom I have made mention elsewhere in this Book, is now
going upon the Eighty first Year of his Age, very healthful and stout in his
Body, of perfect Sense, and good Memory, to a wonder: but the wonder is abated,
when we consider his Caution used in Dieting of himself; for he keeps a Fast,
and abstains from all Fond, at least, One Day every Week; and at other times
ordinarily abstains from Wine and strong Liquors, unless now and then a Glass,
by way of Cordial.

CHAP. LXXII. Present Retribution to the Devout and Praying: Or, Prayers
answered in Kind.
NEver did God say to any of the Seed of Jacob, seek my face in vain. Our
Savior has resolved us by the Authority of his Word, the Example of the
Syrophoenician Woman, Mat. 15, 22. And the Parable of the Importunate Widow,
Luke 18.2. That Prayer is no vain or fruitless Point of Devotion. Let Elijah,
Daniel, David, Jesus, the Apostles, and all the sincere Votaries of the Church
of GOD, give their Suffrage in the Case.

1. Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople, when Arius was sent for thither by the
Emperor, to give an Account of his unquiet Behavior at Alexandria, shut
himself up in the Church, and there fell to Fasting and Prayer, begging of God
Night and Day, with Tears, That if Arius were true in his Opinion, he might
never see the Day of his Trial; but if not, that God would inflict some visible
Judgment upon Arius, the Author of so much Mischief. Arius, before the
Emperor, subscribed and swore to the Decrees of the Nicene Council; but with
Fraud and Equivocation: for swearing that he heartily assented to what he had
written, he meant only a Form of Faith which he had purposely put in his Bosom:
upon this the good Emperor was satisfied, and commanded Alexander to receive
him into his Communion. This was upon Saturday, but the next Day expecting to
the admitted, he goes out of the Palace with Eusebius, and many Followers, in
great Pomp and Pride; but by and by, in the chief Marker-place of the City, his
Conscience accused him, his Belly loosened, he called for the next Jakes;
whither he retired immediately, and there his Fundament coming out, he voided
much Blood, together with Bowels, Spleen, and Liver; and so died wretchedly.
Clark's Mar. of Eccl. History.

2. St. Augustine, when the Goths and Vandals were broke into Africa, and
besieged Hippo, sitting at Table one Day with his Presbyters, and the Bishops
that were fled thither from other places for Refuge, said to them, You know,
Brethren, that from the beginning of this Siege, my daily Prayers have been.
That God would either free us from it, or give his Servants Patience and
Courage to undergo what he imposes, or to take me out of this present evil
World; and I believe, that God will answer my desire. And accordingly the Third
Month of the Siege, he fell sick of a Fever and died. Ibid. And Dr. Jer.
Tailour Life of Christ.

He was very powerful in Prayers, so that sometimes thereby he has cast out
Devils, Clark. Ibid.

I have mentioned formerly in my Christian's Companion, out of his Confessions,
that once being extremely afflicted with the Toothache, so that he could not
speak, by writing, he requested his Friends that came to visit him, to pray
with, and for him: which they did, and immediately whilst they were at Prayers,
his Pain ceased, and his Speech was restored.

3. Luther being present at the Marriage of Philip. Duke of Pomerania, with
Mary, Daughter to the Elector of Saxony, prayed for a Blessing, and taking
Philip by the hand, said, The Lord God be with you, and keep your Posterity
from failing: but his Wife continuing barren Four Years, all his Male-stock was
like to be extinct; yet at length, by God's Blessing, according to Luther's
Prayer, he had Seven Sons by her, which wonderfully increased the Family.
Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 141.

4. Mr. Hugh Latimer used constantly in his Prayers to beg, That God would
restore the Gospel to England once again. Which blessed be God has been
granted. Clark's Exam. p. 461.

5. Luther is said to be able to prevail with God at his pleasure, to obtain
what he list; according to that of Prove. 12.2. Once praying for the Recovery of
Myconius, he let fall this rapturous Expression, Fiat voluntas mea: Let my Will
be done: and then sweetning it, Mea voluntas, Domine, quia tua: My Will,
because thine: which was granted. Ibid. p. 466.

6. Henry, late Lord Delamer, in his Advice to his Children, tells them, That
he had observed, any Morning that he had hurried over his Devotions, the Day
following was not prosperous; and that thing which particularly occasioned him
to such haste, met with ill success. Lord Delamer's Works, p. 3.

7. A. C. 1584, near Bern in Switz^rland, a certain Hill, in an Earthquake, was
carried violently over, and beyond other Hills, and covered a whole Village,
consisting of Ninety Families, one Half-house only excepted, wherein the Master
of the Family, with his Wife and Children, were earnestly praying unto God.
This is attested by Polanus, who lived in those parts. Syntag. p. 841.

Present Retribution to the Devout; Prayers answered in kind, etc.
8. IF Mr. Elliot said of any Affiar, I cannot bless it, it was a worse omen to
it, then the most inauspicious Presages in the World; but sometimes after he
had been with God, about a thing he was able successfully to foretell, I have
set a Mark upon it, it will do well. I shall never forget, that when Enland and
Holland were plunged into the unhappy War, which the more sensible Protestants
everywhere had but sorrowful Apprehensions of; our Elliot being in the height
and heat of the War, privately asked, What News we might next look for? Answered
unto the surprise of the Enquirer, Our next News will be a Peace between the
two Protestant Nations; God knows, I pray for it every day; and I am verily
persuaded, we shall hear of it speedily. And it came to pass accordingly. --
There was a godly Minister of Charlestown, one Mr. Foster, who with his Son
was taken Captive by Turish Enemies: much Prayer was made, both privately and
publicly, by the good People for the Redemption of that Gentleman; but we were
at last informed, that the bloody Prince, in whose Dominion he was now a Slave,
was resolved, that in his Lifetime no Prisoner should be released: And so the
distressed Friends of this Prisoner now concluded, Our hope is lost. Well, upon
this Mr. Elliot in some of his next Prayers before a very solemn Congregation,
very broadly begged, Heavenly Father, work for the Redemption of thy poor
Servant Foster; and if the Prince which detains him will not, as they say,
dismiss him as long as himself lives, Lord, we pray thee to kill that cruel
Prince; kill him and glorify thy self upon him. And now behold the Answer; the
poor captivated Gentleman quickly returns to us that had been Mourning for him
as a lost Man; and brings us news, that the Prince was come to an untimely
Death; by which means he was now set at liberty. Cotton Mather in his Life, p.
50.

9. In 1642 One Mary Glover, a Merchants Daughter in Thames Street, being
bewitched by one Mother Jackson, who was arraigned at Newgate in London,
continuing every second day in most strange and dreadful Fits and Torments, for
about three Weeks or a Month after the Witch was condemned; several Ministers
and other Christians met tegether to pray for her; when on a sudden, after a
terrible Conflict, which so much amazed some, that they cried out with a
confused Noise, Jesus help, Jesus save, the Maid started up out of a wicked
Chair wherein she sat, and by main Strength lifted up one of the Ministers
with her, who kneeled behind and held her in his Arms, and threw white Froth
out of her Throat and Mouth round about the Chamber; and on a sudden fell down
into the Chair as one really dead, with her Head hanging on one side, her Neck
and Arms limber, though before as stiff as if Frozen; presently after Life
returned into her whole Body, and her Eyes and Tongue came into their right
place, she then looked up with a cheerful Countenance round the Chamber, and
with a loud Voice spoke, saying, O he is come, he is come! the Comforter is
come, the Comforter is come! I am delivered, I am delivered! her Father hearing
these Words wept for Joy, and with a faultring Vocie said, O these were her
Grandfather's Words who suffered in Queen Mary 's Days. She then kneeled down
and gave humble and hearty Thanks and Praise to God for her Deliverance; which
she continued to do till her Voice grew weak, and the Minister desired her to
forbear: and so they ended the Day with Thanksgiving. After which she was
committed to the Care of the Minister who writ this Relation, least Satan
should again assault her. His name was Mr. Lewis Haughs, then Minister of St.
Helens, London, from whence this Narrative was taken; and who does not mention
what became of the Witch, nor that the Maid was any more afflicted in this
kind. History of Demons, etc. p. 20.

What follows, is extracted from Mr. Aubrey 's Miscellanies.

10. Hugo Grotius in his Annotations on Jonah, speaking of Nineve, says, That
History has diverse Examples, that after a great and hearty Humiliation, God
delivered Citys, etc. from their Calamities. Some did observe in the late Civil
Wars, that the Parliament after a Humiliation did shortly obtain a Victory. And
as a threefold Cord is not easily broken, so when a whole Nation shall conjoyn
in fervent Prayer and Supplication it shall produce wonderful Effects, William
Lawd (Archbishop of Canterbury) in a Sermon preached before the Parliament
about the beginning of the Reign of Kng Charles I. affirms the Power of Prayer
to be so great, That though there be a Conjunction or Opposition of Saturn or
Mars (as there was one of them then) it will overcome the Malignity of it. In
the Life of V^vasor Powel, is a memorable Account of the Effect of fervent
Prayer, after an exceeding Drought: And Mr. Baxter (in his Book
aforementioned) has several Instances of that kind, which see.

St. Michael and all Angels. The Collect.
O everlasting God, who have Ordered and Constituted the Services of Men and
Angels, after a wonderful manner: Mercifully grant, that as the Holy Angels
always do thy Service in heaven: So by thy Appointment, they may succor and
defend us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Thus far Mr. Aubrey.

11. Mr. Tho. Spatchet, late of Dunwich and Cookley, was under extraordinary
Fits, occasioned by Witchcraft; and was by the gracious Effects of fervent
Prayer delivered out of them; as we are assured by the Narrative thereof, drawn
up by the Reverend Mr. Samuel Petto, Minister at Sudbury in Suffolk, who was an
Eyewitness. This Account was Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in Little
Britain, in June 1693.

12. Mr. John Janeway (as his Brother writes) was mighty in Prayer, and his
Spirit was oftentimes so transported in it, that he forgot the weakness of his
own Body and of others Spirits: Indeed the Acquaintance that he had with God
was so sweet, and his Converse with him so frequent, that when he was engaged
in Duty, he scarce knew how to leave that which was so delightful and suited to
his Spirit. His constant Course for some Years was this; He Prayed at least
three times a day in secret, sometimes seven times twice a day in the Family or
College. He was used to converse with God with a holy Familiarity as a Friend;
and would upon all occasions run to him for advice, and had many strange and
immediate Answers of Prayer; one of which I think it not altogether impertinent
to give the World an Account of.

His honored Father, Mr. William Janeway, Minister of Kelshal in
Hartford-shire, being sick, and being under somewhat dark Apprehensions as to
the state of his Soul, he would often say to his Son John, Oh Son! this passing
upon Eternity is a great thing, this Dying is a solemn business, and enough to
make any ones Heart ache that has not his Pardon sealed, and his Evidences for
heaven clear. And truly Son, I am under no small Fears as to my own Estate for
another World: Oh that God would clear his Love! Oh that I could say
cheerfully, I can die.

His sweet and dutiful Son made a suitable Reply at present; but seeing his
dear Father continuing under despondings of Spirit, he got by himself, and
spent some time in wresting with God upon his Father's account. After he was
risen from his Knees he came down to his sick Father, and asked him how he felt
himself: his Father made no Answer for some time, but wept exceedingly, and
continued for some considerable time in extraordinary Passion of Weeping, so
that he was not able to speak. But at last, having recovered himself, with
unspeakable joy he burst out into such Expressions as these; Oh Son! now it is
come, it is come, it is come; I bless God I can die. I know now what that white
Stone is wherein a new Name is written, which none know but they which have it.
And that Fit of Weeping which you saw me in, was a Fit of overpowring Love and
Joy, so great, that I could not for my heart contain my self; neither can I
express what glorious Discoveries God has made of himself unto me. And had
that Joy been greater, I question whether I could have born it, and whether it
would not have separated Soul and Body.

You may well think that his Son's Heart was not a little refreshed to hear
such Words, and see such a Sight, and to meet the Messenger that he had sent to
Heaven returned back again so speedily. He counted himself a sharer with his
Father in this Mercy, and it was upon a double account welcome, as it did so
wonderfully satisfy his Father, and as it was so immediate and clear an Answer
of his own Prayers, as if God had from Heaven said unto him, Thy Tears and
Prayers are heard for thy Father. Upon this, this precious young Man broke
forth into Praises, and even into another Ecstasy of Joy, that God should deal
so familiarly with him; and the Father and Son together were so full of Joy,
Light, Life, Love and Praise, that there was a little Heaven in the place. See
his Life.

13. Speed in his History of Britain tells us, That Richard the First besieged
a Castle with his Army, they offered to surrender if he would save their Lives;
he refused, and threatens to hang them all: Upon this an Arbalaster charged his
Bow with a square Arrow, making first his Prayer to God that he would direct
the Shot, and deliver the Innocent from Oppression; it struck the King himself,
whereof he Died, and they were Delivered.

Concerning success of Prayer, Mr. Baxter gives us these following Relations.

1. When at Milborn in Derby-shire I was given up for dead, by bleeding an
Hundred and Twenty Ounces at the Nose, after other Weakness and Bleedings many
Years, my Father and Mother-in-law dwelling in Shrewsbury, the Report came to
them there that I was Dead. My Mother-in-law was by the Governor and other
Friends exhorted to bear it patiently. She presently retired to secret Prayer;
where she professes that a Trembling and Concussion of her Body surprising
her, she felt that which constrained her to say what she did when she came
forth (to her Friends) viz. [He is not dead, but shall live for farther
Service.] And hereupon they sent a Messenger from Shrewsbury to see, who found
me alive, and brought them the Tidings. This was in February, 1646. My
Mother-in-law is yet living, about Ninety two Years of Age; the Daughter of Sir
Thomas Hunkes; two of her Brothers, Sir Foulk Hunkes, and Sir Henry Hunkes,
were known Soldiers for the King; the one Governor of Shrewsbury, and the
other of Banbury Castle a while. She is one that has spent a great part of her
Life in secret Prayer, with great neglect of the Flesh and World, and longing
to die and be with Christ, which she has not yet obtained, but will ere long.
(Since the writing of this, dead at 96, in full Understanding, and great
Holiness.)

2. After long Pain and Weakness, reading a Latin Book of one Grehard a foreign
Physician, I found in him, that his own Father had been cured of some of my
Distempers (as I then thought) by daily swallowing a Bullet of purest Gold: I
got one of the Weight of a twenty Shilling price and swallowed it, but it
remained in me: And hearing of a Gentleman within twelve Miles of me, that
lately did the like, and it never passed from him, but he died quickly made me
take Clysters and Purges, but none of them stirred it. My poor praying
Neighbors (not then fearing the Canon which strictly forbids it) set apart
a Day to Fast and Pray for my Deliverance; and that Morning it came away, after
many Weeks abode (three or four) and they spent the rest of the day in
Thanksgiving.

3. In my Weakness, being under Physic with Dr. Wright, then living in
Shrewsbury, there suddenly rose upon one of the Tonsils of my Throat a round
Tumor, seeming to me as hard as a Bone, and about as big as a great Pea, or
small Button, half out of the Flesh and half in: I feared lest it would prove a
Cancer; but the Doctor told me he did not think so, but what it was he knew
not; but perwaded (having first tried dissolving and dissipating means in vain)
to quiet it only with Gargarisms of hot Milk: It increased but little, but no
means altered it, till (as I remember) about a quarter of a Year after my
Conscience reproved me, that having had so many great Mercies upon Prayer, I
never gave God, the Honor or Thanks of public Mentioning them, for fear of
seeming to seek some Glory to my self, being the next morning to preach my
Lecture, I obeyed my Conscience, and mentioned them in the Words, since Printed
and Published, in the second part of Saints Everlasting Rest, being then upon
the Proof of the Truth of the Scriptures: I had before constantly felt it (and
too often looked at in Galss.) As soon as I had Preached, and spoken those Words,
I felt no more of it. As I came out of the Pulpit I put my Finger in my Mouth
to feel it, but could feel nothing: I hasted home to the Glass, and saw that
there was neither Vola, vel Vestigium, vel Cicatrix; no Cavity, Tumor,
Discoloring, nor any sign where ever it way; and I am sure I neither spit it
out, nor swallowed it; and to the last Hour it seemed as hard as a Bone.

4. Richard Cook, a Mercer in Kniver, was long a Man of a pious unblameable
Life, and on of the chief of good old Mr. John Gross (since Minister here in
Friday-street) his Congregation: When I came to Kederminster he removed
thither, and took a House the next Door to me; which proved Old, Dangerous, and
so ill a Bargain, as cast him into melancholy Doubts, that he did not well to
leave his Habitation. His Father before him had long lived, and at last died in
Distraction; taking too much hot Waters to comfort him in Sadness, Nature,
Trouble, and those together, prevailed to his utter Distraction. He so
continued from 1642 to 1646. The best means by such as were most noted for
Curing that Disease were used, and all in vain: My Neighbors of Kederminster
resolved not easily to give over Fasting and Praying with and for him till he
was recovered; diverse Days, all seemed in vain; but at last he amended, and
has been recovered (without any other Remedy) now from the Year 1646, to this
present time 1678, though not altogether of so perfect strength of Brain as
before, yet of competent Understanding, About a Year or two ago I saw him in
London, and I hear he is yet alive and well, 1678.

5. Thomas Giles, the Son of Mr. Giles of Astley, was sent to be an Apprentice
in Worcester; where after a Fever he had a violent Epilepsie; after much
Physic in Worcester, and opening his Head, and all in vain, hs Mother took him
home with her into Kederminster; his Fits were sometimes twice a day; we were
fain to put a Key into his Mouth lest he should bite off his Tongue. At last,
the aforesaid praying Persons resolved to try the old Remedy of Fasting and
Praying till he was recovered; the first day they found no success; as I can
remember, it was the second day, while they were together Praying he was
suddenly cured. Hist. of Appar. Witches, p. 187.

CHAP. LXXVI. Present Retribution to the Charitable.
Dr. Hammond in his Sermon on Deuteronomy. 26.12, 13. lays down this Proposition:
That Almsgiving or Mercifulness was never the wasting or lessening of any Man's
Estate, to himself or his Posterity, but rather the increasing of it. And
thereupon adds, If I have delivered a new Doctrine, which will not presently
be believed, such as every Auditor will not consent to, I doubt not, but there
be plain Texts of Scripture, more then one, which will assure every Christian
of the Truth of it. Consider them at your leisure, Psalm. 41.1. 2. Psalm. 112.
all to this purpose. Prove. 11.25. and 12.9. and 19.17. and 28.27. Add to these
the Words of Christ, Mark 10.30. which though more generally delivered of any
kind of parting with Possessions for Christ's sake, are applied by St. Hierom
to the Words of Solomon, Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet
increases; because says he, they receive an hundred fold in this World. --
This says he I am resolved on, it is want of Belief and nothing else, that
keeps Men from the Practice of this Duty: Could this one Mountain be removed,
the lessening of our Wealth, that Almsgiving is accused of, Could that one
Scandal to Flesh and Blood be kicked out of the way, there is no other Devil
would take the unmerciful Man's part, no other Temptation molest the
Alms-giver. And let me tell you, that you have no more Evidence for the truth
of Christ's coming, for all the Fundamentals of your Faith, on which you are
content your Salvation should depend, then such as I have given you for your
security in this point. -- Archbishop Tillotson, tells us in his Sermon upon
Acts 10. v. 38. That to do good is the most pleasant Employment in the World.
It is natural, and whatever is so, is delightful. We do like our selves, when
ever we relieve the Wants and Distresses of others. And therefore this Virtue
among all other, has peculiarly entitled it self to the name of Humanity. We
answer our own Nature, and obey our Reason, and show our selves Men, in showing
Mercy to the Miserable -- when ever we consider the Evils and Afflictions of
others, we do with the greatest Reason, collect our Duty from our Nature and
Inclination, and make our own Wishes, and Desires, and Expectations from
others, a Law and Rule to our selves. And this is pleasant to follow our
Nature, and to gratify the importunate Dictates of our own Reason. So that the
Benefits we do to others, are not more welcome to them that receive them, then
they are delightful to us that do them. We ease our own Nature and Bowels, when
ever we help and relieve those who are in Want and necessity. As on the
contrary, no Man that has not divested himself of Humanity, can be cruel and
hard-hearted to others, without feeling some Pain in himself. There is no
sensual Pleasure in the World comparable to the Delight and Satisfaction that a
good Man takes in doing good. This Cato in Tully boasts of, as the great
Comfort and Joy of his old Age, That nothing was more pleasant to him than the
Conscience of a well spent Life, and the remembrance of many Benefits and
Kindnesses done to others. Sensual Pleasures are not lasting, but presently
vanish and expire: But that is not the worst of them; they leave a Sting behind
them, as the Pleasure goes off. -- Succedit frigida cura -- Sadness and
Melancholy come in the place of it. But the Pleasure of doing good remains
after a thing is done, the thoughts of its lie easy in our Minds and the
reflection upon it afterward does for ever minister Joy and Delight to us. In
a word. That Frame of Mind which enclines us to do Good, is the very Temper and
Disposition of Happiness. Solomon after all his Experience of worldly
Pleasures, pitches at last upon this as the greatest Felicity of Human Life,
and the only good Use that is to be made of a prosperous and plentiful Fortune,
Eccl. 3.12. I know that there is no good in them, but for a Man to rejoice and
do god in his Life. And a greater and wiser then Solomon had said, That it is
more blessed to give then to receive. Thus far Archbishop Tillotson.

I now proceed to Instances of present Retribution to the Charitable.

1. St. Alban (whom Mr. Fox in his first Tome mentioned amongst the Martyrs who
suffered for the Name and Cause of Christ) having received a poor persecuted
Minister into his House, was by his godly Life and gracious Exhortations so
wrought upon, that he turned from Heathenism to Christianity; and at last
suffered as a Martyr for the Truth of Jesus Christ; as Beda, and others write
of h^^. His kindness to a poor persecuted Minister, was recompensed not only
with his Conversion to the true Religion, but likewise with the honor of
Martyrdom.

2. St. Austin, having set forth the mercifulness an liberality of Constantine
the Great, says, Bonus Deus, Constantinum magnum tantis terrenis implevit
muneribus, etc. God gave Constantine, that merciful Prince, more Wealth than
Heart could wish, for his bounty to the Poor. Aug. de Civitate Dei. l. 5.

3. Dr. Hammond in his forementioned Treatise, mentioned an ancient Story out
of Cedrenus, of a Jew, who upon reading those words of Solomon, Prove. 19.17. He
that has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given
will he pay him again, resolved to try whether God would be as good as his
word; thereupon gave all that he had but two pieces of Silver to the Poor, and
then waited and expected to see it come again. But being not presently answered
in that Expectation, grew angry, and went up to Jerusalem to expostulate with
God for not performing his Promise. And going on his way, found two Men a
striving, engaged in an unreconcileable Quarrel, about a Stone, that both walk
together had found in the way, and so had both equal right to it; but (being
but one, and not capable of being divided) they could not both enjoy; and
therefore to make them Friends, he having two pieces of Silver, does upon
contract divide them betwixt the Contenders, and has the Stone in exchange for
them; having it, he goes on his Journey, and coming to Jerusalem, shows it the
Goldsmith, who tells him it was a Jewel of great Value, being a Stone fallen,
and lost out of the High Priests Ephod, to whom if he carried it, he should
certainly receive a great Reward. He did so, and accordingly it proved; the
High Priest took it of him, gave him a great Reward, and withal, sharply
reproved him for questioning the truth of God's Promise, bidding him trust God
the next time.

4. The Story of Tiberius the Second is pertinent to this purpose, which take
in the Words of that Reverend Person beforementioned, in his Sermon at the
Spittle. This Tiberius was very Famous for his Bounty to the Poor, insomuch;
that his Wife was wont to blame him for it, and speaking to him once how he
wasted his Treasury that way, he told her, He should never want Money, so long
as in obedience to Christ's Commands he did supply the necessity of the Poor.
And presently see how Providence ordered it! Immediately after he had given
much this way, under a Marble Table, which was taken up, he found a great
Treasury, and news was brought him too, of the Death of one Narses, a very rich
Man, who had given his whole Estate unto him.

5. Famous is the Story of that charitable Bishop of Millain, who as he was
Traveling with his Servant, overtook some poor People who begged an Alms of
him; whereupon he asked his Man what Money he had about him, who answered,
Three Crowns; which he commanded him to give unto them, but the Servant
thinking himself wiser than his Master, gave them but two Crowns, not knowing
what occasions they might have for Money before they got home. Not long after
some Noblemen meeting the Bishop, and knowing him to be a very charitable Man,
appointed two Hundred Crowns to be paid to the Bishop's Servant for his
Master's use. The Servant having received the Money, presently with great Joy,
acquainted his Master therewith; whereupon said the Bishop, Thou may now see
how in wronging the Poor of their due, by keeping back the third Crown which I
intended them, thou have likewise wronged me; if thou had given those three
Crowns I commanded thee to give, thou had received three Hundred Crowns,
whereas now I have but two. Melanc. apud Job. Manlium, in Loc. Com.

6. Suitable likewise to this point, is the Story of one John Stewart, Provost
of Air in Scotland, who was eminent for Piety and Charity. He had a
considerable Estate left him by his Father, of which he gave a great part to
the Poor, and other charitable Uses. To pass by many, I shall mention only one:
His Heart, on a time, being much affected with the Wants and Necessities of
many of God's People, who were in a suffering Condition, he sends for diverse
of them to Edinburgh, where being met, and some time spent in Prayer, he made
them promise, not to reveal what he was about to do, so long as he lived: and
then told them, He was not ignorant in what a low Condition many of them were,
and therefore he had brought some Money with him, to lend each of them; yet so
as they should never offer to repay it, till he required the same: soon after
this, such a Plague brake forth in Air the place of his abode, that Trade much
decayed, and he himself, with others, were reduced to straits. Whereupon some
of the Profane in that place derided him, saying, That Religion had made him
poor, and his giving so much to others, like a Fool, had brought him to want.
But mark what followed: Having borrowed a little Money, he departs from Air to
Rochel in France, where Salt, and other Commodities being exceeding cheap, for
want of Trading, he adventured to fraught a Ship, loading her upon Credit; and
then went back again, through England, to Air in Scotland, having ordered the
Ship to come thither: but after long expectation, he was informed for certain,
that his Ship was taken by a Turkish Man of War; the Report whereof did
exceedingly afflict him: not because he knew not how to be abased, as well as
how to abound; but out of fear, that the Mouths of wicked Men would be the more
opened to the reproaching of his Profession and Charity. But soon after Tidings
was brought him, that his Ship was safely arrived in the Road; and upon his
going forth, saw it was a Truth. And through God's good Providence, as a Reward
of his Charity, he made so much of the Commodities in the Ship, that after the
Payment of his Debts, he had Twenty thousand Marks left for himself. Though his
Bread was cast upon the Waters, and to appearance lost, yet after many Days, it
returned to him with great advantage. This Story Hately relates in a Book
called, The Fulfilling of the Scriptures.

7. Daniel Waldow, Esquire; Citizen and Mercer, who was chosen Alderman of London,
is a further proof of this Doctrine before laid down. I could from-mine own
Experience speak much of his Bounty and Charity; as also of that plentiful
Estate, wherewith God blessed him thereupon: but I shall rather give it you in
the Words of that holy Man, and blessed Servant of Christ, in the Work of the
Ministry, Mr. James Nalton, now with God, who was more intimately acquainted
with Mr. Waldow, and therefore the more fit to Preach his Funeral Sermon, and
to set forth his Life for our Imitation: his Words are these: He was a Man
eminent and exemplary in the Grace of Charity; as appeared by his great Bounty
manifested on every occasion. Never any good Man, Minister, or other, came to
propound any Work of Charity, public or private, that needed to do any more
than to propound it: for his Heart was so set upon Works of Mercy, that he
prevented Importunity, by his Christian and Heroic Liberty. He made no more of
giving Ten Pounds to a Work of Charity, than many other rich Men make of giving
Ten Shillings. His Charity had two singular Concomitants, which made it
remarkable and praiseworthy.

1. He did good while he lived: He carried his Lanthorn before him: He made his
own Hands his Executors, and his own Eyes his Overseers. Some will part with
their Riches, when they can keep them no lo nger: This is like a Cutpurse,
that being espied or pursued, will drop a Purse of Gold, because he can keep it
no longer; but to be doing Good in our Lifetime, while we have Opportunity,
this is an Act of Faith, and an Evidence that we can trust God with our
Estates, and our Children, that he will provide for them, when our Heads are
laid in the Grave.

2. He dispersed his Charity so secretly, without any Self-seeking, or
Pharisaical Vainglory, that his Left Hand did not know what his Right Hand
did. Therefore did he often go with an Hundred Pounds under his Cloak, to some
Godly Friends, desiring them to distribute it amongst such honest poor People,
as stood most in need of his Relief.

In brief, he did so much good while he lived, as if he meant to have nothing
to do when he died: and yet he gave so largely when he came to die, as if he
had done no Good when he lived.

Many, I know, are apt to say, They have many Children, and therefore cannot
give: so had Mr. Wald^^. He had Nine Children alive at his Death; but the
providing for them, was no obstruction to his Charity, nor prejudice to his
Children, but did rather entail a Blessing upon them.

8. Mr. John Walter, Citizen and Draper of London, was signally charitable; not
only at his Death, but in the whole Course of his Life, even from his younger
Years. For the avoiding of Vainglory, his manner was to send considerable Sums
of Money to poor Families, by the hands of others, in whose Faithfulness he
could confide. Whereupon God did not only bless him with a large Estate, but
likewise gave him such Contentedness therein, that he sat down abundantly
satisfied; and made a solemn Vow and Promise unto God, That he would give the
Surplusage of his Estate, whatever it was, that for the future should accrue
unto him from his Calling, to charitable Uses. See his own Expressions,
transcribed out of his Last Will and Testament: I thought fit to declare, that
about Twenty Years past, when the Lord had entrusted me with a convenient
Estate, sufficient to maintain my Charge, and afford fit Portions for my Wife
and Children, after my Decease I resolved that what further Estate the Lord
should be pleased to intrast me with, to bestow the same upon charitable Uses.

After this Vow, finding his Estate wonderfully increased, he began to build
Almshouses; one in the Parish of St. George, in Southwark; another in St. Mary
Newington; because in those Parishes he observed many blind, poor, lame People
were, and never an Almshouse for them. He built a Chapel near one of his
Almshouses; and when he had so done with the Poor's Stock, he bought Lands and
Houses of Inheritance, which he settled upon the Company of Drapers, as for the
Relief of his poor Alms-people, so for the performing other charitable Gifts
mentioned in his Last Will and Testament. While he lived, he was wont to go
himself once a Month to his Almshouses, in his worst Clothes (that he might
not be suspected to be the Founder of them) and gave unto the poor People their
promised Allowance. This whilst living. -- At his Death also he gave very
considerable; besides which, he gave the left to his Wife and two Daughters,
about 10000 l.

9. William Pennoyer, Esquire; Citizen and Merchant of London, a Person wholly
composed of Mercy and Goodness; many Years before his Death, turned great part
of the Stock wherewith he traded, into Lands of Inheritance, to the value of
Four hundred Pounds per Annum; he lived frugally, spending upon himself and
Family, about Two hundred Pounds per Annum, and the Remainder he bestowed on
charitable Uses. His Legacies bequeathed in his Last Will and Testament, were
as follows:

To poor Ministers Widows, and others in distress, about 150 l.

To Four of his poor Tenants 20 l.

Likewise 800 l. to be laid out here in Woollen-Cloth, or other Commodities, to
be sent to New England, for the Use of his poor Kindred there.

To Bristol 54 l. per Annum, toward the Maintenance of a Schoolmaster, and a
Lecturer, to Preach a Weekday Lecture there; and to other charitable Uses.

He likewise settled 20 l. per Annum, on Trusstees, for the teaching of Forty
Boys, in, or near White-Chappel; and 40 s. yearly, to buy Bibles for some of
the Children.

He gave 12 l. Annum, for maintaining a School at Hay, in Brecknock-shire; and
40 s. more yearly, to buy Books for the Scholars.

Ten Pound per Annum, for poor distressed People in Bethlehem- Hospital, London.

Ten Pound per Annum more, to Ten of the blindest, poorest, oldest
Cloath-workers, at the Discretion of the Masters Wardens, and Assistants of the
said Company for the time being.

Forty Pound per Annum, to Christ-Church- Hospital, for the placing out Four
Children yearly; and 40 s. more, yearly, to buy each of the Children a Bible.

Besides these, he gave to his poor Kindred above 2000 l. by his Will.

And by a Codicil annexed thereunto, he bequeathed to certain Trustees 1000 l.
to be given to honest poor People. As also 300 l. for Releasing poor Prisoners,
etc.

10. Thomas Arnold, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, at his first setting up,
was not rich in Stock; but being charitably disposed, and ready to every good
Work, his Estate, through God's Blessing, very much increased. -- He frequently
enquired of others, after such poor People as were over-burdened with Children,
or otherwise distressed; yea, he hired Men with Money, to make it their
Business to find out honest poor People, on whom he might bestow his Charity;
and likewise did entrust others with considerable Sums, to distribute among the
poorer sort, charging them to have special Respect to the honest Poor, such
whom they conceived did truly fear God.

That he was no Loser, but a Gainer by his Liberality, appears, in that God
so blessed him in his Calling, that he attained to an Alderman's Estate, and
was chosen to that Office; yea, he gave over his Calling in the City, and
withdrew into the Country, that he might the better mind God, and the
Concernments of his Soul more, and the World less.

11. John Clark, Doctor of Physic, one of great Repute for his Learning,
Piety, and Charity, sometime President of the College of Physicians, was wont
to lay by all the Lord's-days Fees, as a sacred Stock for charitable Uses;
devoting that entirely to God, which he received on his Day, accounting it a
piece of Sacrilege to appropriate it to himself, or any common use: whereupon
God so prospered him in his Calling, that though at first his Practice was
little, and his Estate not very great, yet afterward his Practice so
increased, and the World so flowed in upon him, that he lived plentifully and
comfortably.

12. Dr. J. Bathurst likewise kept his Lord's-days Fees, as a Bank for the
Poor: which was so far from lessening his Incomes, that by the Blessing of God
upon his Practice, they were greatly in few Years augmented by it: for though at
his first coming to London, he brought little Estate with him, and here had
small Acquaintance, Yorkshire being his Native Country, where he had spent his
former Days; yet the Lord was pleased so to prosper him in his Calling, that in
20 Years time he purchased Lands of Inheritance, to the value of 1000 l. per
Annum; to speak (says my Author) what I know to be certain: for in the Repute
of some, his Estate at his Death was no less than 2000 l. of yearly value.

13. Dr. Edmond Trench likewise observed the same course, as his Wife, and
diverse other of his Friends do testify. And certain it is, that this was no
damage, but a great advantage to him: for he had as many Patients as his weak
Body would permit him to visit: and though he lived at a full and plentiful rate,
frequently and cheerfully entertaining Ministers and Scholars at his Table, yet
did he gain a very considerable Estate, which he left to his Wife and Children,
etc.

14. Samuel Dunche, of Pusey, in the County of Berks, Esquire; a Person that
according to the Apostle's Rule, Did good to all; but especially to those of
the Household of Faith: used to send Moneys yearly to several Towns, as to Stow
upon the Woold, in Gloucester-shire; to Lamburn, and others, for the Relief of
the Poor: and upon the last here named, he settled Lands of Inheritance for
ever, for the same use. And to Rumsey in Hamp-shire, he gave by Deed, upon the
like Account, a Lease of Ninety nine Years, to commence after his Decease. The
Poor also of the said Town, whom he called his Alms-people, had also during his
Life, weekly Relief from him: and many other Towns, together with them, were
large Sharers in the like Bounty. Several poor Children of the said Town, and
likewise of those belong to Farringdon, he set to School, and did not only pay
for their Teaching, but also furnished them with Books convenient. He caused
also several good Books to be Printed at his own Charge, which he freely gave
to the Poor; and gave considerable Sums of Money yearly for the Relief of poor
Ministers, and upon several of them he settled Annuities, as 10 l. 20 l. per
Annum, for their Lives, besides Legacies at his Death. Besides all this, his
Hand was ever open to all that he thought Objects of Charity.

Thus did this pious Gentleman honor God with his Substance, and adventure
upon the Royal Prophet's Words, to cast his Bread upon the Waters; which though
the unbelieving World accounts Folly, and usually reckon it among their Losses;
yet he, to his advantage, according to the Promise thereto annexed, found it
again, not after many Days. This Bread, like the Loaves which Christ fed the
Multitude with, was multiplied in his Hands, and his Oil increased by pouring
out. He was but a younger Brother, and the Etate settled upon him, was but 800
l. a Year, or thereabouts; and yet notwithstanding, I had almost said, this
Excess of Charity, his Estate was so far from being ruined, or impaired, as
that not only the same bare Measure he received, but much greater, pressed
down, and running over, was meeted out to him and his Posterity. -- There is
now left to his Heirs, an Estate of more than the double value of what he
received from his Father; besides the Portions which he gave to all his
Daughters, Five in Number, which were very considerable, to some of them more
than 2000 l.

15. Dr. William Gouge, late Pastor of Black-Fryars, a Man eminent, as in other
Graces, so in this of Charity, used to say, That the Tenth part of a rich Man's
Estate was a fit Proportion to be devoted to God for charitable Uses: but
himself, as his Son tells us he collected from his own Papers, gave the Seventh
part of all his yearly Comings-in, toward the Maintaining poor Scholars at the
University, and the Relieving poor Families, and distressed Persons. And how
wonderfully God blessed, as his Ministry, so his outward Estate, is so well
known to all who lived in his Days, that (as his Son says) it is needless to
say any thing of it: only there may be truly applied to him, the Words of the
Psalmist, He was ever merciful and lending, and his Seed is blessed. Mr. Tho.
Gouge 's Surest and Safest Way of Thriving, p. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, etc. From
whence I have extracted all this Chapter, almost, entirely.

It were easy to multiply Instances of this nature; but we will pass to
another of somewhat a different kind.

The Story of SYNESIUS and EVAGRIUS.
LEontius Apamiensis, a most faithful religious Man, that had lived many Years
at Cyrene, assured them, that Synesius (who of a Philosopher became a Bishop)
found at Syrene one Evagrius a Philosopher, who had been his old Acuquaintance,
Fellow-Student, and intimate Friend, but an o^^^^ate Heathen: and Synesius was
earnest with him to become a Christian; but all in vain; yet did he follow him
with those Arguments that might satitfie him of the Christian Verity; and at
last the Philosopher told him, That to him it seemed but a mere Fable and
Deceit, that the Christian Religion teaches Men, that this World shall have an
end, and that all Men shall rise again in these Bodies, and their Flesh be made
immortal and incorruptible, and that they shall so live for ever, and receive
the Reward of all that they have done in the Body, and that he that has pity
on the poor, lends to the Lord, and he that gives to the poor and needy,
shall have treasures in heaven, and shall receive an hundredfold from Christ,
together with eternal Life: these things he derided. Synesius by many Arguments
assured him, That all these things were certainly true; and at last the
Philosopher and his Children were baptized. A while after he comes to Synesius,
brings him 300 l. of Gold for the Poor, and bid him take it; but give him a
Bill under his Hand, that Christ should repay it him in another World. Synesius
took the Money for the Poor, and gave him under his Hand such a Bill as he
desired. Not long after, the Philosopher being near to Death, commanded his
Sons, that which they buried him, they should put Synesius's Bill in his Hand
in the Grave: which they did. The Third Day after, the Philosopher seemed to
appear to Synesius in the Night, and said to him: Come to my Sepulcher, where I
lie, and take thy Bill; for I have received the Debt, and am satisfied; which
for thy assurance I have subscribed with my own Hand. The Bishop knew not that
the Bill was buried with him; but sent to his Sons, who told him all; and
taking them, and the chief Men of the City, he went to the Grave, and found the
Paper in the Hands of the Corpse thus subscribed, Ego Evagrius, etc. I Evagrius,
the Philosopher, to Thee, most Holy Sir, Bishop Synesius, Greeting: I have
received the Debt, which in this Paper is written with thy Hands, and I am
satisfied; and have no Action against Thee for the Gold, which I gave to Thee,
and by Thee, to Christ our God and Savior. They that saw the thing, admired,
and glorified God, that gave such wonderful Evidence of his Promises to his
Servants. And, says Leontius, this Bill thus subscribed by the Philosopher, is
kept at Cyrene, most carefully, in the Church, to this Day, to be seen of such
as desire to see it. Baron. Annal. ad An. 411. Ex Sophron. Praet. Spir. c. 155.

See the Story of the Lord Cromwell's Gratitude to Frescobald, a Florentine
Merchant, mentioned in the Chapter of Remarkable Gratitude.

CHAP. LXXIV. Present Retribution to the Observers of Sabbaths.
AS God has inflicted remarkable Judgments upon those that have profaned his
Sabbaths, so he has remarkably blessed them, who have been careful to observe
them; according to his Promises made upon that point. Isa. 58.13, 14. If thou
turn away thy Foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy Day,
and call the Sabbath a Delight, the Holy of the Lord, Honorable; and shall
honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thy own pleasure, nor
speaking thy own worlds: then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I
will cause thee to ride upon the High places of the Earth, and feed thee with
the Heritage of Jacob thy Father: for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

1. Bishop Jos. Hall observed, that according to his Care of observing the
Lord's Day, he commonly prospered in his Undertakings the Week following.

2. The Lord Chief Justice Hales has made the very same Remark upon himself.
See my Christian's Companion, where both these Examples are cited.

And, if I mistake not, the late Lord Delamere did the same.

3. Towns and Families that have been more strict and regular upon that Day,
have commonly fared better than their Neighbors, who have been profane and
licentious. Even within the Circuit of my own Knowledge, the Town of
Whitchurch, in Shrop-shire, escaped Public Calamities better than some of her
Sister-Towns, as Draiton, Wem, Newport, etc. where frequent and sometimes
dreadful Faires made great Devastations. And which deserves not to pass without
a Nota Been, the Difference of their Devotions upon that Day was notable to a
common Eye: In the former you should scarce see an idle Person walking in the
Streets, but their Doors and Windows close shut, the People within exercised in
serious and grave Discourses, reading of the Scriptures, Repetition of Sermons,
Catechizing, Praying, Singing of Psalms, etc. In the other, the Doors open, the
Streets too much frequented with idle Company, and licentious Exercises. And
even in Whitchurch, where the Plague first, and afterward a Fire had the
greatest Influence, the Rector, or Minister of the Parish, did often enough,
and very plainly admonish them Inhabitants of that particular Street, (called
the New-Town) of their careless observance of the Lord's Day: as if that, in
his Judgment, were the distinguishing Sin of that Street, above any others in
the Town.

4. I have taken Notice elsewhere, of Ministers and others, who have been
delighted, and expended themselves in Sabbatical Devotions, have been called to
their Rest upon that Day. As for instance: 1. The Divine Poet and Preacher, Mr.
Herbert. 2. Mr. Edw. Deering. 3. Theodore Beza. 4. Archbishop Abbot, soon
after he came out of the Pulpit, fell sick, and shortly after died. 5. Dr. Rob.
Harris died between Twelve and One a Clock on Saturday Night. 6. Dr. Preston at
Five a Clock on the Lord's Day Morning. 7. Dr. Thomas Tailour, of Aldermanbury.
Mr. Edward West, the Lord's-Day-Night, after having Preached there. 8. Mr.
Julius Herrings. 9. Mr. Thomas Wadsworth: and Mr. Richard Vines. 10. Sir
Matthew Hale upon Christmas Day, a Day which he used to Celebrate with great
Devotion and much Spiritual Joy; leaving behind him no less than Seventeen
Poems, which he had Composed upon that Day, to the Honor of his Savior. Cum
multis aliis, etc. On the same Day died Mr. Sam. Crook, Minister. See the Head
of Sudden Death, for more Relations of this nature.


5. Mr. H. Burton, after his Sufferings and Exile, having an Order sent him
from the Parliament for his Enlargement, and his Return for England; makes this
Observation, and in these Words: Blessed Tidings indeed; and the more, because
it comes from a Parliament; and the more, because it comes from a Parliament's
Handsel, presenting much Good, but promising more. The News filled Guernsey-
Castle with Joy, and so the Island. The First Observation I made of it, was of
the Day, on which this Tidings came: First I noted it was the Lord's Day, which
Day I had mightily propugned and defended, both by Preaching and Writing
against the Malignant and Profane Adversaries of the Sanctification thereof,
and of its Morality. And when the Book for Dispensations, and Allowance of
Sports on that Day, came with an Injunction to be publicly read in my Church
upon the Lord's Day; that ery Day, instead of Reading of it, I turned my
Afternoon Preaching, into an opening of the Fourth Commandment, therein proving
the Lord's Day, both for Sabbath and Sanctification under the Gospel: now the
Order for my Liberty came on that Day. See his Life, p. 38.

CHAP. LXXV. Present Retribution to them that have been Obedient to Parents.
Honor thy Father and Mother, says the Apostle, which is the first
Commandment with Promise. And the particular Promise annexed to it, is Length
of Days, viz. That thy Days may be long in the Land, which the Lord thy God
gives thee. And the Reason is obvious and natural, and plain to any Man of
Common Sense: for besides, that the Dutifulness of Children, is the likeliest
may to engage the Favor of God, and the Divine Conduct and Blessing on their
sides, it obliges the Children who are temselves green in Years, and
unexperienced in the World, and obnoxious to many Temptations and Snares of Ill
Company, Idleness, Rashness, Licentiousness, etc. to keep close to wiser
Counsels, and the grave Instructions of their faithful, aged, and experienced
Parents: by which means they oftentimes fare better than such rash and
refractory Phaetons, who throw off the Yoke of Parental Discipline, and are
left like Sons of Belial, to do whatsoever seems good in their own eyes. How
many in the World have escaped the Stings of Poverty, and the Ignominy of the
Gallows, and a violent Death, and other Dangers by this means?

1. Though Lamech had several other Children, as Jabal, Jubal, Tubal-Cain, etc.
yet none that we read of, trod in the Steps, and proved so dutiful and
comfortable to his Parents, as Noah, Genesis 5.29. And he was remarkably blessed
and rewarded for it: for when all the rest of the World was destroyed, He found
Grace in the sight of the Lord, Genesis 6.8.

2. Noah had Three Sons, Shem, Ham, Japhet; but Ham dishonored his Father, and
made a Scorn of his Nakedness, and therefore was accursed by him: Shem and
Japhet joined together, and took a Garment to cover their Father's Infirmity,
and therefore, Blessed (says Noah) be the Lord God of Shem, etc. Genesis 9.26.

3. Abraham had Two Sons, Ishmael and Isaac, the one scornful and disinherited,
and turned out of the House; the other dutiful, and his Father's Favorite and
Heir.

4. Isaac had Two Sons, Esau and Jacob; the one a cunning Hunter, a profane
Fellow, that made light of his Birthright, and therefore forfeited his
Blessing; the other a plain Man, and pious, and according procured the Blessing.

5. Jacob had many Children; but Reuben, the Firstborn, unstable as Water,
went up to his Father's Bed, and defiled it; and therefore, Genesis 49.4. Thou
shall not excel. Simeon and Levi had Instruments of Cruelty in their
Habitations, in their Anger they slew a Man, and in their Self-will dug down
a Wall: and therefore, ( ver. 7.) Cursed be their Anger: for it was fierce,
etc. They were to be divided and scattered in Israel. Judah to save Joseph's
Life, who was his Father's Fondling, and the Son of his Old Age, advised his
Brethren to sell him, and afterward offered himself to be Joseph's Bondsman,
for his Brother Benjamin, out of Tenderness to his Aged Father, Genesis 44.34. For
how shall I go up, says he, to my Father, and the Lad be not with me; lest
peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my Father. And therefore see how
this Piety of Judah, and Dutifulness to his Father was at last rewarded, chap.
49.8, 9, 10. Judah, thou art he, that thy Brethren shall praise, thy Hand shall
be in the Neck of thy Enemies; thy Father's Children shall bow down before
thee. Judah is a Lion's Whelp, etc. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah,
etc.

6. I have read (says my Author) of a young Man hanged at Four and twenty
Years, whose curled Black Locks upon the Gallows instantly turned White; many
enquiring into the Cause of such a strange Event, a grave Divine assigned this
Reason: Had this young Man, (says he) been dutiful to his Parents, obedient to
his Superiors, he might have lived so long, 'till that in the Course of
Nature, his Black Hairs had become White. Mr. Quick, in his relation of the
Poisoning of a whole Family in Plymouth, etc. p. 87.

7. Mr. Paul Baines, of Christ's-College, in Cambridge, was at first very
undutiful and irregular in his Conversation, and therefore his Father being
grieved at it, left with one Mrs. Wilson, a Sails-man in London, 40 l. per
Annum, upon this Condition, That if his Son did forsake his evil Courses, and
become an honest Man, he should then give him the Estate; if not, he should
never let him have it. After the Father's Decease, Mr. Baines reformed
mightily, and became eminently pious and devout: Mr. Wilson falling sick, sends
for him, and desires him to pray with him; which Mr. Baines did every
savourily: upon which the good Gentleman told him of the 40 l. per Annum, which
his Father had left with him, and so faithfully delivered up those Writings of
the Agreement, which had passed betwixt his Father and him. And being like to
leave behind him a Wife and two Children, he entreated Mr. Baines to be a
Friend to them. And accordingly after Mr. Wilson's Death, to Discharge his
Trust, and approve himself grateful, he married his Widow. Mr. Clark in his
Life.

Here was a Son, that indeed was not dutiful to his Father in his first Years,
that would not go, when his Father bid him go; but afterward repented and
went: and accordingly he fared; for though the Estate came not to him presently,
yet afterward it came.

CHAP. LXXVI. Present Retribution to the Peaceable and Quiet.
BLessed (says our Savior) are the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth:
and again, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children
of God. And it is certain, a Meekness and Quietness of Spirit does mightily
contribute to the Health of our Bodies, the Comfort of our Minds, and a
peaceable and sweet Enjoyment of the good things of this Life. The Christian
Religion (says a learned Man) Dr. Stillingfleet now Bishop of Worcester, in his
Sermon upon Phil. 3. v. 16. does lay the greatest Obligations on Mankind to
Peace and Unity, by the strictest Commands, the highest Examples, and the most
prevailing Arguments; yet so much have the Passions and Interests of Men
overlay'd the Sense of their Duty, that as nothing ought to be more in our
Wishes so nothing seems more remote from our Hopes, then the universal Peace of
the Christian World. Not that there is any impossibility in the thing, or any
considerable difficulty, if all Men were such Christians as they ought to be;
but as long as Men pursue their several Factions and Designs under the color
and pretense of Zeal for Religion; if they did not find Names and Parties ready
framed, that were suitable to their Ends, the difference of their Designs would
make them. So that 'till men's Corruptions are mortified, and their Passions
subdued to a greater degree then the World has yet found them, it is vain to
expect a state of Peace and Tranquillity in the Church. We need not go far from
home for a sufficient Evidence of this; for although our differences are such
as the wiser Protestants abroad not only condemn but wonder at them; yet it
has hitherto puzzled the wisest Persons among us to find out ways to compose
them; not so much from the distance of men's Opinions and Practices, as the
strength of their Prejudices and Inclinations. Thus far Dr. Stillingfleet.

I now proceed to Instances of Present Retribution to the Peaceable and Quiet.

1. Bazil the Great, after a difference had happened between him and Eusebius
Bishop of Caesaria, upon danger of a Persecution from Valens the Arrian
Emperor, went to him and was reconciled; and afterward upon Eusebius's Death,
was chosen Bishop in his room. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Ambrose, Lieutenant and Consul of Millain, upon the Death of Auxentius
Bishop of that See, going to appease an Uproar that was then risen about the
Election of another Bishop, with his excellent Arguments so appeased the Rage
of the heady Multitude, they with one Voice cried up Ambrose for their Bishop;
upon which, without any further deliberation, he was by the Bishops there
present installed into the Office, though at that time he was but a
Catechumenist, and unbaptized. Ibid.

Another time Justina the Empress going about to banish Ambrose, the People
bore such a singular love to him, that they withstood her Act and hindered it;
and besides, just at the same time a Rebellion was raised in Britain by
Maximus, which cooled her Spleen, and broke her Purpose concerning it. Ibid.

3. There is among the Advertisements of the late News-Letters, a Book
mentioned with this Title, The happiness of a quiet Mind, both in Youth and Old
Age, with the way to attain it: In a Discourse occasioned by the Death of Mrs.
Martha Hasselborn, who died March 13. 1695, in the Ninety fifth Year of her
Age. By Tim. Rogers, M. A. etc. I suppose by the Title (for I have not yet seen
the Book) that the Author does ascribe the healthful Crasis of the
Gentlewoman's Body, and the Longevity of her Life, in great measure to the
quietness of her Mind: but for further satisfaction, I leave my Reader to
consult the Book it self.

4. John of Times, who lived a Nestors Age and more, till he was three Hundred
Sixty one Years old, was a Man of a contented Spirit in all Conditions of Life.
Wanley's Wonders, l. 1. c. 31.

5. Mr. Phil. Henry, of whom I have made mention before, was a Man of a very
sedate even Temper, a calm Spirit, a great Peacemaker in his Neighborhood,
and accordingly he lived, loved, and died, with the universal Lamentation of
People of all sorts. And which perhaps ought not to be omited in the
consideration, after the enjoyment of a kind and loving Wife, who brought him a
good and plentiful Estate, and seeing his Children all disposed of with his
consent, and to content of all Persons concerned, and they walking in the
Truth, and mutual Love one with another, and his Chhildrens Children to his
great Joy and Comfort. I say, after all these Blessings poured plentifully upon
his Head, with great assurance and satisfaction about his spiritual and eternal
Estate, he quietly, with a short Sickness of about twelve Hours continuance, or
not much more, resigned up his Spirit into the Hands of the God of Peace.

6. Mrs. Katherine Stubs obeyed the Commandment of the Apostle, who bids
Women to be silent and learn of their Husbands at home; she would never suffer
any Disorder or Abuse in her House to be unreproved or unreformed; and so
gentle was she, and courteous of Nature, that she was never heard to give the
Lie to any in all her Life; nor so much as (Thou) to any in Anger. She was
never heard to fall out with any of her Neighbors, nor with the least Child
that lived, much less to scold or brawl: And for true Love and Loyalty to her
Husband and his Friends was she the rearest Paragon in the World; she lived
very contentedly; there was never any Man or Woman that ever opened their
Mouths against her: And accordingly as she lived, so she died peaceably and
comfortable; out-braving the Temptations of Satan with great Courage, praying
absolutely for Death, and expressing her self in such sweet Words as these --
Come sweet Christ, Come my Lord Jesus, O send thy pursuivant sweet Jesus to
fetch me! O sweet Jesus, strengthen thy Servant and keep thy Promise. Then
singing a Psalm most sweetly and with a cheerful Voice, she desired her Husband
that the 133th Psalm might be sung before her to Church. See her Life.

CHAP. LXXVII. Present Retribution to the Merciful.
BLessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy: He that considers the
poor and needy, the Lord will consider him in time of trouble: The Righteous is
ever merciful, and lends, therefore shall his Seed be blessed. If we give
credit to the Doctrine of our Religion, and Experience is ready to give
Suffrage to the Truth of it. Though Human Nature be much degenerate, yet is not
altogether without Bowels and Compassion; and if it were, divine Providence is
not so fast asleep, as to suffer ordinarily the merciful Man to be utterly
forsaken.

1. After what manner Compassion and Mercy does sometimes meet with unexspected
Rewards, methinks is pritily represented by Vrsinus Velius, in his Verses thus
Englished.

'A Fisher angling in a Brook,
'With a strong Line and baited Hook;
'When he found his wished Prey did pull,
'It happened he brought up a Skull
'Of one before drowned; which impressed
'A pious Motion in his Breast:
'Thinks he, since I such leisure have,
'Upon it I Will bestow a Grave:
'For what did unto it befall,
'May chance to any of us all.
'He takes it, wraps it in his Coat,
'And bears it to a place remote
'To bury it, and then digs deep,
'Because the Earth it safe should keep,
'And lo! in digging he espies,
'Where a great heap of Treasures lies,
'The Gods do never prove ingrate
'To such as others commiserate.
2. Whilst Dr. Edwin Sands remained at Shaftsburgh, he was chsefly maintained
by one Mr. Isaac, an English Gentleman of Kent, and one that suffered Exile for
the same Cause of Christ; who so entirely loved him, that he was always more
ready to give, then Dr. Sands was ready to receive; so that he gave him above
an hundred Marks (which in those days would go further then two hundred Pounds
now). And Dr. Sands afterward returning to England, and being preferred here
to the Archbishopric of York, very gratefully afterward repayed it again. Mr.
Clark in his Life.

3. One Mr. John Lane, of Horsley-down-lane, Southwark, in a Letter directed to
us on occasion of this Undertaking, desires this Passage may not go without our
Remark, though it be of an inferious Nature. One Widow Wilkinson late of St.
Olives, Southwark, being a good serious Christian, and of a compassionate Soul,
though very poor herself, coming one Evening from a Weekdays Lecture, found
several People beginning, and amongst the rest, a Woman with several Children,
professing that she had not one Farthing to buy a Candle with to light her
Children to Bed: The poor Widow observing the concernedness of the Woman, and
that most of the People were passed by without bestowing any Charity upon her,
was so touched in her Bowels with the consideration of her case, that she had
but one Halfpenny in the World, nor any Candle at home to light her self to
Bed with, yet she gave her that; and going home she found a Candle lying on
some Stall in St. Tooley's street.

4. I knew a Minister about twenty Years ago, or less, That being sent for to
visit a sick Woman of his Parish, found her complain more of her temporal then
spiritual Wants, and insist more upon her Poverty, then either her disease of
Body, or distemperature of Soul: the Minister was pinched with the
consideration, and moved in his Bowels, but being withal so straightened in Purse
at that time, that he had not above six Pence in all the World; after some
debate with his own Thoughts, he gave her that little all which he had, rather
choosing to put himself upon the divine Providence, than give the poor Woman
occasion of thinking hardly of him, or the Gospel for his sake. Afterward he
returned home, and tells the Family where he was a Boarder, in a free and
jesting manner, what a poor Parson they had (for such was the natural temper of
the Man). At going to Bed, one of the Family comes privately to him and offers
him three or four Shillings to keep his Pocket with; and the next Morning
coming from Church, being Nov. 5. a Stranger of another Parish, famed for his
Covetousness, came to him, and as a Free-will-Offering gave him half a Crown;
and this being taken notice of, and communicated from one Neighbor to another,
as the Sign and Token of a compassionate Man, the Parishoners were so affected
with it, that they loaded him with extraordinary Kindnesses afterward, as a
People resolved that he should never want whilst he lived amongst them; his
Income at that time being not above twenty Pounds a Year. This I can assure my
Reader to be true, of my own personal Knowledge.

See more in the Chapter of Present Retribution to the Charitable.

5. Androdus, a Dacian, standing ready in the Arena, and having a Lion let our
upon him, received no hurt: for the Lion came sawning upon him, and caressed
him; and he likewise stroaked the Lion, and made much of him: and after the
loud Shouts of the People, being asked, How this came to pass? he let them
know, That being with his Master in Africa, to get rid of his hard Service, he
had fled into a Cave, whither this Lion came with a Splinter in his Foot, and
held up his wounded Paw to him to cure; which having performed, and healed his
Foot, the Lion kept him, and provided Meat for him Three Years: and when he
came away, the Lion followed him so far, that he was taken and brought to Rome;
and that by the further Cruelty of his Master, he was now accused and condemned
to the Beasts, where they found him. Whereupon his Liberty was granted him, and
the Lion given him for his Pains: with which he afterward got his Living;
every one being desirous to see the Lion that was the Man's Host, and the Man
that was the Lyon'd Surgeon. Dr. Brown's Travels, p. 211. This Story I heard a
worthy Bishop of our Church, not long ago, relate at Table for credible.

Somewhat like this, is to be found in the Life of St. Hierome, of a Lion that
came one Morning into his School, with a Thorn in his Foot; which when St.
Hierome had pulled out, the Lion waited upon him, went to Posture with some
Asses, that brought Fuel to the School every Morning, with many other
Circumstances, which I forbear to relate, because I look upon it as fabulous.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Earnest of a Future Retribution.
GRotius indeed says. That Austin, and other Fathers teach, that we are
certain of the Reward, if we persevere; and this is the Faith which cannot be
deceived: but of Perseverance itself we are uncertain. Discourses of God, etc.
in the Appendix containing his Judgment in diverse controverted Points, p. 88.
But by the leave of this learned and worthy Man, how is this consistent with
the Profession of St. Paul, I have fought the good Fight; henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown, etc.? How with the Doctrine of the Church of England,
in her Articles and Homilies? How with the Letters of Accord, between Bishop
Sanderson, and Dr. Hammond, which I have not leisure now to cite at large? And
how with the Experiences and Assurances of many Christians?

1. The Apprehensions, that Death drew near, were very comfortable to Mr.
Wilson: A Gentlewoman of his Society coming to take her leave of him, (being
about to remove out of Maidstone) he pleasantly said to her, What will you say,
( good Mrs. Crisp) if I get the start if you, and get to Heaven, before you get
to Dover? When another came to visit him, he asked her, What she thought of
him? she answered, Truly, Sir, I think you are not far from your Father's
House. To which he replied, That Is good News indeed, and is enough to make one
laugh for Joy. See his Life.

2. Mr. John Janeway, when he lay upon his Deathbed, his Mother and Brethren
standing by, he said, Dear Mother, I beseech you as earnestly as ever I desired
any thing of you in my Life, that you would cheerfully give me up to Christ: I
beseech you do not hinder me, now I am going to Rest and Glory: I am afraid of
your Prayers, least they will pull one way, and mine another.

Then turning to his Brethren, he thus spoke unto them: I charge you all, do
not pray for my Life any more; you do me wrong if you do. O the Glory! the
unspeakable Glory that I behold! my Heart is full, my Heart is full. Christ
smiles, and I cannot choose but smile. Can you find in your Heart to stop me,
who am now going to the complete and Eternal Enjoyment of Christ? Would you
keep me from my Crown? The Arms of my blessed Savior are open to embrace me:
the Angels stand ready to carry my Soul into his Bosom. O! did you but see, you
would all cry out with me, How long (dear Lord); come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
O why are his Chariot-wheels so long a coming! See his Life.

3. Dr. Samuel Winter, lying upon his Deathbed, about Six of the Clock, on the
Lord's Day Morning, he raised himself up in his Bed, and with a cheerful and
loud Voice called to his Wife, who lay in a Bed by him, saying, 'Sweet-heart, I
have been this Night conversing with Spirits. And as in a Rapture, he cried
out, O the Glories that are prepared for the Saints of God! The Lord has been
pleased to show me this Night, the exceeding Weight of Glory, which, in Heaven,
is laid up for his Chosen Ones. Saying further, That he had studied, and
thought, that he knew as much what the Glory which in Heaven was, as another
Man: but the now saw, that all the Divines on Earth were but Children in the
Knowledge of the Great Mystery of Heavenly Glory, which the Lord that Night had
given him a clearer sight of, than ever formerly he had. That it was such a
Mystery as could not be comprehended by the Wit of Man. With many other
suchlike Expressions; and he had his Soul so wonderfully elevated, that he
could not declare what he found and felt therein. See his Life.

4. Mr. Samuel Fairclough kept his Bed but one whole Day before his departure,
which he had longed and waited for; and the very Day before his last Day on
Earth, some Company being with him, he expressed how much Comfort he did then
take, to consider how that his Savior had tasted Death for him; and that
Christ (by his Resurrection) had given him an assurance, that he was the
First Fruits of those that sleep in him; telling some that stood by him, That
it was very much the Duty of Believers to rejoice, that Death had lost its
Sting, and was now disarmed; and that the Power of the Grave was quite
vanquished and overcome. See his Life.

5. James Bainham, a Martyr in Queen Mary's Reign, being at the Stake, in the
midst of the burning Fire, his Legs and Arms half consumed, spoke thus to the
Standers-by: O ye Papists, behold ye look for Miracles, and here now ye may see
one: for in this Fire I feel no more pain, than if I were in a Bed of Down; and
it is to me as a Bed of Roses. Fox Martyrol.

6. Robert Smith, Martyr, being at the Stake ready to be burned, exhorted the
People to think well of his Cause, telling them, That God would show some Token
thereof; and accordingly when he was half burnt, all black with Fire, and
clustered together on a Lump like a black Coal, so that all thought him to be
dead; on a sudden he rose upright, lifted up the Stumps of his Arms, and clapped
them together. Ibid. Clark's Examp. Vol. 1. C. 39.

7. Mr. Robert Glover, Martyr, was so suddenly replenished with Divine Comfort,
a little before his Death, that clapping his Hands together, he called to his
Man, saying, He is come, he is come: and so died cheerfully. Ibid.

8. Mr. John Holland, a faithful Minister, the Day before his Death, calling
for a Bible, continued his Meditation and Exposition on Romans 8. for the space
of Two Hours: but on a sudden he said, -- Oh, stay your Reading: What
Brightness is this I see? Have you light up any Candles? A Stander-by said, No;
it is the Sunshine (for it was about Five a Clock in a clear Summer's
Evening): Sunshine? says he, nay, it is my Saviour's-shine: now, Farewell
World, welcome Heaven; the Day Star from on high has visited my Heart. O speak
it, when I am gone, and preach it at my Funeral: God deals familiarly with Man.
I feel his Mercy; I see his Majesty; whether in the Body, or out of the Body,
God be knows; but I see thhings that are unutterable. And being ravished in
his Spirit, he roamed toward Heaven, with a cheerful Look, and a soft sweet
Voice; but what he said was not understood. With the Sun in the Morning
following, raising himself as Jacob upon his Staff, he shut up his blessed
Life, with these blessed words: O what an happy Change shall I make, from Night
to Day! from Darkness to Light! from Death to Life! from Sorrow to Solace! from
a factious World, to a heavenly Being! Oh! my dear Brethren, Sisters, and
Friends! it pitieth me, to leave you behind! yet remember my death when I am
gone: and what I now feel, I hope, you shall feel e're you die; that God does,
and will deal familiarly with Men. And now, thou fiery Chariot, that came
down to fetch up Elijah, carry me to my happy Hold. And all ye blessed Angels,
that attended the Soul of Lazarus, to bring it to Heaven, bear me, O bear me
into the Besom of my best Beloved. Amen, Amen. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.
And so he fell asleep. Clark's Exampl. Vol. 1. C. 39. out of Leigh, etc.

9. Mrs. Catherine Breterg. a little before her Death, said, Now I perceive,
and feel, that the Countenance of Christ my Redeemer is turned toward me, and
the bright shining Beams of his Mercy are spread over me, O happy am I, that
ever I was born to see this blessed Day! Praise, praise, O praise the Lord for
his Mercies, etc. Oh, how wonderful! how wonderful is thy Love! Oh! thy Love is
unspeakable! Oh! I feel thy Mercies! And oh! that my Tongue and Heart were able
to sound forth thy Praises as I ought, and willingly would! Oh! help me to
praise the God of all Consolations. -- O My Lord God, blessed be thy Name for
evermore: for thou have showed me the Path of Life. Thou did, O Lord, for a
little Season, hide thy Face from me: but with everlasting Mercy thou have had
Compassion on me. Thou art come with fullness of Joy, and abundance of
Consolations, etc. Help me, O help me to praise the Lord! O praise the Lord:
for he has filled me with Joy and Gladness of Heart. My Line is fallen unto me
in a pleasant Place; I have a goodly Heritage: for the Lord is the Portion of
my Inheritance. Oh! how pleasant is the Perfume of the Place where I lie! It Is
sweeter than Aaron's Perfume, composed of the most precious Spices: How
comfortable is the Sweetness I feel! It Is like the Odor that proceeded from
the Golden Censer, that delights the Soul. The Taste is precious! Do ye not
feel it? sweeter it is than Myrrh, than the Honey, or the Honeycomb. Oh, the
Joys! the Joys! the Joys that I feel in my Soul! O they be wonderful!
wonderful! wonderful! O come kiss me with the Kiss of thy Mouth: for thy Love
is better than Wine. Oh! how sweet the Kisses of my Savior be! mine Eyes are
opened, blessed be God. I do feel and see the everlasting Mercies of my Christ.
O how mavelous gracious and merciful art thou unto me! I feel thy Mercy! I am
assured of thy Love. And so certain am I thereof, as that thou art the God of
Truth: even so sure do I know myself to be thine, O Lord my God. And this my
Soul knows right well.

I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him at the last Day,
etc. My Soul was compassed about with the Terrors of Death; a roaring
Wilderness of Woe was within me: but blessed, blessed, blessed be the Lord my
God, who has not left me comfortless; but like a good Shepherd has brought me
into a place of Rest, even to the sweet, running Waters of Life. O blessed,
blessed be the Lord, that has thus comforted me, and brought me to a place
sweeter than the Garden of Eden. O the Joy! the Joy! the delightsome Joy that I
feel! O how wonderful! how wonderful! how wonderful is this Joy! O praise the
Lord for his Mercies, and for this Joy that my Soul feels right well, etc.

And thus she continued for the space of Five Hours, praising the Lord with a
cheerful and heavenly Countenance.

10. Mrs. John Drake, Wife of Francis Drake, of Esher, in Surrey, Esquire;
naturally of a sanguine and cheerful Disposition; but being by her Parents
matched against her own Mind, fell into Melancholy: which Satan getting
advantage of, assaulted her with many, and unparalleled Temptations, for the
space of Ten Years together. After Marriage, being brought to Bed of a
Daughter, and wronged in her Travail by the Midwife, she never recovered her
Health as before. Whilst she lay in, her Mother (Mrs. Tottle) lying with her,
after her first Sleep, she awaked, with terrible Shrieks and Outcries, saying,
That she was undone, undone, she was damned, and a Castaway; and so of
necessity must needs go to Hell. And therewith she shook, dropped with Sweat,
and wept exceedingly. Her Mother comforted her, and prayed with her; upon which
she seemed pretty well pacified, and after awhile fell asleep again, and
awaked full of extraordinary Joys: telling her Mother, what a wonderful
comfortable Dream she had been in, and how by an Angel she had been assured of
her Salvation; that now she discerned all her former Fears had been false, and
therefore would no more doubt of her going to Heaven. After she fell asleep
again, and waking, was in a more dreadful Case than before, trembling,
sweating, shaking exceedingly, the Bed, and the very Chamber seeming to reel
under her, crying out, That now she was a forlorn Creature, sure to be damned!
without Hope of Mercy! without all Remedy! confident that she must needs go to
Hell!

Together, with this Distemper, she had some Fits of Frenzy, abstained almost
wholly from Meat, used strange desperate Speeches, and was unruly in her
Behavior; would slight and laugh sometimes at all that was said to her, sought
Opportunities to destroy herself, search Places of Scripture that might make
against her, swallowed down many great Pins, would sometimes slip a Knife into
her Napkin or Sleeve, for Two Years together she begged of every one not to
pray for her, would disturb them at Prayers threaten them with a Bedstaff; yet
was afraid of Hell, and ask others If they did not pity her, who must go to
live in Hell Torments for ever! Was merciful to others, but with pretense of
the contrary; visited by many Ministers, and among the rest Bishop Usher, Dr.
Preston, Mr. Dod, etc. -- At last, after Divine Discourses about Death, Heaven,
and Eternal Glory, and Prayer, she broke out with a strange Outcry, into these
Expressions, or to this purpose,

Oh! oh! oh! What Is this? What Is this? What Is this? I am undone, undone,
undone. I cannot endure it, I cannot endure it, I cannot endure it, I cannot
endure it. Oh! oh! oh! Let me be gone, let me be gone, let me be gone. Oh! I
must be gone; I cannot tarry, I cannot tarry. O what shall I do? what shall I
do? O Father! O Mother! O Husband! Come, kiss me, kiss me, and let me be gone.
-- Come All. Farewell All. Let me take you by the Hand, and be gone. Lo! Lo! the
Angel^ are come! they wait, they stay for me. O dear Mother, why do you hold
me? I must be gone. Oh! he is come! he is come! he is come! Now you have it,
you have it, you have it. Why hold you me! Let me be gone. My Work is done. Oh!
Call, call, call. Where Is my Crown? Fetch me my Crown. Bring, bring, bring me
my white Robes; Quickly, quickly, quickly. Why run you not? The Angels stay.
Now you have it, you have it, you have it. Oh! it overcomes, overcomes,
overcomes me! I am undone, undone, undone. What shall I do? What shall I do?
What shall I do? Oh! you will nto let me be gone, etc.

With many other Expressions, delivered with an incredible swiftness, and with
such elevation of Body and Eyes, as if she were making toward the Housetop,
and would have flown away in this Rapture from them all. Then lying down
quietly in her Bed, she thus spoke:

Why are you all silent? Where is my Minister? Sir, what did you think of me,
when I was in this late strange posture? Did not you imagine me to be mad? [
No, said he, but it was very strange to us, etc.] So surely it was, said she,
it was very strange. But will you know how it surprised me? At this Morning
before you came to pray with me, being alone, I prayed to God, That he would
not absent himself for ever; but that once before my Death he would reveal
Christ unto me, and give me some sense and feeling of his Love; and that he
would open the Brasen-Gates of this hard Heart of mine, that the King of Glory
might enter in. Presently after, even as soon as you had ended your Prayer,
this sudden Fit of unsupportable Joy and Feeling surprised me; and with great
violence did rush upon me, so that I could not contain myself, but made that
sudden Outcry among you all. But I must confess to you, that I knew not,
neither do remember, what I said. Only I beseech you, to make use of it
hereafter, to all that shall be in my Case. After me, never despair of any, how
desperately miserable soever their Case be, which at worst cannot exceed mine,
but use and apply the means unto them, and that will prevail at length -- I
sought for that in the Law which was to be found only in the Gospel, etc. O
pray! pray! pray! O give Thanks! for now you have it, you have it, you have it.
About four a Clock in the Afternoon she suddenly fell into such another Rapture
of Joy unspeakable, professing that her frail Flesh was overcome with it. Next
Morning her Mother finding her dressed in a strange and unusual manner, all in
White, she told her, as also Mr. Dod and Dr. Preston, she desired to be buried
so. After Prayers and Praises, and diverse suitable Instructions to the Family
and her Father, and Thanks to the Minister, etc. whilst at Prayer, her Hands
falling and Lips moving, she sunk down in Bed, and resigned up her Spirit to
God. Dr. Preston preached her Funeral Sermon. See her Life called Mrs. Drake
revived; also Clark's Lives.

11. Mrs. Katherine Stubs having made a most heavenly Confession of her Faith
at large, with a sweet, lively, aimiable Countenance, red as the Rose, and most
beautiful to behold; she had no sooner made an end, but Satan was ready to bid
her the Combat; upon which on a sudden she bent her Brows, she frowned, and
looking as it were with an angry, stern, and austere Countenance, as though she
saw some filthy, some ugly displeasing thing, the burst forth into these
speeches following, How now Satan, what make thou here; Art thou come to
tempt the Lord's Servant? I tell thee (thou Hell-hound) thou have no part nor
portion in me; nor by the grace of God ever shall have: I was, now am, and ever
shall be the Lords; yea Satan, I was chosen an Elect of God to everlasting
Salvation, before the foundation of the World was laid, and therefore thou must
get thee packing, thou damned Dog, and go shake thy Ears, for in me thou have
naught. But what do thou lay to my charge, thou foul Fiend? Ah! that I am a
Sinner, and therefore shall be Damned; I confess indeed that I am a Sinner, and
a grievous Sinner, both by original Sin, and actual Sin, and that I may thank
thee for; and therefore Satan I bequeath my sin unto thee, from whence it first
came, and appeal to the Mercy of God in Christ Jesus: Christ came to save
Sinners (as he himself) says, and not Righteous. Behold the Lamb of God (says
John) that takes away the Sins of the World. And in another place he cries
out, The Blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all Sins. etc.

Objection. O but God is a just God thou say, and therefore in Justice must
needs condemn me.

Answer. I grant Satan that he is a just God, and therefore he cannot in
Justice punish me for my Sins, which he has punished already in his own Son:
It is against the Law of Justice to punish any Fault twice. I was and am a
great Debtor unto God the Father, but Jesus Christ has paid that Debt for me;
and therefore it stands not with the Justice of God to require it again; and
therefore avoid Satan, avoid thou Firebrand of Hell, avoid thou damned Dog,
and tempt me no more, for he that is with me is mightier then thou; even the
mighty and victorious Lion of the Tribe of Juda, who has bruised thy Head, and
has promised to be with his Children to the End of the World: Avoid therefore
thou Dastard, avoid thou cowardly Soldier, remove thy Siege, and yield the
Field, won, and get thee packing, or else I will call upon my Grand Captain
Christ Jesus, the Valiant Michael who beat thee in Heaven, and threw thee down
into Hellwith all thy hellish Train and devilish Crew. She had scarcely
pronounced these last Words, but she fell suddenly into a sweet smiling
Laughter, saying, Now he is gone, now he is gone, do you not see him run like a
Coward, and run away like a beaten Cock? He has lost the Field, and I have won
the Vistory, even the Garland and Crown of everlasting Life; and that not by my
own Power and Strength, but by the Power and Might of Jesus Christ who has
sent his holy Angels to keep me. And speaking to them that were by, she said, O
would to God you saw what I see; for behold I see infinite Millions of most
glorious Angels stand about me with fiery chariots ready to defend me, as they
did the good Prophet Elias. These holy Angels, these ministering Spirits, are
appointed of God to carry my Soul into the Kingdom of Heaven, where I shall
behold the Lord face to face, etc. Now I am happy and blessed for ever, for I
have fought the good Fight, and by the might of Christ have won the Victory --
Come sweet Chrict, come my Lord Jesus, etc. (then singing a Psalm most sweetly,
and desiring the 133th Psalm might be sung before her to Church, and desiring
her Husband not to mourn for her) on a sudden she seemed as it were greatly to
rejoice, and looked cheerfully, as though she had seen some glorious Sight; and
lifting up her whole Body, and stretching forth her Arms, as though she would
embrace some glorious and pleasant thing, said, I thank my God through Jesus
Christ he is come, he is come, my good Jailer is come to let my Soul out of
Prison. O sweet Death thou art welcome. welcome sweet Death; never was there
any Guest so welcome unto me as thou art; welcome the Meslenger of everlasting
Life; welcome the Door and Entrance into everlasting Glory; welcome I say, and
thrice welcome my good Goalor; do thy Office quickly, and set my Soul at
liberty; strike sweet Death, strike my Heart, I fear not thy Stroke: Now it is
Father, into thy blessed Hand I commend my Spirit; sweet Jesus, into thy Hands
I commend my Spirit; blessed Spirit of God, I commit my Soul into thy Hands. O
most Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, three Persons and one true and
everlasting God, into thy blessed Hand I commit my Soul and Body. At which
Words her Breath stayed, and so moving neither Hand nor Foot, she slept sweetly
in the Lord. See her Life.

CHAP. LXXIX. Protection of the Good in Dangers.
THE Divine Providence is exercised over all the Creation, but more especially
upon Man then other Creatures that are made subject to him; For God causes his
sun to shine, and his Clouds to distill with Rain; upon the just and unjust: But
more remarkably upon those that fear God, and keep close to him in the way of
Duty, and a close and cordial Devotion, then any others. For the Truth whereof
I appeal to History, and the Experiences of Private and good Men.

1. By Virtue of a Bull issued out by Pope Gregory against John Wickleif, and
signed by Twenty three Cardinals, declaring his Writings to be Heretical; and
this Bull sent to Oxford, together with letters to the King, Archbishop
Sudbury, and Courtney then Bishop of London, requiring them to Apprehend and
Imprison the said Wickleif, and they resolving to proceed against him in a
Provincial Synod, laying aside all Fear and Favor, and going to work roundly
with him, in spite of all Entreaties, Threatenings, or Rewards: god by a small
matter overthrew and confounded their Devices; for the day of Examination being
come, in came a Courtier name Lewis Clifford, a Man of no great Birth, and
commanded them, That they should not proceed to any definitive Sentence against
the said Wickleif; wherewith the Bishops were so amazed and crest-fallen, that
they became as mute Men, not having a Word to answer. And one that writes this
Story says further, that whilst the Bishops were sitting at the Chapel at
Lambeth upon John Wickleif, not only the Citizens, but the vise Objects of the
City were so bold as to entreat for him, and to stop them in their Proceedings.
Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 112.

2. John Husse being condemned and excommunicated by the Pope and Cardinals for
an Heretic, opposed by some of the Barons of Bohemia, and banished by King
Winceslaus, yet was entertained in the Country, and protected by the Lord of
the Soil at Hussinets, and Preached there still; 'till afterward the Pope
dying, a Schism happened in the new Election at the Council of Constance,
whither Husse was commanded to come and make his Appearance, which proved so
fatal to him, notwithstanding the safe conduct granted him by the Emperor for
his Journey and Return. Idem -- p. 117.

3. Henry Alting, when Heidelberg was taken by Storm prepared for Death; and
being at the same time in his Study, bolted his Door and betook to Prayer,
looking every Moment when the bloody Soldiers would break in to make a
Sacrifice of him: But the great Arbiter of Life and Death took care for his
safety; for Monsieur Behusius Rector of the School, and his dear Friend, hiring
two Soldiers, called him forth, and conveyed him through a Backdoor into the
Lord Chancellors House, which Tilly had commanded to be preserved from
Plundering, because of the public Monuments of the Commonwealth that were
kept there. This House was commanded to be Guarded by a Lieutenant Colonel that
was under the Count of Hoheuzollem, a Man greedy of Prey, who, lest he should
lose his Share in the Booty by his Attendance upon that place, sent forth his
Soldiers as it were a hunting, commanding them, That if they met with any
Citizens of Note, that under pretense of Safeguarding them, they should bring
them to him, purposing by their Ransom to enrich himself: To this Man Alting
was brought, who with his naked Sword reeking with Blood said to him, This Day
with this Hand have I slain ten Men, to whom Dr. Alting shall be added as the
eleventh, if I knew where to find him, But who art thou? Such a Countenance and
such a Speech by such a Man, at such a time, might have affrighted the most
constant Mind; but our Alting by a witty Answer, neither denying himself to be
Alting, nor unseasonably discovering himself, Answered (as sometime Athanasius
in the like case) I was (says he) a Schoolmaster in the College of Wisdom:
Hereupon the Lieutenant Colonel promised him safety; who if he had known him to
have been Alting, would certainly have slain him. But what a sad time had be
that Night, hearing the continual Shrieks and Groans which filled the Air, of
Women ravished, Virgins deflowred, Men, some haled to Torments, others
immediately slain; himself retiring into a Cockloft, lest he should be
discovered by some of those many which fled thither for Refuge. At last the
Colonel being remanded away thence, the House was resigned to the Jesuits, and
so he was in fresh Danger; but by a special Providence, the Kitchen being
reserved for Tilly's own Use, he was close fed by one of the Palatine Cooks,
who at last hired three Bavarian Soldires to guard him to his own House. Idem.
p. 493.

The following Letter was sent me November. the 8th 1696. by a Gentleman now
living in London, with whom I am well acquainted, viz.

SIR,
THere were three strange Accidents that befell my Son John, during his abode at
Chesham in Bucke some Years since, which perhaps may be worth your taking
notice of in your History of Remarkable Providence.

1. The first was, the great Danger he was once in of Drowning, which happened to
him by venturing too fat upon the Groundsil just by a large Pond for a little
Whisk, where his Foot slipped and down he plunged; and being but about eight
Years of Age was not able to swim, but by a wonderful Providence, one Mr. John
Reading (his first Cosen) was then at work in a Stable near the Pond, who
coming to see what it was made such a Plunge into the Pond, found it to be my
Son John struggling and sprawling for Life, and almost at his last Gasp -- The
Providence of God was signally remarkable in this my Son's Deliverance from
Drowning, for when his Cosen first heard the noise in the Pond he took it to be
some Stone flung into the Pond, and was a while resolved not to see after it,
as believing no harm had befallen any one. But at last, of a sudden it came
into his Mind, that the great noise which the Plunge made, could not be made by
a Stone, he therefore now leaves his Work and runs to satisfy his dubious
Thoughts, and finds my Son almost Drowned, when this Person with the hazard of
his Life got my Son out of the Pond, he could not be brought to speak (the
muddy and dirty Water had so swelled him) for about nine Hours time, but then
he came something to recollect his Senses, he gave the Account of his falling
into the Pond (as aforementioned); and I desire he may be ever mindful of this
wonderful Deliverance.

2. About two Years after thus escaping from Drowning, he in the middle of the
Day gets a Leaden Bullet, and unawares swallows it down, and had certainly been
choked with it, if his Aunt Reading (with whom he then Boarded) had not by
violent means caused him to bring it up again.

3. A third time (whilst he lived at the same place) he had like to have been
choked by putting a bearded Ear of Corn into his Mouth; the Prickles stuck in
his Throat (after biting it unawares) so hard and so fast, that if his Aunt had
not courageously thrust her Fingers down his Throat, and so by degrees got them
our, he had then lost his Life -- I think these three remarkable Deliverances
from Death ought not to be forgotten by him to his dying Day. I have only to
add, that I am

Your Servant to Command, etc.
London, Nov. 16th. 1696.

4. A Child of Mr. Collins (now living in the Old Baily) swallowed a large
Corking Pin, of near an In^h and half, it lay in the Child's Body for near six
Weeks, at length it appeared with the Point in the Fundament, and by that means
was pulled out; and by its long lying in the Child's Body 'twas Cankered; the
Child afterward recovered, and is now well and hearty.

5. The same Gentleman had a Child about two Months since going to ease
himself, fell backwards into Fleet-ditch, which is about four Yards deep, into
a Lighter of Deals, and a Danish Man being then in the Lighter took him up, and
found he had received no manner of Hurt, though 'twas a Thousand to one (the Fall
being so high and backwards) that it had not dashed out the Child's Brains, or
at least bruised his Limbs.

6. My eldest Son Samuel Wesly, has had a fair escape of his Life, he swallowed
a Brass Counter last Saturday, which had like to have choked him in the
passage of his Throat, and starve him afterward, for it lay in the Mouth of
his Stomach, which made him throw up all he eat. But yesterday it came out
again at the other end; and blessed be God he is very well.

Sent us in a Letter from the present Rector of Ormesly in Lincolnshire.

7. Mr. Samuel Fairclough, upon a Saturday about four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, had his heart much enlarged in Prayer; but especially for that
little one who was his youngest, and then about Two Years Old. This Child (at
that Hour) a Servant had taken up with her into the highest Garret of the
House, and set him by the Window of the Room while she swept it, and so
carelessly neglected to have her Eye upon the little one, as that the Child
(looking out of the Window upon a company of young Ducks, which were swiming in
a Vessel of Water right under the Casement) thrust its Body so far out, as it
fell down, and pitched first upon the Eaves of the next Floor, with that force,
that it brake above a Dozen Tiles off from the place, and with them fell down
to the ground, but not into the Vessel of Water which stood perpendicular to
the Window, but exactly between that Vessel and a large Door which lay very
near it, and upon which the Meat for those Ducks was laid, Had it fallen a
quarter of a Yard on either Hand, its Brains had been dashed out, either by the
Door or Vessel; But god by the Ministration of his Angels, so ordered it, that
although the beighth of the place caused a Dizziness and a Swoon for a few
Moments, yet the child was no sooner taken up, but immediately it came to Life
again, and there was not the least Bruise or Hurt inward nor outward, no not
the least Razing of the very Skin by any of the Tiles that fell with it, but
within a quarter of an Hour it went up and down the House as it had formerly
done. Ibid.

CHAP. LXXX. Guidance of the Good through Difficulties.
THis Subject is near akin to the former, and therefore needs but a short
Preface: As God is a Son and Shield, so he is a Shepherd and Captain, and Guide
to these that love him, and dare put their Trust in him.

1. Athanasius being in danger at Alexandria, through the Attempts of the
Arians against him, in the Reign of Constantius, and one Gregory sent to be
Bishop there in his room, when Athanasius, and his People, were assembled there
to prepare for the Sacrament, which was to be administered next Day; the
Captain, and the Soldiers, beset the Church; Athanasius gave Orders to the
Deacons, to read the Collects for the Day, and then to sing a Psalm: which was
so sweetly sung, that all the People went out at one of the Church-doors, and
Athanasius, in the midst of the Singers, escaped without any hurt from the
soldiers. Dr. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Athanasius another time being sought for, by order of the Emperor, in one
of the Churches of Alexandria, by a Divine Revelation had made his escape out
of the Church, a little before the Enemy broke in to search for him. The like
happened before, when being grievously threatened by Constantius, in the Life of
Constance, he had retired himself to a Friend, and there lay hid in a Cave,
that formerly used to be full of Water; there he continued long, and a certain
Maid used to minister to his Necessities; but the Arians enquired diligently
after him, corrupted the Maid with large Promises, yet were disappointed; for
God discovered the Danger to him a little before, so that he made his escape.
Ibid.

3. Athanasius, another time, being forced to flee from Alexandria, entered a
Pinace, went up the River Nile, was pursued by his Adversaries, but by Divine
Admonition turned back, and having the Stream with him, he swiftly passed by
them; and returning to Alexandria, hid himself amongst his Friends. Ibid.

4. Athanasius, in the Reign of Julian, flying a way in a Ship from the
Governor of Egypt, and the Enemy making haste to pursue him, and his Friends
in the Ship advising him to make haste to Shore, and hide in the Desert; by
direction from Heaven, he required the Pilot to sail back to Alexandria: upon
which being met by the Pursuers, and asked, If they had not seen Athanasius? to
whom answer being made, If they made haste they might soon overtake him. By
which means he escaped, and hid in Alexandria, with a most beautiful, chaste,
and pious Virgin; and the very Night that Julian died, appeared in his Church,
to the great Joy of his Friends, and Astonishment of his Adversaries. Ibid.

5. Another time, in the Reign of Valence and Valentinian, he flies again,
sought for, but not found, to the wonder of his Enemies. Some say, he hid Four
Months in his Father's Sepulcher; but whether he were there, or in the Tomb of
some of his Friends, he was quickly invited home again by the Emperor's
Letters. Ibid.

6. In the Reign of King James, Dr. George Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury,
being a Hunting in a Park, and shooting at a Deer, his Arrow, by mischance,
glanced, and killed a Man: upon which Fact, it was much debated, whether by it
he were not become irregular, and ought to be deprived of his Archiepiscopal
Function, as (thought against his Will) having his Hands embrued in Blood: but
Dr. Andrews, Bishop of Winchester, standing much in his Defense, as likewise
Sir Henry Martin, the King's Advocate, gave such Reasons for the mitigation of
the Fact, that he was cleared from all Imputation of Crime, and thereupon
judged Regular, and in State to continue in his Archiepiscopal Charge. Yet
himself (out of a Religious Tenderness of Mind) kept that Day of the Year, in
which the mischance happened, as a solemn Fast, all his Life after. Sir Rich.
Bak. Chron. p. 446.

7. The Constables coming to serve a Warrant upon Mr. Thomas Tregoss, for
Preaching publicly, one of them mere violent and furious than his Fellows,
whilst he reasoned with Mr. Tregoss, holding the Mittimus in his Hand, sunk
down in the place, seeming at the present to be dead; but by the diligent
Endeavors of those about him, he was brought to himself again: whereupon he
departed without executing the Warrant. And that which made this the more
remarkable, was, for that this Constable was a lusty strong Man, and never
fainted in all his Life before. And though they came again some Days after, to
execute the same Warrant, yet had they not power to carry him to Prison: for
which (as it was reported) the other Constable was fined at the next Session.
See his Life.

8. One Mr. Burgess, late Minister of Graffam, in Sussex, being put to some
trouble at his first coming to that place, through the unkindess (not to say
dishonesty) of some Neighbors, made a Journey London, for the better securing
himself in the possession, and returning home, came late to the outward Skirts
of the Parish, where being apprehensive of Danger, partly by reason of the
great Darkness of the Night, and partly by reason of the Waters and Ditches
which are thereabouts somewhat formidable to a Stranger; he did by some secret
Ejaculations earnestly beg of God, so to direct and preserve him in the way,
that he might not miscarry before he got to his own (then a new) Home: and
presently a Light shone about him, to his great surprizal and comfort, and did
accompany him closely (as the Pillar of Fire did the Israelites) either going
before him, or surrounding him (for I dare not be positive, through the defect
of my Memory) 'till he got safe to his own House. This has been attested to me
by his own Son, an honest. sober Man, now living at Graffam; and one Mr.
Cockrill, a near Neighbor, who says, He heard Mr. Graffam, the elder, often
speak of it with wonder.

9. A pious Gentlewoman, yet living, when a Child, fell into a Pond, where she
was like to perish; a Man who was left alone in the House, reading of a Book,
was suddenly so troubled, though he knew not for what, that he could read no
longer: upon which he walked out, saw a Straw-hat swim upon the Pond, and by
and by the Child rise to the top of the Water; he catches hold of the Child,
drew her out, and so saved her Life. Clark's Exam. Vol. 1. C. 83.

10. Mr. Sam. Fairclough, one Evening, after a Day spent with his Wife in
Fasting and Prayer, on her behalf (being then great with Child) and she walking
abroad to meditate on the Promises of God, fell over Head and Ears into a Pond;
heard a great Shriek, goes out hastily to the Pond, finds his Wife, (after
twice sinking) and laying sudden hold upon her, before the third time, saved
her Life and Health, and Little One (with which she was pregnant) without any
hurt. See his Life.

CHAP. LXXXI. Persons strangely fitted for Great Employments.
IT IS weak Evidence and Proof of the Divine Conduct and Government of the World
to observe the strange Methods sometimes used in the Accomplishment of Men for
Weighty and Sacred Offices: to see the Turns of Providence, the suprizing
Catastrophes, the removal of Difficulties, the opening of Doors unexpectedly,
to make way for some Persons to Studies and Employments in Church and State.

1. How strangely are things wheeled about by Providence! Not what we, or our
Parents, but what God designed, shall take place. Amos was very meanly employed
at first, but God designed him for a more honorable and comfortable Calling,
Amos 7.14, 15. David followed the Ewes, and likely never raised his Thoughts to
higher Things, in the Days of his youth; but God made him the Royal Shepherd of
a better Flock, Psalm. 78.70, 71. Peter and Andrew were employed as Fishermen;
but Christ calls them from that to an higher Calling, Mat. 4.18, 19. To be
Fishers of Men. Pareus, when he was Fourteen Years old, was, by the instigation
of his Stepmother, placed with an Apothecary; but Providence so wrought, that
he was taken off from that, and fitted for the Ministry; wherein he became a
fruitful and eminent Instrument to the Church. James Andreas, was, by reason of
his Fathers inability to keep him at School, designed for a Carpenter; but was
afterward, by the persuasion of Friends, and assistance of the Church-stock,
sent to Stutgard, and thence to the University, and so arrived to a very
eminent Station of Service to the Church. A Master Builder, Oecolampadius, was,
by his Father, designed for a Merchant; but his Mother, by earnest Entreaties,
prevailed to keep him at School: and this Man was a blessed Instrument in the
Reformation of Religion. Flavel's Divine Conduct. p. 80.

2. Mr. Ben. Johnson, was first bred in a private School, near St.
Martin's-Church, then in Westminster-School, under the Learned Mr. Cambden,
afterward admitted into St. John's-College, in Cambridge, where his
Continuance was but short: for his Maintenance failing, he was fain to return
to the Trade of his Father-in-Law, who was a Bricklayer. He was one who helped
in the Building of the New Structure of Lincoln's End, where having a Trowel in
his Hand, he had a Book in his Pocket, that as his Work went forward, so his
Study went not backward.

Some Gentlemen pitying, that such rare Endowments should be buried under the
Rubbish of so mean a Calling, did by their Bounty Manumise him freely, to
follow his own ingenuous Inclinations. England's Worthies, by W. Winstanley, p.
342.

3. Dr. Done, first of Hare-Hall, in Oxford, then removed to Cambridge, thence
to Lincoln's End, at last he went to Travel with the Earl of Essex to Cales,
and thence to Italy and Spain. Returning home, he was chief Secretary to the
Lord Keeper Elsemore, and marrying with the Lady Elsemore's Niece, Daughter to
Sir George Moor, for which he was discharged of the Secretary's place, which he
held, and cast into Prison by his incensed Father-in-Law. But being set at
liberty again, by occasion of a Discourse upon the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, he so pleased the King, that he persuaded him to enter into sacred
Orders, and afterward made him his Chaplain; and attending His Majesty in his
Progress to Cambridge, was there made Doctor of Divinity, next Lecturer at
Lincoln's End and at last Dean of St. Paul's Ibid. p. 380, 381, 382, etc.

4. Archbishop Usher was designed for the Law, his Father intending to send
him over to the Inns of Court; but God, who intended him for a Labourer in his
own Vineyard, prevented his Intentions by Death. Ibid. p. 561.

5. Mr. Herbert, the Divine Poet, aimed a long time at Court-preferment, but
overruled by Divine Providence, and the Advice of Friends, at last exchanged
his Silks, and Lay-Sword, for a Gown and Cassock, and became a very serious and
worthy Minister. See his Life.

6. Dr. Preston had no inclination to the Ministry, 'till he was disappointed
and baffled in his purpose of going into France, in order to fit himself for
the Court. See his Life.

7. George Sohnius intended the Study of the Law; but by a strange Providence
was taken off from it, as himself writes, in a Letter to his Father thus:

WHat has so soon altered my Resolution, I shall briefly declare unto you,
that you may know and approve the Reasons thereof, and give Thanks to God for
his Mercies to us. When upon the 21st Day of July, I was hearing Tubertus 's
Lecture of the Law, and was writing what he spoke, before half an Hour was
past, I fell into very serious Thoughts: for on a sudden, the Excellence and
Majesty of Divinity came into my Mind, and did exceedingly delight me; and
began to stir up in my Mind such a Love to it, that I could not but resolve to
give over the Study of the Law, and wholly apply myself to the Study of
Divinity. And this thought sunk deeper and deeper into my Mind, and was so
extremely pressing upon me, that I could no longer attend to the Lecture of the
Law, nor finish the Writing that I had begun; so that I knew not what to do;
yea, these Thoughts did so haunt me, that I was not only averse from Reading
any more Law, but I abhorred the very Thoughts thereof. And thus, not knowing
what to do, I betook myself with Sighs and Tears unto God, entreating him to
restore to me my former love to, and delight in the Law; but if not, that I was
ready to follow his Call in any thing. But yet after this, whenever I returned
to read any Law-Book, my Heart trembled, and my Eyes abhorred the Letters;
neither was my Mind or Will delighted in that Study. Hereupon consulting with
two of my Godly Friends, and acquainting them with my Case; they judged, that I
was called by God to the Study of Divinity. And therefore, giving Thanks unto
God, I have wholly applied myself thereunto.

Clark's Exampl. p. 610.

8. Athanasius, as if designed by Divine Providence for the Bishopric of
Alexandria, was first exercised, when a Child, in Catechizing his Fellow at
Play, and so sitting them for Baptism; upon which occasion Alexander, the then
Bishop, set him to School, afterward made him Deacon, took him for a
Companion, or Attendant to the Coouncil of Nice, and at last wished him to the
Succession, which he afterward enjoyed, in the same See, and did great Good to
the Church, in opposing stoutly the Arrian Heresy. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

9. St. Augustine having been sometimes inclined to the Manichaean Heresy, and
from the Sin of Concubinage, in a strange manner converted to the Orthodox
Faith, was afterward better accomplished for a Confutation of the Manichees;
in which he was very successful (as in the Case of Firmus, a rich Manichaean
Merchant, and Felix, who coming to Hippo on purpose to spread his Heresy, were
both Converted by him) and for the answering of contradictious Sinners, who
reproached him for his former vicious Life; in which Case he told them, That
the worse he had been, the better was his Physician who had cured him. Ibid.

CHAP. LXXXII. Miraculous Cures of Diseases, etc.
THE Cure of Naaman 's Leprosy, by washing in the River Jordan, and the
Healing of them that were Sick, Lame, Blind, and possessed with Demons,
mentioned in Sacred Scripture, seem strange, especially to Men that look and
believe no further, than the common Operation of mere Nature; but we would here
raise Men to a higher and clearer prospect of the Divinity and try to convince
the World, (if it be possible) that the God who rules over all, is not always
tied to ordinary means, but does sometimes show his Power, as well as his
Goodness, in giving a plain Demonstration of his Mastery over all Secondary and
Visible Causes.

1. Irenaeus tells us, in his Second Book against Heresies, That in his time,
some by Fasting and Prayer had brought to pass, that the Spirits of the Dead
had returned into their Bodies again. -- Others cured the Sick and Diseased,
and by laying on of their Hands, restored them to Health. Clark's Mar. of Eccl.
Hist.

2. Dr. Joseph Hall, then Bishop of Exeter, since of Norwich, speaking of the
good Offices which Angels do to God's Servants; of this kind (says he) was
that no less than mavelous Cure, which at St. Mardene's in Cornwall, was
wrought upon a poor Cripple; whereof, besides the Attestation of many Hundreds
of the Neighbors, I took a strict and impartial Examination in my last
Visitation. This Man, for Sixteen Years together, was fain to walk upon his
Hands, by reason the Sinews of his Legs were so contracted: and upon Monitions
in his Dream to wash in that Well, was suddenly so restored to his Limbs, that
I saw him able both to Walk and get his Maintenance. I found here was neither
Art nor Collusion. The Name of this Cripple was John Trelillie. Bishop Hall 's
Mystery of Godliness, L. 1. 8.

3. Concerning Samuel Wallas, of Stamford, cured in a miraculous manner, of a
deep Consumption, see the Chapter of the Appearance of Good Angels, 7.

4. Mariane Maillard, born at Coignac, in Xaintonge, was lame from the First
Year of her Age, having a hollowness in that place, where we usually perceive
the Bone of the Left Thigh fall into the Hip; as she grew in Years, her
Lameness increased, insomuch that there arose a great Tumor above the Cavity of
the Ischium, and her Leg became above Four Inches shorter her Knee turning
inwards, and her Foot so distorted, that the inward Ancle-hone almost supplied
the place of the Sole of her Foot: she lived in France, 'till the Persecution
drove her thence, and flying first to Lauzanne, and then to Germany, at last
she came over into England; where she being a Servant to Mademoiselle de
Laulan, in St. James's Alley, n^^r the Church, in St. Germain-street; whereon
Sunday, Nov. 26. 1693, she was bespattered with Dirt by little Children, as she
came from the French-Church behind Leicester-Fields, and followed with ill
Names, 'till at last she wept and complained to her Mistress of it. The same
Night between Seven and Eight of the Clock, she took the New Testament to read,
and falling upon the Second Chapter of St. Mark she told her Mistress, That she
wondered at the Infidelity of the Jews; and if such a thing had happen^d now
(says she, that was wrought upon the sick of the Palsy) I would run very
quickly, and believe too: and scare had she uttered those words, but a
redoubling of the Pain came upon her, which forced her to stretch out her Leg,
on which the Bone made a snap, her Leg extended itself, her Foot and Knee were
both restored to their proper situation, her Pains ceased, and she thought she
had heard a Voice saying unto her, Thou art healed: and presently she walked up
and down the Chamber, and continues very well, saving a little weakness. The
Witnesses who depose that she was extraordinary lame before Nov. 26. were her
Father, Mother, the Inhabitants of the place where she was born, and many
others, English, French, of all Ages, of both Sexes, Children of Five or Six
Years old, a Tailor who made her Clothes, her Shoo maker, a Swiss that knew her
from her Cradle, the Surgeon who visited her Two Years before. All which are
attested and declared before Sir Sill. Ashurst, Lord Mayor of London, upon
Oath, Dec. 19. 1693.

5. Mr. Francis Culham, born at New-Buckenham, in the County of Norfolk, on
Christmas Day, 1631. and having been bred a Surgeon, afterward Dwelling at
the White-Lion in South-Lambeth, in the County of Surry, in the Month of
August, 1671. unhappily fell backward, and about Michaelmas ensuing had another
Fall; both which somewhat contused his Head. About Three or Four Days after
Christmas, he complained of an alteration in his Health; and about Two Days
after, became stupefied in his Brain, which gradually spread over his Body: to
this a Weakness in his Limbs succeeded; so that he was forced to take his Bed,
and immediately grew not only speechless, but lost the use of his Reason. He
lay a Month without eating any Food, or taking any other Sustenance, except a
small quantity of Drink with a little Syrup of Violets; sometimes once a Day,
which other Days he would intermit: nevertheless, in all that time he went not
to Stool.

At the expiration of this Month, he eat a good Meal; and so did eat daily for
some short time; and after fasted a whole Week, neither eating nor drinking any
thing; then receiving some Sustenance for a few Days, he fasted another Week
complete.

These times of long Fasting being over, he afterward did eat but once in
Three Days; but then it was incredible, both in respect of the Quantity and
Manner: for be would most greedily devour a whole Joint of Meat at a Meal, and
that in a very short time. This he usually tore in pieces, after an
extraordinary ravenous sort, and drank therewith not less than Six or Seven
Quarts of strong Drink; which he always smelt to, before he would taste; and
refused to Drink, unless out of a Stone-bottle.

But the Distemper he seemed to lie under after such extravagant Eating, was
exceeding strange and remarkable: for he made a dreadful and horrid Noise, but
inarticulate, and lay roaring and howling most part of the Day after, (as
sometimes he did before he did eat) seeming to covet more Meat, even then when
he had fed most plentifully.

In this sad and deplorable Condition he continued, keeping his Bed
continually, and refusing to take any internal Medicine; nor did he know either
Wife or Children, Friends, or Visitants, or seemed to take Notice of any other
thing.

He use several sorts of Tones and Cries, all lamentable enough, and lay (for
the First Year) with his Eyes continually open, he would sometimes attempt to
bite those that came near him. In this time he was once let Blood, and once
Fluxed.

About a Month before his Recovery, he was twice let Blood; but how far that
might signify any thing, is uncertain, seeing no effect appeared 'till the Day
of his Restoration, which was the Twelfth of May. 1676. only for Two Days
before, he now and then wept, seeming to have some sensible apprehension of his
Wife and Children, by holding them fast by the hand, when they stood near him;
though since his Recovery he remembers it not.

But that Twelfth Day of May, about Ten a Clock in the Morning, by the
miraculous Power and Mercy of God, his Understanding began to return; whereupon
he made Signs (by moving his Hands in a Writing posture) for a Pen, Ink, and
Paper; which being brought to him, he wrote as follows:

LOrd, grant a Power from thy Divine Nature.
I thought I saw the Glorious appear to me.
The Prayers of all good People I desire.
I desire the heavenly Water, that I thirst no more.
It is the Light I desire from the most High.
As the Son does appear in me, I hope a better Work will be perfected in me.
It is heavenly Bread that I desire, that I hunger no more, and then I shall be
more beautiful.
His Wife then offering him a Glass of Wine, he refused it, and wrote again
thus:

It is Prayers I first desire.

Hereupon the Minister of the Parish was sent for, to pray by him; who, though he
was not then at home, yet not long after bestowed a Visit on him.

After he had sat up a while, Dr. Gale, Master of St. Paul's School, with Mr.
Will. Perry, another Minister, and two Friends more, accidentally passed by his
House; who being entreated to come in and Pray with him did very readily
consent. The Doctor being desirous fully and clearly to understand the
condition of the Man, asked several Questions, and finding no Answer, but
abundance of Tears, attended with great Trembling in all his Body, and
Blackness in his Lips, the Doctor with the Company present went to Prayers,
reading the Office of the Church for the Visitation of the Sick. Mr. Culham did
manifest a great Devotion, applying to himself several Passages in the Offices,
especially in the Absolution; all the while powering out Tears and smiting his
Breast. And when these Words were pronounced, Glory be to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, Mr. Culham with a loud Voice answered, Glory be
to God on High: Thou have wrought a great Work, now Power is given from the
most High, etc. After this he called for a Morsel of Bread, though he had eaten
none in all his Distempers; refused to drink Sack as too strong for him;
wondered at his younger Son, as grown out of Knowledge; gave him his Blessing,
and commanded him to be dutiful to his Mother. These two Ministers came that
Night again to him, and found him much recovered; and since also have
frequently visited him; at which he always much rejoices. Immediately upon his
speaking, he perfectly knew his Neighbors and former Acquaintance, who came to
see him in great Numbers.

The second Day after his Recovery, he was able to walk about his Chamber
leaning on another Shoulder; the third Day with a Staff only: And now he is
greatly increased in Strength, feeds moderately, sleeps well, and his
Intellects and Faculties are become exceeding clear and strong.

His Wife behaved herself toward him all the while he lay under this great
Affliction, with great Care and Affection; and by an honest and industrious
course of Life, supported him and his Children.

Attested by,

Rich. Parr. D. D. of Camerwel. Tho. Gale, D. D. Will. Perry, M. A. N. Paget,
M. D. Elias Ashmole. And. Needham, Curate of Lambeth, etc.
6. In the Year 1676, about the thirteenth or fourteenth of this Month October,
in the Night, between one and two of the Clock, Jesch Claes, being a Dutch
Woman of Amsterdam, who for fourteen Years had been Lame of both legs, one of
them being dead and without feeling, so that she could not go but creep upon
the Ground, or was carried in peoples Arms as a Child, being in Bed with her
Husband, who was a Boatman, she was three times pulled by her Arm, with which
she awaked, and cried out, O Lord! What may this be? Hereupon she heard an
Answer in plain Words, Be not afraid, I come in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. Your Malady which has for many Years been upon you shall
cease, and it shall be given you from God Almighty to walk again. But keep this
to your self till further Answer. Whereupon she cried aloud, O Lord! that I had
a Light, that I might know what this is. Then had she this Answer, There needs
no Light, the Light shall be given you from God. Then came Light all over the
Room, and she saw a beautiful Youth about ten Years of Age, with curled yellow
Hair, Clothed in White to the Feet, who went from the Beds-head to the Chimney
with a Light, which a little after vanished. Hereupon did there shoot
something, or gush from her Hip, or diffuse it self through her Leg, as a Water
into her great Toe, where she did find Life rising up, felt it with her Hand,
crying out, Lord, give me my Feeling now, which I have not had in so many
Years. And further she continued crying and praying to the Lord, according to
her weak Measure

Yet she continued that Day, Wednesday, and the next Day, Thursday, as before
till Evening at six a Clock; at which time she sat at the Fire dressing the
Food: Then came as like a rushing Noise in both her Ears, with which it was
said to her, Stand, your going is given you again. Then did she immediately
stand up that had so many Years crept, and went to the Door. Her Husband
meeting her, being exceedingly afraid, drew back: In the mean while she cried
out, My dear Husband. I can go again. The Man thinking it was a Spirit drew
back, saying, You are not my Wife. His Wife taking hold of him said, My dear
Husband, I am the self-same that has been Married these thirty Years to you;
The Almighty God has given me my Going again. But her Husband being amazed
drew back to the side of the Room, till at last she claspt her Hand about his
Neck, and yet he doubted, and said to his Daughter, Is this your Mother? She
answered, Yes Father, this we plainly see: I had seen her go also before you
came in. This Person dwells upon Princes Island in Amsterdam. This Account was
sent from a Dutch Merchant, procured by a Friend for Dr. R. Cudworth, and
contains the main Particulars that occur in the Dutch Printed Narrative, which
Monsieur Van Helmont brought over with him to my Lady Conway at Ragley, who
having enquired upon the spot when he was there at Amsterdam, though of a
genious, not at all credulous of such Relations, found the thing to be really
true. As also ^hilippus Lambergius in a Letter to Dr. Henry Moor, sent this
Testimony touching the Party cured. That she was always reputed a very honest
good Woman, and that he believed there was no Fraud at all in that Business.
Glanvile's Saducism Triumph. p. 427.

7. In this place may be accounted the strange way of curing the Struma or
Scrophula, commonly called the Evil: which took its Derivation first of all
from King Edward the Confessor; and has in after Ages been effected by the
Kings of England and of France. Concerning which, take only this Story;
discoursing upon a time with Mr. Philip Caryll, of Shipley in Sussex, a Roman
Catholic, concerning Miracles done in this last Age, in this Nation; he
produced this for an Instance: That his Son being affected with that Distemper,
he (having no Faith in the case) was earnestly persuaded to address himself to
King Charles the Second for a Touch of his Hand; which having procured, his Son
was restored to perfect Health; which he declared to me, calling his Son into
company, and showing him perfectly healed.

8. Galen had a Man in Cure that had an Artery in his Ankle-bone half cut in
sunder, whereby he lost all his Blood before any Remedy could be applied to
him. He writes, That he was advertised in his Sleep (by some God or Angel)
that he should cut the Artery quite in sunder, and the Ends would retire to
each side, and so lock together again. When he awaked, he executed what his
Dream had represented to him, and by that means cured the Man. Treas. of
Ancient and Modern Times, l. 5. p. 475.

9. A young Woman Married, but without Children, had a Disease about her Jaws
and under her Cheek like unto Kernels, and the Disease so corrupted her Face
with Stench, that she could scarce, without great shame, speak unto any Man.
This Woman was admonished in her Sleep to go to King Edward, and get him to
wash her Face with Water brought unto him, and she should be whole. To the
Court she came, and the King hearing of the matter, disdained not to undertake
it; but having a Basin of Water brought unto him, he dipped his Hand therein
and washed the Woman's Face, and touched the diseased Part oftentimes, sometimes
also signing it with the Sign of the Cross. When he had thus washed it, the
hard Crust or Skin was softened, the Tumors dissolved, and drawing his Hand by
diverse of the Holes, out thence came diverse little Worms, whereof, and of
corrupt Matter and Blood they were full. The Kings still pressed it with his
Hand to bring forth the Corruption, and endured the Stench of it, until by such
pressing he had brought forth all the Corruption. This done, he commanded her a
sufficient Allowance every day for all things necessary, until she had received
perfect Health, which was within a Week after; and whereas she was ever before
Barren, within one Year she had a Child by her Husband. This Disease has since
been called the Kings Evil; and is frequently cured by the Touch of the Kings
of England. Stew's Annals, p. 98.

10. Sir John Cheek was once one of the Tutors to King Edward the Sixth,
afterward Secretary of State; much did the Kingdom value him, but more the
King; for being once desperately sick, the King carefully enquiring of him
every day, at last his Physician told him, there was no hope of his Life, being
given over by him for a dead Man: No, said the King, he will not die at this
time, for this Morning I begged his Life from God in my Prayers, and obtained
it: Which accordingly came to pass, and he soon after, contrary to all
expectation, wonderfully recovered. This, says Dr. Fuller, was attested by the
old Earl of Huntington, bred up in his Childhood with King Edward, to Sir
Thomas Cheek, who was alive Anno 1654, and Eighty Years of Age. Lloyd's
State-Worthies, p. 194.

11. Mrs. Savage, Wife of Mr. Savage, a Schoolmastet and Minister, living in
Horse-shooe-lane, who having had a very troublesome Lameness in her Hand from a
Child, her Fingers being so contracted, that her Hand was become almost wholly
useless to her: And in December, 1693, having had withal some ilness and
weakness of Body, and having used some other means for the Cure, but without
Effect; at last by Fasting and Prayer found real amendment; and after they Duty
ended, fitting by the Fireside the Story of the French Girl came into mind,
and her Husband having heard of it only by two Persons, did not presently give
present and full Assent to it, but blessed God if it were true; at length a
strong Impression came into his Mind, that his Wife's hand might be cured by
that same means as the Girle's Foot. Thereupon he takes the Bible, reads St.
Matthew. 8th chap. and at those Words, Lord if thou will thou can make me
clean -- with an extraordinary Emotion of Spirit, he took hold of his Wife's
Hand, asked her, If she had Faith? -- adding, That his Faith was as much as the
Leaper's; for though he did absolutely believe the Power of Christ, yet he put
an If, to the Will of Christ. To which she Replied, That she had Faith in the
Power of Christ, that he was able now he is in Heaven to cure her, as he was
when upon Earth: but whether it was his Pleasure, or whether be saw it good for
her she could not tell; but if he thought fit for her, she doubted not but he
would heal her; or to that purpose. Her Husband proceeded Reading till the came
to the Faith of the Centurion about his Servant, when on a sudden she felt a
Pain in her Knuckles and Fingers, and pulling off her Glove, her Hand instantly
stretched out straight, and became like the other; and she was immediately
cured of what was judged by all incurable. Her Hand likewise received strength
as well as streightness; and whereas it used to be extremely cold, it is now as
warm as the other: And whereas formerly she was not able to go a Mile through
weakness of Body, she is now able to walk three or four. For confirmation,
enquire at their House aforementioned: See also the Appendix to the General
History of Earthquakes, p. 173, 174.

Take here another Relation, as it came in a Letter from Hitchin in
Hartford-shire, as follows; Hitchin.

June the 6th, 1693. Dear SIR,
12. YOurs I received the last Night; as to the Person you enquire after, and
the Lord's Work upon him, take it in short as follows; His Name is David
Wright, about twenty seven or twenty eight Years of Age; he lived two or three
Miles hence for some Years, in the capacity of a Shepherd, his distemper of
Body by the Evil rendering him incapable of hard Work. At Michaelmas 1693, he
desired a Religious Woman to take him into her Service, which she was not
willing to do, because he was a profane Wretch, and much given to Swearing and
other Vices; but upon his promising a Reformation, and that he would go to hear
the Word preached, she hired him: yet he afterward went on his evil Courses,
and would not go to hear: But Novmeber 29th, last past, having Notice that
there was a Sermon to be Preached by one Mr. Edward Coals, a worthy Minister,
his mind was so much fixed to go and hear him, that notwithstanding the same
day he had a Brother came for him with a Horse to go some Miles another way,
about urgent Business of his own, yet he could by no means be prevailed with to
go with him, of which Resolution he says he can give no reason to himself: he
came to hear, and the Word made such deep Impression upon his Mind that his
Soul was converted, and his Body healed at the same time. He declares, that
while the Minister was Preaching, his hard Heart was softened, and the Eyes of
his Mind enlightened, whereby he had Faith in his blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; and that at the same time he found his Body cured of the Evil,
under which he had long languished; and is fully persuaded he shall never have
it again: But however, God may please to do as to that, this is certain, that
he has been very well from the 29th of November to this very day: But the
Change upon his Soul is more remarkable then the Cure of his Body; to see such
a poor grossly ignorant Wretch so suddenly changed, and to hear him blessing and
praising of God, and admiring his Grace and Love to him; that he who knew
nothing one Hour before, should now speak so sensibly of Jesus Christ and
Heavenly Things! This is to the Astonishment and Admiration of all that knew
him. As to his bodily Distemper, he had the King's Evil for about fifteen or
sixteen Years past, and was formerly touched by King Charles the Second. At
first he was forced to keep his Bed for several Weeks together, with great
Pains and diverse running Sores upon him; but for about twelve Years past he
has been in Service for the most part, yet never in Health all the while, but
had running Sores, which were sometimes skined over and swelled; and then he
was at the worst, and felt most Pain till they broke and run again. He has had
these Sores in many parts of his Body, of which the Scars are visible; and two
continued in the same place in the Small of his Back a long while; and at the
time when he came to hear the Sermon aforementioned, they were skined over and
swelled, so that he was in very great Pain, and cound not keep pace with his
Company: But while he was hearing, the Swelling of his Sores sunk insensibly,
and he was well on a sudden, and all his Pain was gone; so that as they
returned home he went before them, leaping, rejoicing, and praising God for his
great Mercy and loving Kindness to him, all the way he went. After he came
home, he continued to admire the exceeding Grace of God to so vile and ignorant
a Sinner as he was, and spent most part of the Night in this heavenly Exercise,
and still remains in this admirable frame of Heart. Much more might be
mentioned, but this may suffice at present from

Yours, etc.

We whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, do hereby attest and declare, That
living in the same Family with David Wright, we were Eye and Ear-witnesses of
the Truth of the foregoing Particulars concerning him, and in confirmation of
the Verity thereof, we have hereto put our Hands.

both Sons to Wright 's Mistress. Slape Drever Thomas Drever
Thomas Child. Joseph Morgan. Ibid.



See more in the Chapters of The Existence of Good Angels, and Present
Retribution to the Devout and Praying, etc.

13. We have this Account from a credible Hand, viz. That about two Years ago,
the Apprentice of Mr. Welby in East-Smithfield was taken Dumb, but recovered by
the help of a neighboring Doctor. After a few days he lost his Speech again,
but by the direction of a second Doctor recovered it once more; but falling
into a third Relapse, the Physicians could give him no help. About two Months,
the young Man had a Vision in his Dream, of a Man that advised him to take the
Fat of a Lamb, and anoint himself therewith, and apply the Heart hot to his
Throat; he had the same Apparition a second time, upon which Physicians and
Divines were consulted, who thought it a Delusion of the Devil, and dissuaded
him from it. The Apparition coming the third time told him, 'Twas no Delusion,
and as a Token that it was not, he should lose the Use of his left Arm; which
fell out accordingly; and he advised him to use the Remedy upon the ^4th of
August, and to take the Air for a Month, or it would be worse for him. Upon
which he went to High-Gate, and applying the Remedy recovered his Speech next
day, and had the Use of his Arm restored.

Postscript to the Flying-Post, Aug. 22. 1696.

14. Sozomen tells us, That the Queen of Iberia, being taken with an incurable
Disease, was miraculously restored to perfect Health, by a Christian Woman at
the Invocation of the Name of Christ. I shall give my Reader the Story at
length out of Socrates Scholasticus. There was, says he, a certain Godly and
Devout Woman taken Captive of the Iberians, (a People dwelling nigh the Euxine
Sea) this Woman being a Captive, and having her Conversation with Barbarians,
gave herself wholly to Godliness; for she exercised very much the Discipline of
Continency, using a severe kind of Abstinence, and applying herself wholly to
fervent Prayer; which when the Barbarians perceived, they wondered at the
strangeness of the Act. It fell out, that the King's Son of very tender Years
fell into a dangerous Disease; the Queen, after that Countrey-manner, sent the
Child to other Women for Physic, to try if Experience had taught them any
Medicine that might Cure that Malady. But when the Nurse had carried the Child
about to every Woman (I suppose he means every neighboring Woman that made any
Profession of Skill that way) and could procure Remedy of none; at length he is
brought to this Captive Woman, who in the presence of many more Women, who
without the Application of any other Salve or Medicine, took the Child, laid
her Sackcloth upon him, and said only these Words, Christ which healed many,
will also heal this Infant. When she had uttered these Words, and prayed unto
God for his Aid and Assistance, the Child forthwith recovered, and from that
time enjoyed perfect Health. The fame of this Act was bruted abroad among all
the Barbarian Wives, and at length came to the Queen's Ear, so that the Captive
Woman was much talked of. A while after the Queen herself fell sick, and this
simple Woman was sent for; she refused to go, lest peradventure some Violence,
contrary to the Modesty of her Nature, should be offered to her: the Queen then
was conveyed to her; she practiced the like as she had done before unto the
Child; the Queen is rid of her Disease, thanks the Woman for the Cure; but the
Woman answered, It Is not my doing, but Christ's, the Son of God, and Maker of
Heaven and Earth: She exhorts the Queen to call upon him, and acknowledge him
for the True God. The King marveling at this strange Cure, commanded that the
Woman should be bountifully rewarded. Who made Answer, That she wanted no
Riches, but esteemed Godliness a great Treasure: and that the King should
receive a precious Jewel, if he would acknowledge that God whom she professed:
with these Words she returned back the Rewards. The King laid up all these
sayings in his Breast; the next day, as the King went a Hunting, the Hills and
Forest where his Game lay, were over-cast with dark Clouds and a thick Mist,
the Game was uncertain and doubtful, the way stopped and intricate; the King
being at his Wits end, not knowing what was best to do, calls upon the Gods
whom he accustomed to serve, but they stood him in no stead; it came to his
mind to think upon the God of the Captive Woman; unto him he turns and cries
for Help: as soon as he had Prayed unto him, the Cloud was dissolved and the
Mist scattered; and the King wondering, returns home to his Wife, and told what
had happened. Immediately he fends for the Captive Woman, and after some
Instructions from her turns Christian, erects a House of Prayer, and makes a
Proclamation to his People to receive the same Faith. Sozom. l. 2. c. 6.
Socrat. Schol. l. 5. c. 16. Ruffin. l. 1. c. 10. Theodorat. l. 1. c. 23.
Centur. Magd. cent. 4. c. 13. Ruffinus says, The King of the Iberian 's Name
was Bacurius.

In the Preface of a French Treatise, Entitled, Harmony des Propheties
anciennes avec les Modernes, which was Printed at Cologn, in the Year 1687, I
find this very wonderful Passage, which I choose to mention in this place, as
contributing to the Explication of them that are to follow.

Madam Mingot, the Widow of a Chyrurgion, of the City of Caen in Normandy, had
several unaccountable Revelations made unto her, that she kept wholly secret;
but there was one, which by a Miracle that accompanied it, was put beyond the
possibility of Secrecy. She was afflicted with a Palsy eight or ten Years
together in her Limbs, which rendered her altogether Impotent; and her Impotency
was not the less, for her being fourscore Years of Age. But one Day, when she
was at Prayer before the God of Heaven, for the Deliverance of his Church from
the Confusions then upon it, in the heat and height of the French Persecution,
it was audibly said unto her, Thy Prayers are heard, the afflicted Church shall
be speedily and gloriously delivered; but it has yet something more to suffer.
She was commanded herewithal, to make this Revelation known unto her Brethren;
and that they might give credit unto her Words, it was added, The Lord has
restored thy Health and Strength unto thee. She was immediately and
miraculously Healed of her Malady, and she walked her self, and carried unto
her Pastors, the Account of this Revelation. They wondered at the Miracle, and
would fain have concealed the Prophecy; but the Prophecy could not possibly be
hid, because of the famous Miracle that attended it. All the Pastors of Caen,
and a good number of other Protestant Refugees belonging to the Town, being in
the Low Countries, Anno 1687, offered their unanimous and uniform Testimony to
the Truth of this mavelous matter.

16. There is likewise an undoubted Relation of a poor, but a good Woman,
belonging to the Congregation of Mr. Daniel Burgess in London. She had for many
Years labored under a Fistula in her Hip, which had proceeded so far, that the
very Bone was tainted, and she was turned out of the Hospital as Incurable.
This Person reading, with Prayer over it, that Passage in Mat. 15.28. Jesus
said unto her, O Woman, Great is thy Faith; be it unto thee as thou will: And
feeling her Soul by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, carried forth unto a
great Faith in him, she found herself immediately and miraculously Cured of all
her Malady. I have not now the Relation of this matter at hand; but this is as
far as I can remember, the Substance of what I received concerning it. It was
about the beginning of December, 1694.

17. In a Letter from the Reverend Mr. John How, I find the ensuing Passages,
which I take the leave to expose unto the Public.

It gives among us (writes that wort by Man) some Reviving to the Languishing
Interest of Christianity, and some Check to the Infidel Spirit, that (under the
falsely assumed name of Deism) would turn all Revealed Religion, and indeed all
Religion into Ridicule; that God is pleased to own it, by some late miraculous
Cures, wrought upon the Acting of Faith in Christ.

18. That excellent Person proceeding then to recite some of the Instances,
which we have already mentioned, he adds;

A fourth, I have late certain Knowledge of (but the thing was done six Years
ago) a Blackamooryouth, Servant unto a religious Baroner. He lately dining at
my House assured me, That his Servant having a great Aversion to Christianity,
and refusing Instruction, was struck with universal Pains in all his Limbs,
which continued upon him a Year and half, like Rheumatical, but relieved by
none of the apt usual Means that are wont to give Relief in such cases. At
length, in his Torments, which were great he grew serious, instructible,
penitent; and by the frequent Endeavors of the Parochial Minister (a good man,
known to me) brought to an understanding Acknowledement of Christ; upon which,
Baptism being promised to him, he consented; but pressed to be carried unto the
Assembly, that he might own Christ publicly: Upon the doing whereof, he was
immediately Cured, and has continued well ever since. These are great Things!
Hallelujah! Preparatives, I hope, to the Revival of Christianity; and I fear,
to terrible Acts of Vengance upon obstinate persevering Infidels.

19. Susanna Arch was a miserable Widow, for diverse Years overwhelmed with an
horrid Leprosy, which the Physicians that saw it, pronounced incurable; but
from that very time that they told her so, a strange persuasion came into her
Mind, that the Lord Jesus Christ would Cure her. That Scripture came frequently
into her Mind, Mat. 8.2. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean: and she
found herself enabled to plead this before him, with some degree of Confidence,
that at last she should prevail. She resolved, that she would rely on the Lord
Jesus Christ, who in the Days of his Flesh, when on Earth, cured all Diseases
and Sicknesses among the People, and who had still as much Power, now that he
is glorified in Heaven. She felt many Temptations to weaken her Confidence; but
still there came in seasonable and agreeable Scriptures, with a mighty force
upon her to strengthen it; as at one time, that in Mark 11.22. Have Faith in
God. At another time, that in Job. 11.40. Said I not unto thee, that if thou
would believe, thou should see the Glory of God? At another time, that in
Heb. 10.35. Cast not away your Confidence, which has great Recompense of
Reward. Her Leprosy had been complicated with a Phtisick, which for many Years
afflicted her; but in the Month of November. 1694. she had her Phtisick removed,
without any Humane Power; and she took that as a Token for Good, that she
should also be cured of her Leprosy; and the late Miracles upon others,
enlivened this her Hope exceedingly.

In December the Distemper of this Godly Woman grew worse and worse upon her;
and when her Mind was uneasy, those passages came to mind: I know, O Lord,
that thou can do every thing: and Our God whom we serve, is able to deliver
us.

On December 26. at Night, she was buffeted with some Temptations, that her
Faith for her Cure having proved but a Fancy, her Faith for her Soul must be so
too: but she cried out unto the Lord, Lord, I have cast my Soul upon thee, and
my Body upon thee, and I am resolved now to cast all my Diseases upon thee. Her
Mind was hereupon composed; and the next Night, putting up her Hand unto her
Head, first on the one side, and then on the other, she felt a new Skin on both
sides, which very much amazed her; whereupon she cried out, Lord Jesus, have
thou begun? Thou will carry it on. She then taking off her Head-Cloaths, found
the Scurf gone off her Head, and a firm Skin appearing there; and her
Distemper, which had extended itself all over her Body, from Head to Foot, in
putrefying Sores, was in like manner, suddenly taken away, to the admiration of
all that were Beholders.

Reader, Do not now encourage thy self in a vain Expectation of Miracles, to
relieve thy particular Afflictions, but improve these Miracles as Intimations
of what the Lord Jesus Christ can and will quickly do, for his afflicted Church
in the World. These Four last Accounts were Extracted from Mr. Cotton Mather,
in his Sermon called, Things for a Distressed People.

Extracted from the Miscellanies of John Aubrey, Esquire; 20. OUR English
Chronicles do Record, That in the Reign of King Henry the Third, a Child was
born in Kent, that at Two Years old cured all Diseases. Several Persons have
been cured of the King's Evil, by the Touching, or Handling of a Seventh Son.

21. Samuel Scot, Seventh Son of Mr. William Scot, of Hedington, in Wilt-shire,
did, when a Child, wonderful Cures by Touching only, viz. as to the
King's Evil, Wenns, etc. but as he grew to be a Man, the Virtue did decrease,
and had he lived longer, perhaps might have been spent.

22. It Is certain, the Touch of a Dead Hand has wrought wonderful Effects, e.
g. -- One a Painter of Stowel, in Somersetshire, near Bridgewater, had a Wenn
in the inside of his Cheek, as big as a Pullet's Egg, which by the Advice of
one was cured by once or twice Touching, or Rubbing with a Dead Woman's Hand.

23. Mr. Davys Mell (the famous Violinist, and Clock-maker) had a Child
Crook-back'd, that was cured after the manner aforesaid.

24. In Somersetshire, it is confidently reported. That some were cured of the
King's Evil, by the Touch of the Duke of Monmouth. The Lord Chancellor Bacon
says, That Imagination is next Kin to Miracle-working Faith.

25. When King Charles the First was Prisoner at Carisbrook-Castle, there was a
Woman Touched by him, who had the King's Evil in her Eye, and had not seen in a
Fortnight before, her Eyelids being glued together: as they were at Prayers
(after the Touching) the Woman's Eyes opened. Mr. Seymer Bowman, with many
others, were Eyewitnesses of this.

26. William Bakhouse, of Swallowfield, in Berk-shire, Esquire; had an ugly Scab
that grew on the middle of his Forehead, which had been there for some Years,
and he could not be cured. In his Journey to Peterborough, he dreamt there,
That he was in a Church, and saw a Hearse, and that one did bid him wet his
Scab, with the Drops of the Marble. The next Day he went to Morning-Service,
and afterward going about the Church, saw the very Hearse (which was of Black
Say, for Queen Catherine, Wife to King Henry the Eighth) and the Marble
Gravestone by. He found Drops on the Marble, and there were some Cavities
wherein he clipped his Finger, and wetted the Scab: In Seven Days it was
perfectly cured.

27. Arise Evans had a fungous Nose, and said, It was revealed to him, that the
King's Hand would cure him: and at the first coming of King Charles the Second
into St. James's-Park, he kissed the King's Hand, and rubbed his Nose with it;
which disturbed the King, but cured him. Mr. Ashmole told me.

28. There is extant a true Relation of the wonderful Cure of Mary Maillard
(Lame almost ever since she was born) on Sunday the 26th of November, 1693.
With the Affidavits and Certificates of the Girl, and several other credible
and worthy Persons, who knew her both before and since her being cured. To
which is added, A Letter from Dr. Wellwood, to the Right Honorable the Lady
Mayoress, upon that Subject. London, Printed for R. Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms, in Warwicklane. 1664.

29. The following Letter I received from Mr. Moses Pit, with the Relation of
Anne Jefferies.

December. 3. 96.

Reverend Sir,
I Have here sent you what I have Published of Anne Jefferies; which you may,
if you please, Reprint in your Collections, only with these Additions, which
accrued not to my Memory, or Information, 'till after I had Published the same,
(viz.) That these Fairies are distinguished into Males and Females; and than
they are about the bigness of Children of Three or Four Years of Age. I also
desire you to insert this Letter to me, from my Kinsman, Mr. Will. Tom, who was
the Person which Dined with the Lord Bishop of Gloucester, when I told him this
of Anne Jefferies; and is a Merchant of as much Note as most in Devon, or
Cornwall, and has been Mayor of Plymouth, who knows Anne Jefferies (who is
still living) as well as my self, he sent me the Letter, on my sending him one
of the Books by Post (I have the Original by me).

Plymouth, May 12. 1696.

Cous. Pit,
I Have yours, with the enclosed Prints, and do know, and have heard, that all
in it is very true: which, with my Duty to my Lord Bishop of Gloucester, you
may acquaint his Lordship, it is needless for me to write to him. I am,

Your Affectionate Kinsman and Servant, William Tom. This is all I think
needful to acquaint you with on this Subject. I am, Your True and Faithful
Servant, Moses Pit.


30. An Account of one Anne Jefferies, now living in the County of Cornwall,
who was fed for Six Months by a small sort of Airy People, called Fai^ies: And
of the strange and wonderful Cures she performed with Salves and Medicines she
received from them, for which she never took one Penny of her Patients. In a
Letter from Moses Pit, to the Right Reverend Father in God, Dr. Edward Fowler,
Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

My LORD,
WHen about Christmas last I waited on you with my Printed Letter, to the
Author of a Book, entitled, Some Discourses upon Dr. Burnet (now Lord Bishop
of Salisbury) and Dr. Tillotson (late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury)
occasioned by the late Funeral Sermon of the former upon the latter. After I
had paid my Duty and Service to your Lordship, you were pleased to mind me of
my having told you a wonderful Story about Seventeen or Eighteen Years since,
in the Company of a Kinsman of mine, a Tradesman of Plymouth; who also
confirmed part of it from his own Knowledge: and the following Narrative you
will s^^d to contain the Substance of what you then heard. And I doubt not, but
I could bring several other Persons, now living, to justify the Truth of what
I here write: Nay, the Person concerned, who is at this time living in
Cornwall, must own it, and a great deal more, if she could be prevailed with to
speak out. My Lord, I thought I could, if any Person alive, have prevailed with
her, she being the Servant that attended me in my Childhood; but your Lordship
may see that I cannot, and therefore your Lordship must be content with what I
here publish: I am satisfied I was not, nor could be imposed on in this Affair,
the Particulars having made s^ great an Impression on me from my Youth
hitherto. I know, my Lord, that the great part of the World will not believe
the passages here related, by reason of the strangeness of them; but I cannot
help their Unbelief: Your Lordship knows the Record where it is mentioned, That
the great God did mavelous things in the sight of our Forefathers; but for
all that they sinned yet more, and believed not his wondrous Works: And
therefore Unbelief is no new Sin crept into the World. And moreover, my Lord,
if Men would give themselves time to think, they cannot but remember that the
great God has done as great and mavelous Works in our Age, both in Judgment
and in Mercy, as be did in the Days of old, by which the greatest Atheist may
be convinced, not only of the Being of a God, but also that his Power and his
Goodness, are as manifest now as of old; and therefore it is the Duty of all
that do by personal Knowledge know any extraordinary Works or Providence of
God, which are uncommon, to publish them to the World, that the great God may
be glorified, and Mankind edified; which is purely and truly the Design of
Publishing the following Narrative.

ANne Jefferies, (for that was her Maiden Name) of whom the following strange
things are related, was born in the Parish of St. Teath, in the County of
Cornwall, in December 1626. and she is still living, 1696. being now in the
Seventieth Year of her Age; she is married to one William Warden, formerly Hind
(a Hind is one that looks after the rest of the Servants, the Grounds, Cattle,
Corn, etc. of his Master) to the late eminent Physician, Dr. Richard Lower,
deceased; and now lives as Hind to Sir Andrew Slanning, of Devon, Bar.

I must acquaint you, Sir, that I have made it my Business, but could not
prevail, to get a Relation from her of what she herself remembers of those
several strange Passages of her Life that I here relate, or of any other that I
have either forgot, or that never came to my Cognizance: but she being
prevailed with by some of her poor ignorant Neighbors not to do it; and she
fancying, that if she should do it, she might again fall into trouble about it:
I here give your Lordship the best and faithfullest Account I can.

In the Year 1691, I wrote into Cornwall, to my Sister Mary Martyn's Son, an
Attorney, to go to the said Anne, and discourse her as from me, about the most
material strange Passages of her Life: he answers my Letter, Sept. 12, 1691.
and says, I have been with Anne Jefferies, and she can give me no particular
Account of her Condition, it being so long since. My Grandfather, and Mother
say, That she was in Bodmyn Goal Three Months, and lived Six Months without
Meat; and during her Continuance in that Condition, several eminent Cures were
performed by her, the Particulars no one can now relate. My Mother saw the
Fairies once, and heard one say, That they should give some Meat to the Child,
that she might return to her Parents, Which is the fullest Relation can now be
given.

But I not being satisfied with this Answer, did, in the Year 1693, write into
Cornwall to my Sister's Husband, (Mr. Humph. Martyn) and desired him to go to
Anne Jefferies, to see if he could persuade her to give me what Account she
could remember of the many and strange Passages of her Life. He answers my
Letter, Jan. 31. 1693. and says, As for Anne Jefferies, I have been with her
the greatest part of one Day, and did read to her all that you wrote to me; but
she would not own any thing of it, as concerning the Fairies, neither of any of
the Cures she then did. I endeavored to persuade her she might receive some
benefit by it. She answered, That if her own Father were now alive, she would
not discover to him those things that did then happen to her. I asked her the
Reason, why she would not do it? she replied, That if she should discover it to
you, that you would make either Books or Ballads of it: And she said, That she
would not have her Name spread about the Country in Books or Ballads of such
things, if she might have Five hundred Pounds for the doing of it: for she
said, she had been questioned before Justices, and at the Sessions, and in
Prison, and also before the Judges at the Assizes; and she does believe, that
if she should discover such things now, she should be questioned again for it.
As for the ancient Inhabitants of St. Teath Church Town, there are none of them
now alive, but Thomas Christopher, a blind Man, (Note, This Tho. Christopher
was then a Servant in my Father's House, when these things happened) and he
remembers many of the Passages you wrote of her. And as for my Wife, she then
being so little, did not mind it; but has heard her Father and Mother relate
most of the Passages you wrote of her.

This is all I can at present possibly get from her, and therefore I now go on
with my own Relation of the wonderful Cures, and other strange Things she did,
or happened to her, which is the Substance of what I wrote to my Brother, and
that he read to her.

It Is the Custom in our County of Cornwall, for the most substantial People of
each Parish, to take Apprentices the Poor's Children, and to breed them up till
they attain to twenty one Years of Age, and for their Service to give them
Meat, Drink, and Clothes. This Anne Jefferies being a poor Man's Child of the
Parish, by Providence, fell into our Family, where she lived several Years,
being a Girl of a bold daring Spirit; she would venture at those Difficulties
and Dangers that no Boy would attempt.

In the Year 1645, (she then being Nineteen Years old) she being one Day
knitting in an Arbor in our Garden, there came over the Garden-hedge to her
(as she affirmed) Six Persons, of a small stature, all clothed in Green, which
she called Fairies: upon which she was so frighted, that she fell into a kind
of a Convulsion-fit: but when we found her in this Condition, we brought her
into the House, and put her to Bed, and took great Care of her. As soon as she
recovered out of her Fit, she cries out, They are just gone out of the Window;
they are just gone out of the Window: Do you not see them? And thus in the
height of her Sickness she would often cry out, and that with eagerness; which
Expressions we attributed to her Distemper, supposing her lightheaded. During
the Extremity of her Sickness, my Father's Mother died, which was in April,
1646; but we durst not acquaint our Maid Anne with it, for fear it might have
increased her Distemper, she being at that time so very sick, that she could
not go, nor so much as stand on her Feet; and also the Extremity of her
Sickness. and the long Continuance of her Distemper, had almost perfectly mop'd
her, so that she became even as a Changeling: and as soon as she began to
recover, and to get a little strength, she, in her going, would spread her Legs
as wide as she could, and so lay hold with her Hands on Tables, Forms, Chairs,
Stools, etc, till she had learned to go again: and if any thing vexed her, she
would fall into her Fits, and continue in them a long time; so that we were
afraid she would have died in one of them. As soon as she had got out of her
Fit, she would heartily call upon God: and then the first Person she would ask
for, was myself, and would not be satisfied 'till I came to her. Upon which she
would ask me, If any one had vexed or abused me, since she fell into her Fit.
Upon my telling her, no one had, she would stroke me, and kiss me, calling me
her dear Child; and then all her Vexation was over.

As soon as she recovered a little strength, she constantly went to Church to
pay her Devotions to our great and good God, and to hear his Word read and
preached. Her Memory was so well restored to her, that she would repeat more of
the Sermons she heard than any other of our Family. She took mighty delight in
Devotion, and in hearing the Word of God read and preached, although she herself
could not read.

The first Manual Operation, or Cure she performed, was on my own Mother; the
occasion was as follows: One Afternoon, in the Harvest time, all our Family
being in the Fields at work, (and my self, a Boy, at School) there was none in
the House but my Mother, and this Anne: my Mother considering that Bread might
be wanting for the Laborers, if care were not taken; and she having before
caused some Bushels of Wheat to be sent to the Mill, my Mother was resolved
that she herself would take a Walk to the Mill, (which was but a Quarter of a
Mile from our House) to hasten the Miller to bring home the Meal, that so her
Maids, as soon as they came from the Fields, might make and bake the Bread; but
in the mean time how to dispose of her Maid Anne, was her great care, for she
did not dare trust her in the House alone, for fear she might do herself some
mischief by Fire, or set the House on fire (for at that time she was so weak,
that she could hardly help herself, and very silly withal): At last, by much
Persuasions, my Mother prevailed with her to walk in the Gardens and Orchards,
'till she came from the Mill; to which she unwillingly consented. Then my
Mother locked the Doors of the House, and walked to the Mill; but as she was
coming home in a very plain way, she flipt and hurt her Leg, so that as she
could not rise, there she lay a considerable time in great pain, 'till a
Neighbor coming by on Horseback, seeing my Mother in this Condition, lifted
her up on his Horse, and carried her home. As soon as she was brought within
the Doors of the House, word of it was sent into the Fields to the Reapers, who
thereupon immediately left their Harvest-work, and came home; the House being
presently full of People: a Manservant was ordered to take a Horse, and ride
for Mr. Lob, an eminent Chyrurgeon, that then lived at a Market Town called
Bodmyn, which was Eight Miles from my Father's House: but whilst the Man was
getting the Horse ready, in comes our Maid Anne, and tells my Mother, she was
heartily sorry for the Mischance she had got in hurting of her Leg, and that
she did it at such a place (naming the place); and further, she desired she
might see her Leg: my Mother at first refused to show her her Leg; saying to
her, What should she show her Leg to so poor and silly a Creature as she was?
for she could do her no good: but Anne being very importunate with my Mother to
see her Leg, and my Mother being unwilling to vex her by denying her, for fear
of her falling into her Fits, (for at all times we dealt gently, lovingly, and
kindly with her, taking great care by no means to cross or fret her) did yield
to her Request, and did show her, her Leg. Upon which Anne took my Mother's Leg
on her Lap, and strok'd it with her Hand; and then asked my Mother, If she did
not find Ease by her stroking of it? My Mother confessed to her, she did. Upon
this she desired my Mother to forbear sending for the Chyrurgeon, for she
would, by the Blessing of God, cure her Leg: and to satisfy my Mother of the
Truth of it, she again appealed to my Mother, Whether she did not find farther
Ease upon her continued stroking of the part affected; which my Mother again
acknowledged she did. Upon this my Mother countermanded the Messenger for the
Chyrurgeon.

On this my Mother demanded of her, how she came to the Knowledge of her Fall?
She made answer, That half a Dozen Persons told her of it. That, replied my
Mother, could not be: for there was none came by at that time, but my Neighbor
-- that brought me home. Anne answers again, That that was Truth; and it was
also true, that half a Dozen Persons told her so: for, said she, you know I
went out of the House into the Gardens and Orchards very unwillingly. And now I
will tell you the Truth of all Matters and Things that have befallen me.

You know that this my Sickness and Fits came very suddenly upon me, which
brought me very low and weak, and have made me very simple. Now the Cause of my
Sickness was this:

I was one Day knitting of Stockings in the Arbor in the Garden, and there
came over the Garden-hedge of a sudden, Six small People, all in Green Clothes;
which put me into such a Fright that was the Cause of this my great Sickness;
and they continue their Appearance to me, never less than Two at a time, nor
never more than Eight: they always appear in even Numbers, Two, Four, Six,
Eight. When I said often in my Sickness, They were just gone out of the Window,
it was really so; although you thought me lightheaded. At this time when I came
out into the Garden, they came to me, and asked me, If you had put me out of
the House against my Will? I told them, I was unwilling to come out of the
House: upon this they said, You should not fare the better for it; and
thereupon in that Place, and at that Time, in a fair Pathway you fell, and
hurt your Leg. I would not have you send for a Chyrurgeon, nortrouble your
self: for I will cure your Leg. The which she did in a little time.

This Cu^^ of my Mother's Leg, and the Stories she told of these Fairies, made
such a Noise over all the County of Cornwall, as that it had the same Effect
St. Paul's healing of Publius's Father of a Fever, and a Bloody Flux, at Malta,
after his Shipwreck there, as related Acts 28.8, 9. And it came to pass, that
the Father of Publius lay sick of a Fever, and of a Bloody Flux: to whom Paul
entered in, and prayed, and laid his Hands on him, and healed him. So when this
was done, others also which had Diseases in the Island, came, and were healed.
That People of all Distempers, Sicknesses, Sores, and Ages, came not only so
far off as the Lands-end, but also from London, and were cured by her. She took
no Moneys of them, nor any Reward, that ever I knew or heard of; yet had she
Moneys at all times sufficient to supply her Wants. She neither made nor bought
any Medicines, or Salves, that ever I saw or heard of; yet wanted them not as
she had occasion. She forsook eating our Victuals, and was fed by these Fairies
from that Harvest-time, to the next Christmas Day; upon which Day she came to
our Table, and said, Because it was that Day, she would eat some Roast-beef
with us: the which she did, I myself being then at Table.

One time (I remember it perfectly well) I had a mind to speak with her, and
not knowing better where to find her than in her Chamber, I went thither, and
fell a knocking very earnestly at her Chamber Door with my Foot, and calling to
her earnestly, Anne, Anne, open the Door, and let me in. She answered me, Have
a little Patience, and I will let you in immediately. Upon which I looked
through the Keyhole of the Door, and I saw her Eating; and when she had done
Eating, she stood still by her Bedside as long as Thanks to God might be
given, and then she made a Coursey (or Bow) and opened the Chamber Door, and
gave me a Piece of her Bread, which I did eat; and I think it was the most
delicious Bread that ever I did eat either before or since.

Another odd Passage which I must relate was this; One Lord's Day my Father
with his Family being at Dinner in our Hall, comes in one of our Neighbors,
whose name was Francis Heathman, and asked where Ann was; we told him she was
in her Chamber: Upon this he goes into her Chamber to see for her; and not
seeing her, he calls her; she not answering, he feels up and down in the
Chamber for her; but not finding her, comes and tells us she was not in her
Chamber. As soon as he had said this, she comes out of her Chamber to us, as we
were fitting at Table, and tells him, she was in her Chamber, and saw him, and
heard him call her, and see him feel up and down the Chamber for her, and had
almost felt her, but he could not see her although she saw him, notwithstanding
she was at the same time at the Table in her Chamber eating her Dinner.

One Day these Fairies gave my Sister Mary (the now Wife of Mr. Humph. Martyn)
then about four Years of Age, a Silver Cup that held about a Quart, bidding her
give it my Mother and she did bring it my Mother; but my Mother would not
accept of it, but bid her carry it to them again, which she did: I presume this
was the time my Sister owns she saw the Fairies. I confess to your Lordship I
never did see them: I had almost forgot to tell your Lordship, that Ann would
tell what People would come to her several Days before they came, and from
whence, and at what time they would come.

I have seen Ann in the Orchard dancing among the Trees, and she told me, she
was then dancing with the Fairies.

The great Noise of the many strange Cures Ann did, and also her living without
eating our Victuals, (she being fed, as she said, by these Fairies) caused both
Neighbour-Magistrates and Ministers to resort to my Father's House, and talk
with her, and strictly examined her about the Matters here related; and she
gave them very rational Answers to all those Questions they then asked h^^ (for
by this time she was well recovered out of her Sickness and Fits, and her
natural Parts and Understanding much improved) my Father and all his Family
affirming the Truth of all we saw. The Ministers endeavored to persuade her
they were evil Spirits that resorted to her, and that it was the Delusion of
the Devil (but how could that be, when she did no Hurt, but Good to all that
came to her for Cure of their Distempers?) and advised her not to go to them
when they called her. Upon these Admonitions of the Ministers and Magistrates,
our Ann was not a little troubled and concerned, not well knowing what to do in
this case. However, that Night after the Magistrates and Ministers were gone,
my Father with his Family sitting at a great Fire in his Hall, Ann being also
present, she spoke to my Father, and says, Now they call (meaning the Fairies)
we all of us urged her not to go. In less then half a quarter of an Hour she
says, Now they call a second time; we encouraged her again not to go to them.
By and by she says, Now they call a third time; upon which, away to her
Chamber she went to them, (of all these three Calls of the Fairies, none heard
them but Ann). After she had been in her Chamber some time, she came to us
again with a Bible in her Hand, and tells us, that when she came to the
Fairies, they said to her, What has there been some Magistrates and Ministers
with you, and dissuaded you from coming my more to us, saying we are evil
Spirits, and that it was all the Delusion of the Devil? Pray desire them to
read that place of Scripture in the first Epistle of St. John, chap. 4. ver. 1.
Dearly beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are
of God, etc. This place of Scripture was turned down to in the said Bible. (I
told your Lordship before, Ann could not read).

After this, one John Tregeagle, Esquire; (who was Steward to the late John Earl of
Radnor) being then a Justice of Peace in Cornwall, sent his Warrant for Ann,
and sent her to Bodmin Goal, and there kept her a long time. That day the
Constable came to execute his Warrant, Ann milking the Cows, the Fairies
appeared to her, and told her, that a Constable would come that day with a
Warrant for to carry her before a Justice of Peace, and she would be sent to
Goal. She asked them if she should hide herself; they answered her, No, she
should fear nothing, but go with the Constable. So she went with the Constable
to the Justice, and he lent her to Bodmin Goal, and ordered the Prison-Keeper
that she should be kept without Victuals; and she was so kept, and yet she
lived, and that without complaining. When the Sessions came, the Justices of
the Peace sent their Warrant to one Giles Bawden, a Neighbor of ours who was
then Constable, for my Mother and my self to appear before them at that
Sessions, to answer such Questions as should be demanded of us about our poor
Maid Ann ( Bodmin was eight Miles from my Father's). When we came to the
Sessions, the first that was called in before the Justices was my Mother (what
Questions they asked her I do not remember): When they had done examining her
they desired her to withdraw. As soon as she came forth, I was brought it, and
called to the upper end of the Table to be examined; and there was (I suppose
him to be) the Clerk of the Peace, with his Pen ready in his Hand to take my
Examination (I do not remember that they did put me to my Oath). The first
Question they asked me was, What have you got in your Pockets? I answered,
Nothing Sir, but my Cuffs, which I immediately plucked out of my Pocket and
showed them. Their second Question to me was, If I had any Victuals in my
Pocket for my Maid Ann? I answered, I had not; and so they dismissed me as well
as my Mother. But poor Ann lay in Goal for a considerable time after; and also
Justice Tregeagle, who was her great Persecutor, kept her in his House
sometimes as a Prisoner, and that without Victuals. And at last when Ann was
discharged out of Prison, the Justices made an Order that Ann should not live
any more with my Father. Whereupon my Father's only Sister, Mrs. Frances Tom, a
Widow, near Padstow, took Ann into her Family, and there she lived a
considerable time, and did many great Cures: but what they were, my Kinsman Mr.
Will. Tom, who then lived in the House with his Mother, can give your Lordship
the best Account of any that I know living, except Ann her self. And from
thence she went to live with her own Brother, and in process of time Married as
aforesaid.

And now my Lord, if your Lordship expects that I should give you an Account
when, and upon what occasion these Fairies forsook our Ann, I must tell your
Lordship, I am ignorant in that; she herself can best tell, if she could be
prevailed with so to do: and the History of it, and the rest of the Passages of
her Life, would be very acceptable and useful to the most curious and
inquisitive Part of Mankind.

And now my Lord, I think good here to put an end to my plain Relation of these
very strange Passages of this Ann Jefferies's Life: It Is only Matter of Fact
which I have here faithfully related; I have not made any Observations nor
Reflections upon any one Passage. I leave your Lordship to your own free
Thoughts and Judgment. I my self cannot give one natural Reason for any one of
these Passages that happened to this poor Woman, but must conclude with that
great Apostle and Scholar St. Paul, Romans 11.33, 34, 35, 36. O the depths of the
Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! For who has known the Mind of the
Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Or who has first given to him, and it
shall be recompensed unto him again? For of him, and through him, and to him,
are all things: To whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

I am Your Lordship's most Humble and Dutiful Servant, MOSES PIT.
May 1. 1696.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Satan and Ill Spirits permitted to Hurt the Good in their Names.
SAtan has his Name from Slandering; and to show that he is a true (...), and
answers his Name to a Hair, he has not been wanting to reproach, back-bite,
accuse, and affix Nicknames and opprobrious Titles all along upon those People
that will not list themselves under his Banner, and fight under his Colors.
The Prophets were sufficiently misrepresented under the old Mosaic Economy,
and the Jewish Church were accused of Treasons and Rebellions; nor did our
Savior himself escape the Lash of slanderous Tongues; Is not this the
Carpenter? And worse then that, Behold a gluttonous Man and a Wine-bibber; and
worse yet, He casts out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. St. Paul was
counted a seditious and busy Man, a raiser of Tumults, and causer of
Rebellion; a Heretic, Mad, a Blasphemer, and a Despiser of the Fathers
Ordinances (to use the Words of Bishop Jewel in his Apology). St. Stephen, one
who had spoke against the Law, Moses, the Temple, and against God himself.

1. Who knows not, says Bishop Jewel, after what sort our Fathers were railed
upon in times past, which first of all began to acknowledge and profess the
Name of Christ? How they made private Conspiracies, devised secret Counsels
against the Commonwealth; and to that end, made early and private Meetings in
the Dark, killed young Babes, fed themselves with Man's Flesh, and like Savage
and Bruit Beasts, Drink their Blood. In conclusion, after they had put out the
Candles, did commit Adultery among themselves; and without regard, commit
Incest one with another; that Brethren lay with their Sisters, Sons with their
Mothers, without any Reverence of Nature or Kin, without Shame, without
Difference, etc. Bishop Jewel in his Apol.

2. The Waldenses or Vaudois, who were a sort of People that stood it out with
Constancy against the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, had so many
opprobrious Titles bestowed upon them by the Agents of that Prince of Darkness,
as would almost tire a serious Reader to read over, Albigenses Fratricelli's
Poor Man of Lions, Turlupius, Sabalpius, etc.

3. Luther was so hateful to them of the Roman Communion, that they slandered
him, as if he had been begot by an Incubus, had familiar Conversation with the
Devil, was Possessed, and at last was carried away by the Devil, Body and Soul
alive: and they published the Story of his shameful Death, whilst himself was
yet alive.

4. Calvin was so odious, that the Wits of Bruxels combined together in a Knot
to pour as much Satyr upon him as possibly they could; introducing the Prince
of the bottomless Pit, as transported with Rage and Passion, and threatening to
plague the World with the most pestilential Monster he could procure, for the
Punishment of Mankind. And then telling us, that he had been guilty of such
Villanie^, that he was Burned in the Shoulder for a Malefactor; that he changed
his name from Cawin to Calvin, that he went to exercise the Devil out of a
Person possessed, and had like to have been torn in pieces by him, etc. I know
not how now to cite my Authority for this last Paragraph, the Book being gone
out of my hands: but I think the Title of it was, Calvino-Mastix; Published by
the Wits of Bruxels. Some gave the name of Calvin to their Dogs; and others out
of hatred to him abstained from the Lord's Supper. Beza in vit. Calvin.

5. Beza and Oecolampadius, and others of the Reformed Church were bespattered
with most dirty and devilish Slanders in a Popish Book, which I lent formerly
to a Neighbor, but could never recover the sight of it again. Particularly Beza
was reproached, as guilty of Adultery, Sodomy, and Obscenity.

6. Bishop Hooper called a Hypocrite, a Beast, etc.

7. And what has been the meaning of those odious Nicknames, raised in this
Kingdom, in this last Age, amongst People and Brethren of the same Faith and
Hope; Puritans, Phanaticks and Roundheads on the one side, and Malignants,
Cavaliers, and Papists, are Popishly affected on the other side; Whigs and
Tories, and for them that had not Zeal enough to advance to the same height of
Bigottry with either Extremes, but endeavored to moderate between them, and
make Peace, Trimmers, and Time-observers: And these reproachful Titles thrown
about with so much Rashness and Bitterness, that it broke the Hearts of some
very worthy and innocent Persons; particularly a Petition full of unjust
Accusations, being preferred against Mr. Francis Quarles, by eight Men (whereof
he knew not any two, nor they him, save only by sight); the first News of it
struck him so to the Heart, that he never recovered it, but said plainly, It
would be his Death; and accordingly it proved. See his Life, Writ by his
sorrowful Widow, Mrs. Vrsula Quarles, by way of Preface to his Poetical
Paraphrase upon Ecclesiastes.

And it is observable what Mr. Mather tells us of the Persons Bewitched lately
in New England, that the Devil does often appear before them in the Shape and
Representation of some good or creditable Person, whom they had no reason to
suspect; as he did to Isaf Chacus the Turk at London, the Night before he was
Baptized, in the Person of Mr. Durie his Instructor, to dissuade and affright
him from his Purpose: as may be seen in the Printed Relation.

LHAP. CXXXIV. Satan permitted to Hurt the Good in their Health of Body.
AS the Christian Religion has a natural Tendency to the Preservation of
Health and long Life (length of Days being in her right Hand, according to
Solomon): And God almighty has (...) Health and Prosperity to them, that live
a godly Life: So he has threatened Diseases and Shortness of Life to them that
are careless of his Laws; and told us, That the Wicked shall not live out half
their Days. And in order hereunto, he permits Satan oftentimes to pour out his
Malice and Venom upon Mankind, partly by Witchcraft and preternatural Strokes,
as in the case of Job, who was afflicted with Boyls and Botches (vexations and
noisome to a Proverb) and in the Instances of the Demoniack^ in the Gospel, who
were sorely tormented with Diseases and strange Fits and Convulsions, so that
they were rent, and tore, and tertured, at upon a Wrack or Gibbet; and partly
by malicious Injections and Temptations, provoked either to Presumption or
Despair, and all the ill Effects and Consequences of those grand Precipicies of
Human Nature. And in truth the end of all sinful Courses is Death.

1. Langius tells a memorable and true Story of one Vlricus Neusesser, who
being grievously tormented with a Pain in his side, suddenly felt under his
Skin, which yet was whole, an Iron Nail as he thought; and so it proved when
the Chyrurgion had cut it out: But nevertheless his great Torments continued,
which enraged him so, that he cut his own Throat. The third Day when he was
carried out to be Buried, Eucharius Rosenbader, and Johannes ab Actenstet, a
great company of People standing about them dissected the Corpse, and ripping up
the Ventricle, found a round piece of Wood of a good length, four Knives, some
even and sharp, others indented like a Saw, with other two rough pieces of Iron
a span long; there was also a Ball of Hear. This happened at Fugenstal, 1539.
Antid. against Atheism, l. 3. c. 5.

2. Wierus tells also of one that was possessed, of which himself was an
Eyewitness, th^^ vomited up pieces of Cloth with Pins stuck in them, Nails,
Needles, and such like stuff: which he contends does not come from the Stomach,
but by a prestigious Slight of the Devil, is only ingested into the Mouth. Ibid.

3. Cardan relates the like of a good simple country Fellow, and a Friend of
his, that had been a long time troubled with vomiting up Glass, Iron Nails, and
Hair, and that at that time he ^old Cardan of it, he was not so perfectly
restored, but that something yet crashed in his Belly, as if there were a Bag
of Glass in it. Ibid.

4. There were thirty Children strangely handled at Amsterdam, 1566. of the
Truth whereof Wierus professes himself very well assured. They were Tortured
very much, and cast very violent upon the Ground; but when they arose out of
their Fit knew nothing, but thought they had been only asleep. For the
remedying of this Mischief they got the help of Physicians, Wizards, and
Exorcists, but without success; only while the Exorcists were reading, the
Children vomited up Needles, Thimbles, shreds of Cloth, pieces of Pots, Glass,
Hair, and other things of the like nature. Ibid.

5. Now the Advantage I would make of those Relations is this, That these
Effects, Extraordinary and Supernatural, being so palpable and permanent, they
are not at all liable to such subtersuges as Atheists usually betake themselves
to, as of Melancholy, and disturbance of Fancy in those that profess they see
such strange things, or any Fraud or Imposture in those that act. Ibid.

6. This following Relation of a strange Witchcraft discovered in the Village
Mehra in Sweedland, was taken out of the public Register of the Lords
Commissioners appointed by his Majesty the King of Sweeden, to examine the
whole Business, in the Years of our Lord, 1669, and 1670.

The News of this Witchcraft coming to the King's Ear, his Majesty was pleased
to appoint Commissioners, some of the Clergy and some of the Laity, to make a
Journey to the Town aforesaid, and to examine the whole Business; and
accordingly the Examination was ordered to be on the 13th of August, and the
Commissioners met on the 12th Instant in the said Village, at the Persons
House, to whom both the Minister and several People of Fashion complained with
Tears in their Eyes, of the miserable Condition they were in; and therefore
begged of them to think of some way, whereby they might be delivered from that
Calamity.

They gave the Commissioners very strange Instances of the Devils Tyranny among
them; how by the help of Witches, he had drawn some hundreds of Children to
him, and made them subject to his Power; how he has been seen to go in a
visible Shape through the Country, and appeared daily to the People; how he had
wrought upon the poorer sort, by presenting them with Meat and Drink, and this
way allured them to himself; with other Circumstances to be mentioned hereafter.

The Inhabitants of the Village added, with very great Lamentations, That
though their Children had told all, and themselves saught God very earnestly by
Prayer, yet they were carried away by him; And therefore begged of the Lords
Commissioners to root out this hellish Crew, that they might regain their
former Rest and Quietness; and the rather, because the Children which used to
be carried away in the Country, or District of Elfdale, since some Witches had
been Burnt there remained unmolested.

That Day, i. e. the 13th of August, being the last Humiliation-day instituted
by Authority for removing of this Judgment, the Commissioners went to Church,
where there appeared a considerable Assembly both of Young and Old: The
Children could read most of them, and sing Psalms, and so could the Women,
though not with any great Zeal or Fervor. There were Preached two Sermons that
Day, in which the miserable Case of those People that suffered themselves to be
deluded by the Devil was laid open; and these Sermons were at last concluded
with very fervent Prayer.

The public Worship being over, all the People of the Town were called
together to the Persons House, near three Thousand of them. Silence being
commanded, the King's Commission was read Publicly in the Hearing of them all,
and they were charged under very great Penalties, to conceal nothing of what
they knew, and to say nothing but the Truth; those especially who were guilty,
that the Children might be delivered from the Clutches of the Devil. They all
promised Obedience, the guilty feignedly, but the guiltless weeping and crying
bitterly.

On the 14th of August the Commissioners met again, consulting how they might
withstand this dangerous Flood; after long deliberation, an Order also coming
from his Majesty, they did resolve to execute such as the Matter of Fact could
be proved upon: Examination being made, there were discovered no less than
three Score and Ten in the Village aforesaid, three and Twenty of which freely
confessing their Crimes were condemned to die; the rest, one pretending she was
with Child, and the other denying, and pleading not guilty, were sent to
Fahluna, where most of them were afterward Executed.

Fifteen Children which likewise confessed that they were engaged in this
Witchery, died as the rest. Six and Thirty of them, between nine and sixteen
Years of Age, who had been less guilty, were forced to run the Gantlet; Twenty
more, who had no great inclination, yet had been seduced to those hellish
Enterprises, because they were very young, were condemned to be lashed with
Rods upon their Hands for three Sundays together at the Church-door; and the
aforesaid six and thirty were also doomed to be lashed this way once a Week
for a whole Year together. The number of the seduced Children was about three
Hundred.

On the 25th of August, Execution was done upon the notoriously Guilty, the Day
being Bright and Glorious, and the Sun shining, and some Thousands of People
being present at the Spectacle. The Order and Method observed in the
Examination was thus:

First, The Commissioners and the neighboring Justices went to Prayer; this
done, the Witches, who had most of them Children with them, which they either
had seduced, or attempted to seduce, from four Years of Age to sixteen, were
set before them; some of the Children complained lamentably of the Misery and
Mischief they were forced sometime to suffer of the Witches.

The Children being asked whether they were sure they were at any time carried
away by the Devil; they all declared they were: begging of the Commissioners
that they might be freed from that intolerable Slavery.

Hereupon the Witches themselves were asked, whether the confessions of these
Children were true, and admonished to confess the Truth, that they might turn
away from the Devil unto the Living God. At first most of them did very stiffly,
and without shedding the least Tear deny it, though much against their Will and
Inclination.

After this, the Children were examined every one by themselves, to see whether
their Confession did agree or no; and the Commissioners found that all of them,
except some very little ones, who could not tell all the Circumstances, did
punctually agree in the Confession of Particulars.

In the mean while the Commissioners that were of the Clergy examined the
Witches, but could not bring them to any Confession, all continuing steadfast in
their denials, till at last some of them burst out into Tears, and their
Confession agreed with what the Children had said. And these expressed their
abhorrency of the Fact, and begged Pardon; adding, that the Devil, whom they
called Loeyta, had stopped the Mouths of some of them, and stopped the Ears of
others; and being now gone from them, they could no longer conceal it, for they
now perceived his Treachery. Glanvil's Sadduc. Triumph. p. 579, 580, etc.

I am unwilling to leave this Chapter, 'till I have represented the Murderous
Nature of Satan, and displayed the Devil in his own Colors. And this I will
endeavor to do in a few Instances, which shall be irrefragable, beyond all
Exceptions and Confutation; as I think these before Recorded are enough to make
the Atheist bite his Nails, and our Witch-Advocates scratch their Heads, to
find out an Evasion, or Scape-hole for themselves to shelter in.

7. In 1618. happened a very sad Tragedy, in the Family of the Right Honorable
the Earl of Rutland, whose Children were Bewitched, and one Murdered, by the
Devilish Malice of Joan Flower, and her two Daughters, Margaret and Philip, who
dwelt near Belvoir-Castle in Rutland-shire, the Residence of that Noble Earl,
and where they were not only relieved, but entertained as Cheerwomen. After
which Margaret was admitted to live in the Castle as a Servant-maid, 'till at
length the Countess had Information of some Misdemeanors they were guilty of,
having Notice that the Mother was a very malicious Woman, and much given to
Swearing, Cursing, and Atheistical Imprecations; and that of late Days her
Countenance was strangely altered, her Eyes fiery and hollow, her Speech fierce
and envious, and her whole Demeanor strange and ridiculous, being much alone,
and having diverse other Symptoms of a notorious Witch: and her Neighbors
reported, she had Familiar Spirits, and terrified 'em all with her Curses and
Threats of Revenge, upon the least Displeasure was done her.

She likewise heard, That her Daughter Margaret often carried such great
Quantities of Provision from the Castle to her Mother, as was unfit for a
Servant to purloyn, and at such unseasonable Hours, that it was believed they
could never maintain their extraordinary Riot and Expense, without robbing
their Lady, to maintain several debauched Fellows, who frequented her Mother's
House, for the Love of her youngest Daughter Philip, who was likewise leudly
transported with the Love of one Thomas Symson; insomuch, as he was heard to
say, she had Bewitched him; for he had no power to leave her, though he found
himself much altered, both in Body and Mind, since he kept her Company.

Such Discourses passed concerning them several Years before they were
Apprehended or Convicted, of which the Earl and Countess took little Notice, by
reason of their cunning Observance, and modest Carriage toward them: At length
my Lord had some suspicion of the Mother, and estranged himself from that
Familiarity and Discourse which he used to have with her: for one Peak having
wronged her, she complained to the Earl, whom she found unwilling to encourage
Clamours, and malicious Informations. And the Countess discovering some
Incivilities in her Daughter's Life, and her Neglect of Business, discharged
her for ^^ing any more in the Castle; yet gave her Forty Shillings, a Bolster,
and a Bed, commanding her (...) ^ome. Upon this the Mother being upbraided by
her Neighbors, and told, that her Daught^^ (...) ^^urned out of Doors, she
cursed all that were the Cause of it, and studied to Revenge herself upon that
Honorable Family. The Devil perceiving the malicious Temper of this Wretch,
and that she and her Daughter were fit Instruments to enlarge his Kingdom,
offered them his Service, and that in such a manner as should no way terrify
them nor could th^^ be suspected to be concerned, appearing in the shape of a
Dog, Cat, or Rat; telling them, That if they would make a Contract with him,
they should have their Will upon their Enemies, and do them what Damage they
pleased. The Thoughts of doing Mischief to their Ill-willers, easily induced
them all to agree to his damnable Proposals, and they consented to be his, Body
and Soul, confirming their Agreement with abominable Kisses, and an odious
Sacrifice of Blood, with certain Charms and Conjurations, wherewith the Devil
deceived them. After this, these Three Women became Devils Incarnate, and grew
proud in the Power they had got to do Mischief by several Spells and
Incantations; whereby they first killed what Cattle they pleased: which so
encouraged them, that they now threaten the Earl and his Family, who soon after
fell sick with his Countess, and were subject to strange and extraordinary
Convulsions, which they judging only to proceed from the Hand of God, had not
the least Jealousy of any evil Practice against them.

At last, as Malice increased in them, so the Earl's Family felt the smart of
their Revenge: for Henry Lord Ross, his Eldest Son, fell sick of a very unusual
Disease, and soon after died. His Second Son, the Lord Francis, was likewise
miserably tortured by their wicked Contrivances: and his Daughter, the Lady
Catherine, was often in great danger of her Life, by their barbarous Dealings,
with strange Fits, etc.

The Honorable Parents bore all these Afflictions with Christian Magnanimity,
little suspecting they proceeded from Witchcraft, 'till it pleased God to
discover the Villainous Practices of these Women, whom the Devil now left to
fall into the Hands of Justice, for Murdering the Innocent, and to remain
notorious Examples of God's Judgment to future Ages.

They were apprehended about Christmas, in 1618. and after Examination before
diverse Justices of Peace, who wondered at their audacious Wickedness, were all
Three ordered to be carried to Lincoln-Jail. Joan Flower, the Mother, it is
said, called for Bread and Butter by the way, and wished, it might never go
through her, if she were guilty of that which was charged upon her; and so
mumbling it in her Mouth, she never spoke a word more, but fell down and died
with horrible Torture, both of Soul and Body, before she got to the Jail. The
two Daughters were Examined before Sir William Pelbam, and Mr. Butler, Justices
of Peace, Feb. 4. 1618, where Philip, the youngest, made the following
Confession:

That her Mother and Sister were very malicious against the Earl of Rutland,
his Countess, and their Children, because Margaret was turned out of the Lady's
Service; whereupon her Sister, by her Mother's Order, brought from the Castle,
the Right Hand Glove of the Lord Henry Ross, who presently rubbed it on the
Back of her Spirit, called Rutterkin; and then put it into boiling Water, after
which she pricked it very often, and then buried it in the Yard, wishing the
Lord Ross might never thrive. And so her Sister Margaret continued with her
Mother; and she often saw her Imp Rutterkin, leap on her Shoulder, and suck her
Neck. She confessed also, That she often heard her Mother curse the Earl, and his
Lady, and would thereupon boil Blood and Feathers together, using many Devilish
Speeches, and strange Gestures. She likewise acknowledged, That she herself had
a Spirit sucking her Left-breast, in the form of a White Rat, which it had done
for three or four Years past; and that when it came first to her, she gave her
Soul to it; who promised to do her good, and to force Tho. Symson to love her,
if she would suffer it to suck her: which she agreed to, and that it had sucked
her two Nights before.

Margaret, her Sister, being Examined, agreed in the Confession that Philip had
made, of their Malice to the Earl, and about the young Lord's Glove; which, for
other Circumstances, for brevity's sake I here omit.

12. About the same time, Joan Wilmot, of Goadby, a Witch, was Examined by Sir
Henry Hastings, and Dr. Fleming, Justices in Leichestershire, about the Murder
of Henry Lord Ross; who declared, That Joan Flower, told her, the Earl of
Rutland had dealt badly by her, and had put away her Daughter; and though she
could not have her Will of my Lord himself, yet she had sped my Lord's Son, and
had stricken him to the Heart, etc.

13. Another Witch, called Ellen Green, of Stathorn, in Leichestershire, was
Examined about that time by the same Justices, who confessed, That Joan Wilmot,
abovenamed, came to her about six Years since, and persuaded her to forsake
God, and betake herself to the Devil: to which she consented; who then called
two Spirits, one like a young Cat, which she named Puss, and the other in the
shape of a Mole, which she called Hiff, Hiff; who instantly came, and Wilmot
going away, left them with her, after which they leapt on her Shoulder, the
Kitling sucking her Neck under her Right-ear, and the Mole under her Left, in
the same place: after which she sent the Kitling to a Baker in the Town, who
had called her Witch, and struck her, bidding it go and Bewitch him to Death.
And the Mole she sent to Anne Daws, of the same Town, upon the same Errand,
because she had called her Witch, Whore, and Jade; and within a Fortnight after
they both died. After which she sent them to destroy two Husbandmen, named
Willison, and Williman, who died both in ten Days: these four she mur^hered
while she dwelt at Waltham. When she removed to Stathorn, where she now dwelt,
upon a Difference between her and one Patchet's Wife, a Yeoman there, Joan
Wilmot called her to go and touch Patchet's Wife and Child; which she did,
touching the Woman in Bed, and the Child in the Midwife's Arms, and then sent
her Spirits to Bewitch them to Death: the Woman languished a Month before she
died; but the Child lived only 'till next Day after she had touched it: adding,
that Joan Wilmot had a Spirit sucking on her, like a little White Dog; which
she saw: and that she gave her Soul to the Devil, to have these Spirits at
Command, for any mischievous purpose, and suffered them to suck her constantly
about the Change and Full-Moon.

14. One Anne Baker, a Witch was likewise Appreh^^^ (...) and Examined about
the same time, who confessed before Sir George Manors, and Dr. Fleming, (...)
of Peace, That she had a Spirit like a White Dog, which she called a good
Spirit; and that one Peak, and one Dennis's Wife of Belvoir told her, That the
young Lord Henry was dead, and that his Glove was buried in the Ground, which
as it wasted and rotted, in like manner did the Lord's Liver rot and waste
likewise.

15. Margaret, and Philip Flower, were arraigned at the Assizes at Lincoln,
before Sir Henry Hobart, and Sir Edward Bromley, Judges, whereupon their
confessing themselves Actors in the Destruction of Henry Lord Ross, with other
damnable Practices, they were Condemned and Executed at Lincoln, March 11. And
the rest questionless suffered according to their Deserts. History of Demons,
p. 140, 141, etc. Discov. of Witchcraft, etc.

16. Anno Dom. 1645. There was a notable Discovery of several Witches in Essex,
and among others, one Elizabeth Clark was accused of this horrid Crime, and
Informations taken against her before Sir Harbottle Grimstone, and Sir Thomas
Bows, Justices of Peace for that Country. John Rivet, of Mannintree, deposed,
That about Christmas his Wife was taken sick and lame, with such violent Fits,
that he verily believed her Distemper was more than natural; who thereupon went
to one Hovey, at Hadly in Suffolk, who was reckoned a cunning Woman: she told
him, That his Wife was Cursed, or Bewitched by two Women, who were her near
Neighbors; and that she believed she was Bewitched by Elizabeth Clark, alias
Bedingfield, who lived near their House; and that her Mother, and some of her
Kindred, had formerly suffered as Witches and Murderers.

At the same time Matthew Hopkins of Mannintree. declared upon Oath, That this
suspected Witch being ordered by the Justices to be watched several Nights, for
Discovering her wicked Practices, he coming into the Room where she was, with
one Mr. Stern, intending not to stay, Elizabeth Clark said, If they would
tarry a little, and do her no hurt, she would call one of her White Imps, and
play with it in her Lap: but they told her, they would not allow it. After
which, she in Discourse confessed, she had Carnal Converse with the Devil, six or
seven Years, who came to her Bed three or four times a Week, in the shape of a
proper Gentleman, with a Lac'd-band, and would say, Bessy, I must lie with you:
which she never refused. About a Quarter of an Hour after this Discourse, there
appeared an Imp somewhat like a white Dog, with red Spots, and short Legs,
which soon vanished: she said his Name was Jamara. Then another appeared like a
Greyhound, with long Legs; which she called Vinegar Tom. She told them, the
next would be a black Imp, and should come for Mr. Stern; which came
accordingly, and instantly was invisible. The last that appeared was like a
Poll-Cat, but the Head bigger

She likewise confessed, That she had five Imps of her own, and two of the
Old-Beldam, Anne Wests; and that their Imps sucked upon each other; and that
Satan would never let her rest, 'till she consented to kill the Cattle of Mr.
Edwards of Mannintree, and the Horse of one Robert Tailor.

Matthew Hopkins likewise affirmed, That going from the House of this Mr.
Edwards, to his own, about Ten that Night, with this Greyhound, the Dog
suddenly gave a Leap, and ran as if he had been in a full Course after an Hare;
and he hastening to see what it was, spied a white Thing like a young Cat, and
the Greyhound standing a-loof off, and that soon after the Imp, or Kitling,
danced about the Dog, and bit off a piece of Flesh from his Shoulder, which
made him come crying to his Master. He also declared, That coming that Night
into his own Yard, he spied a black Thing, in shape like a Cat, thrice as big,
sitting on a Strawberry-bed, and looking steadfastly on him; but going to it,
it leaped toward him, as he thought, and ran quite through the Yard, and the
Greyhound after it, to the great Gate, which it threw wide open, and then
vanished: the Dog returned shaking and trembling exceedingly.

Mr. John Stern confirms the aforesaid Information, adding, That after five
Imps had appeared, Elizabeth Clark said, she had one more called Sack and
Sugar; who had been hard at work, but would not be long e're he came; and then
he should tear Mr. Stern. And soon after she told him, That it was well he was
so quick; otherwise her Imp had soon skipped upon his Face, and perhaps had got
into his Throat, and then there would have been a Nest of Toads in his Belly:
she said likewise, that she had one Imp, for which she would fight up to the
Knees in Blood, before she would lose it.

Francis Mills, Grace Norman, Mary Philips, and Mary Parsley, who all watched
with Elizabeth Clark, declared upon Oath, That about twelve a Clock that Night
she smackt with her Mouth, and beckned with her Hand, and instantly there
appeared a white thing about the bigness of a Car. They also saw five Imps
more, whom she called by the Names aforementioned, and told them, that the Old
Beldam Anne West, did by Witchcraft kill Robert Oaks Wife of Lawford, and a
Clothier's Child of Dedham, in Essex, both which died about a Week before. She
added, That old West had the Wife of William Cole, of Mannintree, in handling;
and she died accordingly of a pining and languishing Disease.

George Turner informed upon Oath, That going to see Elizabeth Clark, after she
was apprehended, and asking her, Whether she had any hand in the Drowning of
one Thomas Turner his Brother, who was cast away at Sea, about two Years and an
half before? she answered, That the old Beldam, West, raised that Wind which
sunk his Hoy; and that she had no Hand in it.

Upon these, and other Informations, and her Confessions, Elizabeth Clark was
Arraigned, Convicted, and Executed at Chelmsford, March 27. 1645. Inform.
Witches, p. 6.

13. In the last place we will remove the Scene into New England; as we find a
Discovery made lately, and Published by the Special Command of the Governor.
Take it in the Words of the Author, Mr. C^tton Mather.

WE have now (says he) with horror, seen the Discovery of a great Witchcraft!
An Army of Devils is horribly broke in upon the place which is the Center, and
after a sort, the Firstborn of our English-Settlements: and the Houses of the
good People there, are filled with the doleful Shrieks of their Children and
Servants, tormented by invisible Hands, with Tortures altogether preternatural.
After the Mischiefs there endeavored, and since in part conquered, the
terrible Plague of Evil Angels has made its Progress into some other Places,
where other Persons have been in like manner Diabolically handled.

These our poor afflicted Neighbors, quickly after they become infected and
infested with these Demons, arrive to a Capacity of Discerning those which they
conceive the Shapes of their Troubles; and notwithstanding the great and just
suspicion, that the Demons might impose the Shapes of innocent Persons in their
Spectral Exhibitions upon the Sufferers, (which may, perhaps, prove no small
part of the Witch-plot in the issue) yet many of the Persons thus represented,
being Examined, several of them have been Convicted of a very damnable
Witchcraft: yea, more than one, twenty have confessed, that they have signed
unto a Book which the Devil showed them, and engaged in his Hellish Design of
Bewitching and Ruining our Lands.

We know not, at least I know not, how far the Delusions of Satan may be
interwoven into some Circumstances of the Confessions; but one would think all
the Rules of understanding Human Affairs, are at an end, if after so many most
voluntary, harmonious Confessions, made by intelligent Persons of all Ages, in
sundry Towns, at several times, we must not believe the main Strokes wherein
those Confessions agree; especially when we have a thousand preternatural
Things every Day before our Eyes, wherein the Confessiors do acknowledge their
Concernment, and give Demonstration of their being so concerned. If the Devils
now can strike the Minds of Men with any Poisons of so fine a Composition and
Operation, that Scores of innocent People shall unite in Confessions of a
Crime, which we see actually committed, it is a thing prodigious, beyond the
Wonders of the former Ages, and it threatens no less than a sort of a
Dissolution upon the World.

Now, by these Confessions it is agreed, that the Devil has made a dreadful Knot
of Witches in the Country, and by the help of Witches has dreadfully increased
the Knot: that these Witches have driven a Trade of Commissioning their
Confederate Spirits, to do all sorts of Mischiefs to the Neighbors. Whereupon
there have ensued such mischievous Consequence upon the Bodies and Estates of
the Neighborhood, as could not otherwise be accounted for. The Wonders of the
Invisible World, p. 11.

14. In the Year 1665, Elizabeth Brooker, Servant to Mrs. Hicron, of Honiton,
in the County of Devon, as she was serving in Dinner one Lord's Day, suddenly
felt a pricking, as of a Pin in her Thigh; the next Day she felt but little
pain; the Tuesday she was much pained, and the Pin wrought so far into her
Flesh, that she could no longer feel it with her Fingers. The Wednesday she
went to Exeter, that she might have the Advice of Mr. Anthony Smith, a
Surgeon there, of great Reputation. He, upon examining the place, would not
believe that any Pin was there, there being no Skin broken, no Swelling, nor
any other thing by which be might perceive the least Token of any such matter:
however, upon her confident and constant affirming there was a Pin, he made an
Incision; and searching with an Instrument, at length found the Pin, and took
it out: it was a little crooked, and of the larger sort of small Pins. He
presently made Application for the Cure of the Wound, which in about three
Weeks time was effected.

The day before this happened, the Woman had an unknown Person asked a Pin of
her, which she denied her, but did not suspect her. Hist. Disc. of Apparitions
and Witches, p. 65.

15. There was Published in the Year 1690, the Relation of a Ghost to one John
Dyer in Winchester-yard in Southwark; giving an Account of the amazing
Circumstances attending this Apparition; and it persuing him from place to
place with Violence used at sundry times, in Laming him, and cruel Attempts to
take away his Life, all very strange and wonderful.

16. Another Relation was Published 1683, called, A Narrative of the Demon of
Spraiton in the County of Devon: The Relation thus, About the Month of November
last, in the said Parish and County, one Francis Fey, ( Servant to Mr. Phil.
Furse) being in a Field near his Master's House, there appeared unto him in the
resemblance of his Master's Father, with a Mole-staff in his hand, as he was
wont to carry when living; the Spectrum bid him not be afraid of him, but tell
his Master, That several Legacies bequeathed by him were unpaid, naming ten
Shillings apiece to two Persons: The young Man replied, That one of them was
dead: the Ghost answered, He knew that, but named the next Relation: And
ordered him likewise to carry twenty Shillings to the Sister of the deceased,
living near Totness, and promised when he had performed these things to trouble
him no further, and then left the young Man; who took care to see the Legacies
satisfied, and carried the twenty Shillings to the Gentlewoman, but she refused
it, being sent (as she said) from the Devil. The same Night the Spectrum
appeared to him again; whereupon the young Man challenged his Promise, seeing
he had performed all according to his appointment, But his Sister would not
receive the Money: To which it replied, 'Twas true; but withal, ordered the
young Man to ride to Totness and by a Ring of that value which she would
receive; which being provided accordingly she took: and the young Man was no
further troubled. -- It further tells, and that is it that I chiefly aimed at,
That the former Spectrum speaking to the young Man of his second Wife (who was
also dead) called her wicked Woman, though the Relator knew her, and esteemed
her a very good Woman.

Now the next day after the buying and delivering the Ring, the young Man
riding home to his Master's House, with the Servant of the Gentlewoman near
Totness, and near the entrance of the Parish of Spraitan, there appeared to be
upon the Horse behind the young Man, a Spectrum resembling the old Gentleman's
Wife spoken of before. This Demon often threw the young Man off his Horse, and
threw him with great Violence to the Ground, to the great Astonishment of the
Gentlewoman's Servant, and diverse others that were Spectators of the Action. At
his coming into his Master's Yard, the Horse which the young Man rid, though very
poor, leaped at once twenty five Foot at one spring. Soon after the She
Spectrum showed herself to others in the House, viz. Mrs. Thomasin Gidly, Ann
Langdon, and a little Child, which they were forced to remove from the House:
She appeared sometimes in her own Shape, sometimes in Forms very horrid, now
and then like a monstrous Dog, beiching out Fire. At another time it flew out
of a Window in the shape of a Horse, carrying with it only one pane of Glass,
and a small piece of Iron. One time the young Man's Head was thrust into a very
strait place between the Beds-head and a Wall, and forced by the strength of
diverse Men to be removed thence; who being much hurt, was advised to be
Bleeded, and the Ligature of his Arm was conveyed from thence about his Middle,
where it was strained with so much Violence, that it had almost killed him, and
being cut in sunder, it made a strange and dismal Noise, so that the standers
by were affrighted at it.

At diverse other times he has been in danger to be strangled with Cravats and
Neckcloths, which have been drawn so close, that with the sudden Violence he
has near been choked, and hardly escaped Death. Another time one of his
Shooe-strings was observed (without the assistance of any Hand) to come of its
own accord out of his Shoe, and filing it self on the other side of the Room;
the other was crawling after it, but a Maid spying that with her Hand drew it
out, and it strangely clasped and curled about her Hand like a living Eele or
Serpent. This is testified by a Lady of considerable Quality, too great for
exception, who was an Eyewitness.

(To pass over many other fantastical Freaks); When the young Man was
returning from his Labor he was taken up by the skert of his Doublet by this
Female Demon, and carried a height into the Air; he was soon missed by his
Master and other Servants then at Labor, and after diligent enquiry no news
could be heard of him; until at length (near half an hour after) he was heard
singing and whistling in a Bog, where they found him in a kind of Trance or
Extatick Fit: when he returned again to himself, viz. about an Hour after, he
solemnly protested to them, that the Demon had carried him so high, that his
Master's House seemed to him to be but as a Hay-cock; and that during all that
time he was in perfect Sense, and prayed to Almighty God not to suffer the
Devil to destroy him; and that he was suddenly set down in that Quagmire. The
Workmen found one Shoe on one side of his Master's House, and the other on the
other side, and in the Morning espied his Peruke hanging on the top of a Tree;
by which it appears that he was carried, a considerable height, and that which
he told them was no Fiction. Extracted out of a Letter from a Person of Quality
in Devon, to a Gentleman his Friend in London, Dated May 11. 1683.

CHAP. LXXXV. Satan permitted to Hurt the Good in their Estates.
IT IS the Observation of the learned and pious Hales of Eaton, that Satan,
being the God of this World, does all he can to make the Bad Rich, and the Good
Poor. And no doubt, but as Pevia in Aristophanes the Comedian complained, Where
ever Plutus comes and takes his Residence, he either finds or endeavors to
make the People vicious. My Business is not here to search into all the Arts of
that Abaddon of Souls, all the malicious Intrcagues and Insinuations that he
uses to confer Wealth upon the Bad; and hurt innocent Persons in their
Estates. The Plot is interwoven with a mixture of so much human Policy for the
most parts that it is neither very easy nor safe to make the discovery. We
shall only consider the case as abstrasted from near human Arts and Actions.

1. Ann Leach of Misley in Essex, was likewise apprehended for the same horrid
Crime of Witchcraft at that time, against whom Richard Edwards of Mannintree
deposed, That on Sunday afternoon, driving his Cows home by her House, a black
Cow of his which he judged to be very well fell down, and died two days after;
and the next day passing by her House again, a white Cow fell down and died in
the very same place; and being both opened there could be no Disease discovered
which might occasion their Death. He likewise declared, That some Months before
he had a Child nursed by one Goody Wiles, who dwelt near Elizabeth Clark and
Elizabeth Gooding, another Witch, which Child was taken with strange Fits,
extending the Limbs and rolling the Eyes, and in two days died; and he verily
believes Ann Leach and Elizabeth Gooding were the death of his Child: and so it
appeared by Ann Leach 's own Confession which follows. Inform. Witches, p. 6.
Hist. of Them.

2. Ann Leach being examined, said, That she had a gray Imp sent her, and that
she with Elizabeth Clark and Gooding, sent their Imps about a Year before to
kill a black and white Cow of Mr. Edwards's, which was done accordingly, there
were three Imps sent, a Black, a Gray, and a White. She likewise confessed,
That thirty Years before, she sent a gray Imp to kill two Horses of Mr. Braggs
of Wisley, out of Malice to his Wife, who told her, she was suspected to be a
naughty Woman; and that she and Gooding sent each of them an Imp to murder Mr.
Edwards's Child, hers being White and the other Black; and that she had her
white Imp and two others of Robert Peirce's Wife, of Stonk in Suffolk, he being
her Brother; and that these Imps went from one to the other ^^^ing Mischief
where ever they went; and that if she did not employ them she was never well,
but when she sent them to act her Revenge, she was very healthy, and that they
usually sucked these Teats which were discovered on her Body, and often spoke
to her in a hollow Voice which she plainly understood; assuring her she should
never feel Hell Torments. She confessed further, That upon a small Quarrel with
Elizabeth the Daughter of Robert Kirk of Mannentree, about a Quoif which the
Maid refused to give her she sent her Imp to destroy her, who accordingly lay
languishing a whole Year and then died; and that she sent her gray Imp to kill
the Daughter of the Widow Rawlings of Misley, because she was put out of her
Farm, and Mrs. Rawlings put in. She also confessed, That she knew of Elizabeth
God (...) sending an Imp to vex and torment John Taylor's Wife of Mannentree,
and would have discovered (...) the Devil would not suffer her. And lastly,
That about eight Weeks before, Elizabeth Goodging, Anne West, and her self, met
at the House of Elizabeth Clark, where there was a Book read wherein there was
no goodness: She was likewise Tried and Executed at Chelmiford ^he same Year
1645. Inform. Witches, p. 8.

3. Joyce Boanes being examined about the same business confessed, That about
thirteen Years before she had two Imps which came into her Bed in the likeness
of Mice and sucked on her Body, and that she afterward employed them to go and
kill ten or twelve Lambs belonging to one Richard Welsh of St. Osyths, which
was done accordingly: And then to the House of one Thomas Clinch, where they
killed a Calf, a Sheep, and a Lamb; and that she carried the four Imps
aforementioned to kill Robert Turner's Servant, and that her Imp called Rug
made him bark like a Dog; Rose Hallybreads forced him to sing several times in
the greatest extremity of his Pains; Susanna Cocks compelled him to crow like a
Cock: and the Imp of Margaret Landish caused him to Groan in an extraordinary
manner. Upon this Confession and other Evidence, Joyce Boanes was Condemned and
Executed at Chelmsford, May 11. 1645. Idem. p. 20.

4. Susan Cock upon Examination confessed, That Margery Stoakes her Mother
lying upon her Deathbed, and she coming to see her, her Mother privately
desired her to entertain two Imps, which she said would do her good; and that
the same Night her Mother died the two Imps came to her accordingly, and sucked
on her Body, one of them being like a Mouse which she called Susan, and the
other yellow about the bigness of a Cat, which she called Bessie, and that she
employed Bessie with three Imps more belonging to the Witches abovementioned,
to kill ten or twelve Sheep of John Spall's against whom she had much Malice,
because being with Child, and desired some Curds of Wife, she denied either to
give or sell her any. She also confessed, that what was said about Robert
Turner 's Servant was true; and further, that she and Margaret Landish sent
their Imps to one Thomas Mannocks of St. Osyth, which killed six or seven of
his Hogs in revenge for his refusing to relieve her, and saying she was a young
Woman and able to work for her Living. She and Margaret Landish were both
Condemned and Executed at Chelmsford. May the 12th, 1645. with several others.
Yea, so great a number of these Vassals of Satan were discovered about this
time, that there were thirty Tried at once before Judge Coniers at Chelmsford,
July 25. 1645. whereof fourteen were Hanged, and an Hundred more detained in
several Prisons in Suffolk and Essex. Ibid. p. 22.

5. Elizabeth Clark was accused of horrible Witchcraft, in 1645, before Sir
Harbottle Grimstone, and Sir Thomas Bows, Justices of Peace for Essex. She
herself likewise confessed, That she had five Imps of her own, and two of the Old
Beldam, Anne West's; and, that their Imps sucked upon each other; and, that
Satan would never let her rest, 'till she consented to kill the Cattle of Mr.
Edward's of Mannintree, and the Horse of one Robert Tailor. Upon these
Informations, and her own Confessions, Elizabeth Clark, was Arraigned,
Convicted, and Executed at Chelmsford, March the 27th. Inform. Witches, p. 6.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Satan permitted to Hurt the Good in their Souls.
THough Satan delights in all kind of Mischief, yet none pleases him so well,
as that which has the deepest Tincture of Malice in it, and brings most
Dishonor to God, and most Unhappiness to Mankind: And therefore it is, that
though he plays sometimes at Push-pin, and small Games, the lessening of Peoples
Estates, blotting their Reputation, and the like; yet his principal aim is
still to do most Mischief to the best part of Man, his Soul: as is too gross
and evident to need any Descant or Example; yet for Method's-sake observe these
following Particulars:

1. Dr. J. Templar gave this following Discourse in a Letter to a Friend of is,
concerning one Robert Churchman, of Balsham, near Cambridge.

SIR,
YOur desire to be acquainted with some Passages concerning the Quakers in this
town, obliges me to give you the following Account.

At my first Settlement here, I found them very busy in enticing my People to
a compliance with their Persuasions in Religion. This Design they did attempt
to accomplish, by dispersing their Papers among them. Two of my Parishioners I
had a particular Eye upon, namely Robert Churchman, and his Wife: they being
Persons of a very good Life, and of a plentiful Estate, I was under a fear that
their Departure from the Church, might be a means to induce others to the same
Practice. The first, in many Discourses I had with him, did manifest a very
strong Inclination to the Principles of the Quakers. The second was so far
engaged, that the Quakers did commonly report, that a Principle was wrought in
her.

As I was one Day in Conference with the said Robert Churchman, I desired him,
that when any of their Books came to his Hand, he would do me the kindness to
bring them to me, that we might read them over together, assuring him of no
unwillingness in me, to hearken to (...) soever should appear reasonable.

What I desired he performed not long after. When I had received the Paper into
my hand, before I began to read, I suggested to him, That it would be
convenient, that the Person who had been the cause of his Seducement should be
sent for, and hear what was replied to the Contents: which he willingly
consented to. When the Quaker was come, one Branch of our Discourse was,
Whether the Scripture is to be owned as a Rule? which the Quaker denied;
asserting. That the Rule was within them. After the Expense of two or three
Hours in Discourse about this, and other Matters, I desired Robert Churchman to
take Notice, that the Quakers did not own the Scriptures for their Rule: which
before this Conference I and intimated to him, but found him unwilling to
believe. It pleased God so far to bless what was spoken, that the next time he
met his Brother, Thomas Churchman, he told him of what had passed at my House;
and that now he was assured, that the Quakers did not acknowledge the Scripture
for their Rule: and for his part, he would not be of that Religion which does
disown the Scripture in that particular.

Not long after, the Wife of the forementioned Quaker coming to his House to
visit his Wife, he met her at the Door, and told her, she should not come in;
intimating, that her Visit would make Division betwixt them, After some Parley,
the Quaker's Wife spoke unto him in these Words: Thou will not believe, except
thou see a Sign; and thou may see some such.

Within a few Nights after, Robert Churchman had a violent Storm upon the Room
where he lay, when it was very calm in all other parts of the Town; and a Voice
within him, as he was in Bed, spoke to him, and bid him, Sing Praises, sing
Praises; telling him, that he should see the Glory of the New Jerusalem: about
which time a glimmering Light appeared all about the Room. Toward the Morning
the Voice commanded him to go out of his Bed naked, with his Wife and Children.
They all standing upon the Floor, the Spirit making use of his Tongue, bid them
to lie down, and put their Mouths in the Dust; which they did accordingly. It
likewise commanded him to go and call his Brother and Sister, that they might
see the New Jerusalem; to whom he went naked about half a Mile.

When he had delivered his Message, that which spoke within him, charged them
to denounce Wrath against them, and declare, that Fire and Brimstone would fall
upon them, as it did upon Sodom and Gomorrah, if they did not obey: and so he
returned to his own House; where, upon the Floor, of a low Room, he stood naked
about three or four Hours. All that while he was acted in a very unusual
manner; sometimes the Spirit within him forced him to sing, sometimes to bark
like a Dog.

When his Brother and Sister who followed him, were very importunate with him
to resist it, it bid him to kill them, making use of these words: These my
Enemies, which would not that I should Reign over them, bring them, and slay
them before my Face. It made him to utter with great readiness many places in
Scripture, which he had no knowledge of before. The Drift of what was spoken,
was to persuade him to comply with the Quakers; and it named some which live in
the Neighboring Towns. About three or sour Hours being thus spent, he came to
himself, and was able to give a perfect Account of what had befallen him.

Several Nights after, the same Trouble returned upon him. His Wife was
tortured with extraordinary Pains; the Children which lay in the room,
complained, That their Mouths were stopped with Wool, as they were in Bed. The
Disturbance was so great, that he had Thoughts of leaving his House for a time,
and made it his Desire to be with me at mine: I prevailed with him not to be so
sudden in his Removal, but to make some further Trial. It pleased God upon a
Continuance with him in Prayer, every Day in the House, that he was at last
perfectly free from all molestation.

The Quaker hearing of his Condition, gave it out, that the Power of God would
come upon him again, and that the Wound was but skinned over by the Priest.
Which made me the more importunate with him to keep close to the Public
Service of God, and to have nothing to do with them, or their Writings.

Which Direction he followed 'till November 1661; and then perusing one of
their Books, a little after, upon the Tenth Day of that Month, his Troubles
returned: A Voice within him began to speak with him after the former manner.
The First Sentence which it uttered was, Cease thou from Man, whose Breath is
in his Nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted? The Design which he
discerned that it did aim at, was to take him off from coming to the Church
(where he had been that Day) and from hearing the Word of God. It suggested
several other Scriptures, in order to the persuading of him to a compliance
with the Quakers; and told him, That it would strive with him as the Angel did
with Jacob, until the Breaking of the Day, at which time it left him.

The two next Nights it gave him the same Molestation, saying. It must be with
him, as it was with David, Who gave no Sleep to his Eyes, nor Slumber unto his
Eyelids, until he found a place for the Lord, and Habitation for the God of
Jacob.

Upon a Wednesday at Night he was very peremptory in his resisting of it. When
it began to solicit him, he replied, That he saw it was a Spirit of Delusion;
which he would not obey. Upon which the Spirit denounced a Curse against him in
these words, Go, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire. And so left with a very
great heat in his Body.

After this, he was, in his own apprehension, in a very comfortable Condition;
and while he was considering what had happened, a Voice within him spoke to
him, saying, That the Spirit which was before upon him, was a Spirit of
Delusion; but now the true Spirit of God was come into him. It acquainted him,
that the Doctrine of the Trinity was true, and that God had an Elect People;
and that those whom the Father Elected, the Son has redeemed; and whom Christ
redeemed, the Holy Ghost sanctifies: and told him, than the Minister of the
Town would further instruct him about the Truth of these Things.

Upon Thursday Morning about Break-of-Day, it set him upon his Knees, as he was
in Bed, and bid him Farewell. The same Day it came upon him in the Field, as he
was going to, and coming from the Market, and pressed upon him to believe, that
it was the good Spirit which he was acted with, which he still doubted of.

One Night that Week, amongst many Arguments which it used to that purpose, it
told him, If he would not believe without a Sign, he might have what Sign he
would. Upon that Robert Churchman desired, if it was a good Spirit, that a Wire
Candlestick, which stood upon the Cup-board, might be turned into Brass: which
the Spirit said, he would do. Presently there was a very unsavory Smell in the
Room, like that of the Snuff of a Candle newly put out; but nothing else was
done toward the fulfilling that Promise.

Upon the Lord's Day following, he being at Church, it came upon him. When the
Chapters were named, he turned to them in his Bible, but was not able to read.
When the Psalm was sung, he could to pronounce a Syllable.

Upon Monday Morning his Speech was wholly taken from him. When I came to him,
and asked him how it was with him? he moved his Head toward me, but was not
able to speak: I waited an Hour or two in the Room, hoping that his Speech
might have returned unto him, and that I might have gained from him some
Account of his Condition: but finding no alteration, I desired those who were
present to join with me in Prayer. As we were praying, his Body, with much
violence, was thrown out of Bed; and then, with great vehemence, he called to
me to hold my Tongue. When Prayer was done, his Tongue was bound as before,
'till at last he broke our into these words, Thine is the Kingdom, Thine is the
Kingdom: which he repeated, I believe, above an Hundred times. Sometimes he was
forced into extreme Laughter, sometimes into Singing: his Hands were usually
employed in beating his Breast: all of us who stood by, could discern unusual
Heavings in his Body.

This Distemper did continue toward the Morning of the next Day; and the Voice
within him signified to him, that it would leave him, bidding him to get upon
his Knees, in order to that end; which he did, and then presently he had a
perfect Command of himself.

When I came to him, he gave me a sober Account of all the Passages of the Day
before, having a distinct Remembrance of what the Spirit forced him to do, and
what was spoken to him by those who stood by. In particular he told me, he was
compelled to give me that Disturbance in Prayer, which I before mentioned, the
Spirit using his Limbs and Tongue as it pleased, contrary to the Inclination of
his own Mind.

Upon the Thursday following, the Spirit began to rage after its former manner,
as I was at Prayer with him; it was very discernable how it wrought upon his
Body, forced him to grate his Teeth and draw his Mouth awry. He told me after I
had done, that it hid him to denounce Woe against me. It pleased God upon
continuance in Prayer with him, at last to release him of all his Trouble, and
so far to make it advantageous to him and his Wife, and some others, which were
too much biased with the Principles of the Quakers, that now they have a
perfect dislike of that way, and do diligently attend upon the public Service
of God in the Parochial Church: Sit, you may be confident of the Truth of what
is here related, by

Balsham, Jan. 1. 1681. Your assured Friend, J. T.


1. In the Year 1653, in Kendal in Westmoreland, there was one John Gilpin, who
was very desirous to associate himself with the Quakers at their Meetings; and
speaking with one of them about it, he much encouraged him to hold on his
purpose; and accordingly he went to them, when one Chapter Atkinson was Speaker,
whose drift was to deny all ministerial Teaching and Ordinances, together with
all notional Knowledge gained by the use of such means, and to become as if
they had never learned any thing, and now be taught of God within themselves;
by waiting upon an inward Light which (says he) lies low hidden under the
Earth, viz. The Old Man which is of the Earth earthly.

2. Gilpin was immediately taken with this new Doctrine, that he resolved to
close with them, was afraid to read any good Books, to hear any preaching
Minister, or to call to remembrance any thing which he had formerly learned
concerning God, Christ, his own Estate, or any other Subject contained in the
Scriptures; for they told him that all such Knowledge was but Notional, Carnal,
and hanging upon the Tree of Knowledge; adding, cursed is every one that hang
on this Tree.

One or them told him, that Christ was a Man, had his Failings, distrusted God,
etc.

3. At this next Meeting, the Speaker urged him to take up the Cross, daily,
saying, Carry the Cross all Day, and it will keep thee at Night: He urged him
to hearken to a Voice within him; speak much of a Light within them; which
Gilpin not yet finding was much troubled, desiring that he might fall into
Quaking thinking that thereby he should attain to the immediate discoveries of
God to him. And accordingly shortly after as he was walking in his Chamber, he
began to quake so extremely that he could not stand, but fell upon his Bed,
where he howled and cried in a terrible and hideous manner, (as others of them
used to do) yet he was not afraid, but looked upon it ad the Pains of the New
birth: after half an Hour, by degrees he ceased from howling, and rejoiced that
now he could witness against the Ministers of England, as false Prophets, and
Priests of Baal: All the Night after he was much troubled with Dreams about his
Sins; and when he awaked as he thought thereon, he perceived something lighting
on his Neck, and giving him a great Stroke, which caused much Pain, and so a
second, third, and fourth, each less then other; discerned something to enter
into his Body, which Satan suggested to be the Spirit of God like a Dove; and
he thought he heard a Voice within him saying, Is is Day: Adding twice. As sure
as it is Light, so surely shall Christ give thee Light.

Two or three days after he still waited for more light, and walking into his
Garden, he lay down with his Face to the Ground, at which time his right Hand
began extremely to shake, and he was in a great Rapture of Joy, apprehending it
to be a Figure of his spiritual Marriage and Union with Christ: Then did the
Power within raise him, and set him on his Feet, and afterward laid him on his
Back, brought his Sins into his remembrance, causing his Hand at every Sin to
strike the Ground; and he heard a Voice saying, Now is such a Sin mortified.
Then he arose up and it was said unto him, Ask what thou will of the Father in
my name, and he will give it thee. Then said Gilpin What shall I ask? It was
answered, Ask Wisdom in the first place; which he did; and it was answered,
That his Request was granted, and that he should be endowed with the Gift of
Prophecy, and Singing Praise to God.

Presently after, at another of their Meetings, after one Atkingson had spoke,
and one John Audland was speaking, Gilpin was drawn out of his Chair and thrown
upon the Ground, where he lay all Night; all which time his Body and Members
were all in Mortion, being turned from his Back on his Belly, and so back again
several times, making Crosses with his Legs, and his Hands moving on the Ground
as if he had been Writing; and he heard (as he thought) a Voice saying, That
that Writing with his Hand on the Ground, signified the Writing of the Law in
his Heart: Then were his Hands moved to his Head, and he heard the Voice saying
Christ in God, and God in thee. Which Words he was compelled to sing forth in a
strange manner, as also dives Phrases of Scripture; then the Devil raised him
up, and did him be humble; then brought him on his Knees again, saying, Stoop
low, low. Then he was drove down the Street to a Fidler's House, where his Hand
was forced to knock at the Door, and a Voice bid him say, Behold, Christ stands
at the Door and knocks; where entering in, and taking down a Base Viol, he
Played upon it and Danced: The Voice answering him, This is not beeause I love
Music, but to signify the Joy in Heaven for thy Conversion, etc.

Then being carried through the Town, he proclaimed as he went, I am the Way,
the Truth, and the Life. Once being cast upon his Back on the Ground, the Voice
said, Thou shale two Angels to keep thee; and immediately two Swallows came
down the Chimney, and sat on a Shelf near him; whereupon he cried, My Angels,
my Angels, which presently flew up the Chimny again, though the Doors and
Windows were open. Then was he cartied upon his Hands and Knees out of the Door
into the Streets, saying, He must forsake Wife, Children, and all to follow
Christ. Thus went he up the Street, till some pulled him out of the Mire, and
by force carried him into his House, his Wife and Family going to Bed; he
remained alone trembling, and questioning what these strange Actions should
mean: whereupon his Hand was forced to take up a Knife which lay by, and to
point it to his Throat, and the Voice said to him, Open a Whole there, and I
will give thee eternal Life: But he threw away the Knife, and by his Wife's
persuasions went to Bed, and in the Morning he roared out, now the Devil is
gone out of me; at which instant he and his Family heard it Thunder. Shortly
after the Devil came to him again, and told him that it was Satan that had
possessed him hitherto, but now Christ was come and had cast out Satan, and
that now what he had done before in his Clothes in obedience to Satan, he must
undo in his Shirt in obedience to Christ, Whereupon he rose out of his Bed,
went into the Street in his Shirt, 'till being stopped, the Devil told him,
That he must be carried into the House by four Women, or else for ever stand
there like a Pillar of Salt, etc. Then four Women carried him to his Bed, where
he played topsey turvey from one Bed to another; the Devil bidding him not to
fear, etc. Promising him also to give him Bread of Life to Eat, an Water of
Life to Drink; and that out of his Belly should flow Rivers of Living Water:
Then were his Teeth moved as if he were eating and he thought that he felt in
his Belly a flowing up and down of Waters: and being told that Christ's Angels
should now wait upon him, he saw two Butter-flies in the Window, he swallowed
one and put the other to his Throat, which the Voice said should enter in
there, nothing being impossible to him that believes: Then was he forced to
make Circles on the Bed; whereupon suspecting that he was acted by Satan, and
being in great fear, crying, Lord, what will thou have me to do? The Devil
answered, It is too late for thee to cry unto God, for Sentence is already
pass aginst thee. Hereupon he lay down in despair, but presently the Devil
told him the third time, That is was a white Devil that had deluded him this
second time; but that now Christ was come indeed, and would cast him out; and
accordingly he thought the Devil was ejected: But then all his Members fell on
working as if the Pangs of Death had been upon him, the Voice telling him, That
they were the Pangs of the New Birth, and that now Chrost was Newborn in him.
Thus he continued a whole day, and the Devil told him, That now he should work
Wonders, and cast out Devils in Christ's Name, etc.

A while after he began again to question whether in all this he were not
deluded by Satan, which made him fall into great fear, and then the Devil told
him, That all this while he had been serving him, and blaspheming God, and that
now it was too late to repent: hereupon he fell into a Despair and great
Terrors; when at last it pleased God to give him Repentance and Peace in his
Conscience. Whereupon he published a Narrative of these things for a Caution to
others. This was arrested under the Hand of the Mayor of Kendal, the Minister,
Schoolmaster, etc. Clark's Exampl, Vol. 1. C. 63.

4. A. C. 1653. Some Quakers came out of the North into Wales about Wre^ham; at
their Meetings after long silence, sometimes one, sometimes more, fell into a
great and dreadful Shaking and Trembling in their whole Bodies and all their
Joints with such Risings, and Swellings in their Bellies and Bowels, sending
forth such Shriekings, Yeanlings, Howlings, and Roatings, as not only
affrighted the Spectantors, but caused the Dogs to bark, the Swine to cry, and
the Cattle to run about, to the astonishmen: of all that heard them. By these
Artifices one William Spencer was drawn by them to leave the Church, and to
follow them, whereupon at several times he fell into the same quaking Fits; and
lying with one of them three several Nights, the last being much troubled, and
not able to sleep, upon a sudden he heard something buzzing and humming about
the Quakers Head like an Humble-bee, which did sore affight him, whereupon he
sought to rist, but the suaker persuaded him to lie still; and immediately
there arose a great Wind and Storm, which shook the House wherein they lay;
which adding much to his former fear, he again attempted to arise, but the
Quaker still pressed him to lie still, persuading him to expect the Power to
come (which they often promised to their Proselites) and thereupon he again
heard the former humming Noise, which more and more terrified him, so that he
strove vehemently to rise, but the Quaker laid his Head upon Spencer's
Shoulder, and did blow hard like the hissing of a Goose several times toward
his Face or Mouth, which made him leap out of his Bed in a great astonishment,
crying for a Light, and Guide to conduct him to a Neighbors House: and upon
this occasion left them altogether, testisying the truth thereof to the
Quaker's Face before many Witnesses, the Quaker not denying it. Attested under
several hands Ibid.

5. A. C. 1654. A grave Minister at the earnest desire of some Friends, went
with John Ward and Anthony Hunter to a Meeting of the Quakers, at the House of
John Hunter in Benfield-side in the County of Durham, where he found about
twenty Persons sitting all silent. And after we had sat a while (says the
Minister that gave this Relation under his Hand) all being mute, the Lord moved
me to arise and call upon his Name by Prayer: I was no sooner up, but my Legs
trembled greatly, so that it was some difficulty to me to stand; but after I
had Prayed a short space the trembling ceased. Whilst I prayed to God as a
Creator, there was but little disturbance; but when I cried in me Name to Jesus
Christ my Mediator, God in my Nature in the highest Glory appearing, and
interceding for his Saints, then the Devil roared in the deceived Souls, in a
most strange and dreadful manner, some howling, some sereeching, yealling,
roaring, and some had strange confused kind of humming and singing Noise. Such
a representation of Hell I never heard of; there was nothing but Horror and
Confusion.

After I had done Praying, (not opening mine Eyes before) I was amazed to see
about the one half of those miserable Creatures so terribly shaken, with such
strange, violent, various Motions, that I wondered how it was possible for some
of them to live. In the midst of this Confusion one of them asked me, if I was
come to torment them; to whom I applied that Word, Mat. 8.29. where the Devils
asked Christ the same Question. And whilst I spoke something of Faith, they
declared that they were come to the Faith of Devils, Jam. 2.19. who believe and
tremble; but he said that we were not attained to such a Faith.

After two Hours, as we were departing out of House, one of them cursed me with
these Words, All the Plagues of God be upon thee: whereupon I returned and
Prayed for such of them as had not committed the unpardonable Sin. Ibid.

6. A. C. 1656. There was one John Toldervy, lately Servant to Colonel Webb,
living in Cornhill, London, who published a Book called, The Foot out of the
Snare; wherein he declares how he was seduced by the Quakers, etc. Wherein he
tells us, that the first Principle infused into him was against the Ministers
and Scriptures, then against all Compliments, and Greetings, and Ornaments,
etc. A short time (says he) after my compliance with the Spirit that entered
into me, my Master coming from the Wells, I reached a Stool, took him by the
Arm, and bade him sit down William Webb, not bowing, nor pulling off my Hat,
nor calling him Master, but added, how does thy Body do? whereupon he answered,
John what is the matter? where is the Servants Obedience? where is the Masters
Honor? To which I answered, my Master was the faithful Spirit, etc. and that
all the Ministers, particularly Feak his Minister, were Ministers of the Devil,
etc. Once when his Master and his company were at Dinner, he took a Stool and
sat down at the upper end of the Table, saying, that he was the Servant of the
living God, and had more right to the Creatures then his Master. After this
(says he) I was resolved to be wholly taught by the Light within me, and so
never to sin any more: and when Customers came into the Shop, I durst nor ask
what they wanted, nor make in the Price of Wares more then one Word, nor use
any word but thee and thou, nor pull of my Hat, nor call diverse of our Wares by
the usual names, but gave them other names, which made me unfit for my Calling
whereby I should live. Upon this necessity, and by command of the Spirit within
him, he fared hard, feeding upon Stalks and Leaves of Cabbages he took up in
the Streets; pining away, was put upon expectation of Revelations; had several
Spirits appeared before him with musical Noises, and was so haunted with
repeated Apparitions and contradictory Motions of the Spirit, 'till at last by
the occasion thereof he burnt his Leg in the Fire; and became so Brainsick
with these Cour^es, and frequent Watchings together, that he was near at
Death's-door. At last it pleased God to give him some Respite for the
refreshment of his Body and the quiet of his mind; upon which he wrote the Book
abovementioned; the whole Narrative is tiresome and sad to relate; Mr. Clark
has abridged it, and I have abridged his Abridgment. Ibid.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Satan permitted to Disturb the Quiet and Peace of Persons or
Families, etc.
THE Devil is the greatest Makebate and the archest Beautifeu in the World;
setting Men^^ odds with one another, at odds with themselves, and with God to;
promoting Variance sometimes in our Families and Societies, and sometimes in
our own Breasts; and this he does not always in a clandestine way, by secret
Injections and temptations; but sometimes by Actions palpably Diabolical,
wherein his cloven Foot is conspicuous and evident enough; and wherein his Art
and Malice is plain enough to be seen by any that have not abdicated their
common Sense, as well as their Reasonable and Religious Principles.

1. In the 1678, on the Sunday after Twefth-day, William Medcalfe and his Wife
went of Church, leaving their only Daughter Alice at home, and whilst they were
there the said Alice heard a Noise in the Yard, and looking out at the Window
she saw a Man of a middle stature, with light flaxen Hair, standing at the
Stable-door, upon which she called out at the Window, and demanded of him what
he did there? he returned, that he came for a Horse which he borrowed of her
Father. She made him answer again, that she knew nothing of it, and that he
should have none 'till her Father came home. He received the Answer, and went
away for that day.

The next day her Father and Mother being gone to Sleeford Market, she saw him
again at the Stable-door, and demanded of him as before; he told her she might
go look: then he asked her where the Horses were; she answered him as short,
told him, he might go look. Upon this he began to sooth and flatter her, and
gave her many softning Words, going toward the Door as he spoke, as if he
intended to go in to her; which she observing, she hastened and bolted the Door
fast; upon which he threatened her (what these Threats were she cannot recall)
but some body knocking at the Door on the other side of the House, and she
understanding it was a Neighbor opened the Door, and told her Neighbor all
that had passed; and upon it they both ^an together into the Yard to see if he
were there, but they could not find him, neither knew they which way he went.

After this she was quiet for some time, only about two Weeks before
Shrove-tide, one Follet a Cobbler, and suspected to be the occasion of all that
happened, came to the House, and they did set him to work, moved thereto, I
suppose by Fear, for he had threatened the Daughter, but for what I cannot
learn. Whilst he was working he began to discourse to the Mother to this
effect, That her Daughter should die that Year, that he had examined some Books
which he had, and that he understood so much by them: And when he had done his
Work he bid them farewell, telling them. He was sure they would think of Follet
when they did not see him. Soon after this, Alice fell sick, and her Mother was
somewhat doubtful of her recovery, but as it pleased God she was restored again
to her former health, and continued undisturbed 'till May the Week before
Whitsuntide.

And them as she was drawing Water at a Well in the Yard, she saw the same
Person again, which I first described, at the House-door with a great Club,
endeavoring as she thought to break the Door open. Upon this she called to
him, and as'd him what he did there; upon the speaking, he flung down the Club
among a great many earthen Milk-pans, or Panchins, as they call them, and with
so great Violence, that she could not conceive but that he had broken many of
them; but afterward upon Examination she found them all whole. As soon as he
had done this he went away, and she leaving her Pail at the Well, followed him,
and saw him go down the Street, but at the turning of the Lane lost the sight
of him, and could not recover it. This was on Monday, and she saw him every Day
that Week, but nothing passed between them; and several times she called her
Father out that he might see him, but he never could.

On Saturday he appeared to her in a more dreadful manner at the Hall-window;
when she saw him, she asked him what his business was there; he told her he
would speak with her: She asked him what he had to say, and desired him to
speak it; but he said he would not yet tell her; then he showed her a Knife,
and that passed between them then.

On the Sunday she saw him again run by the Window with a Knife in his Hand as
before, and she told her Father and Mother of it, and they both ran out but
could not see him.

On the Monday whilst she was Milking, she saw him with his Knife as before;
and thus he often afterward appeared to her, especially at the Parlour-Window,
having opened it (which had not, they think, been opened for many Years before)
and holding a Knife, only sometimes it was a shorter and sometimes a longer;
but always bloody, and so was the Hand that held it.

In the Week also before Whitsuntide, one Richard Cosins a Youth about eighteen
or nineteen Years old, and then living with Goodman Medcalfe, and now most
commonly working for Sir William York, having heard Alice describe this Man
which she so often saw, as he was walking toward Rocksome, a little place
belonging to Lessingham Parish, he met a Man which he thought to he very much
like the Man which she described. He went home and told his Master, upon which
he and his Daughter walked out that way to see if they could meet him; they
were not gone far, but the Daughter saw him, and told her Father, and pointed
which way he went that he might see him, but still as he went one way to see
him, the Daughter presently saw him go the contrary way, so that he never could
obtain the sight of him.

Once coming from Milking she had a good Club in her Hand, and he met her, and
asked her what she did with that Club; she being more then ordinary courageous,
told him, she had a good mind to lay it about his Pate. He made her no answer
but went away.

Another time in July, as near as they can remember, Alice made her a mess of
Furmety for her Breakfast, in was made as she tells of new Milk, which I take
notice of, because of what follows. As soon as she had began to eat it the
forementioned Follet came to the Door and asked whether they had any Shoes to
mend; she told him she thought they had, (though indeed she knew of none, but
spoke it out of fear) but that her Father and Mother being gone out she knew
not where they were: So he went away, and she returned, designing to fall again
to her Breakfast, but found it turned to a hard Curd, at which she was much
surprised, and resolved to set it by to show her Father and Mother, but she had
no sooner turned her Back, but the Dish danced about on the Table, 'till it
fell on the Ground and spilt all in the Floor, which a Neighbors Dog as they
thought coming in licked up. The same day as she was raking Hay she was taken
Lame, and continued so a quarter of a Year.

After this she was quiet again for a while, and the next time she saw him was,
when going behind the Barn upon some occasion, she espied him standing at some
distance from her, and a sudden blast of Wind took her Hat from off her Head
and carried it to his Feet, but she was not much daunted at it, but ran to him
and took it up, and then he disappeared.

One Sunday in the middle of all her Troubles, as she was stooping to take up a
Pin, he appeared to her and told her, that Follet was the cause of all her
Troubles, and so left her.

Hitherto I have given you as exact an Account as I could get from them, as to
the time: That which follows I set down without observing the Circumstances of
Time, or Order of Action, because I can learn no certainty of it from them, but
the Matter of Fact is truth.

Often when they were gone to Bed, the inner Doors were flung open, as also the
Doors of a Cupboard which stood in the Hall; and this with a great deal of
Violence and Noise. And one Night the Chairs, which when they went to Bed stood
all in the Chimney-corner, were all removed and placed in the middle of the
Room in very good order, and a Meal-sieve hung upon one cut full of Holes, and
a Key of an inner Door upon another. And in the Daytime, as they sat in the
House spinning, they could see the Barn-doors often flung open, but not by
whom: Once as Alice sat spinning the Rock or Distaff leapt several times out
of the Wheel into the middle of the Room; upon which she said, she thought
Follet was in it. She had no sooner said the Words, but she saw Follet ride by
to Sir William York's House, about some business with him, relating to him as a
Justice; with much more such ridiculous stuff as this is, which would be
tedious to relate. See the whole Story in Mr. Glanvil's Saducis. Triumph. p.
499.

2. The Story of the Devil of Mascon is notorious, who a long time disturbed
the Quiet of Mr. Perrheaud and his Family, by tumbling about the Chairs,
throwing down his Brass and Pewter, drawing the Curtains of his Bed, walking
about the Chambers, whistling, singing, talking familiarly to them; sadling the
Horse in the Stable with the Crupper toward the Horses Head; sometimes
disturbing them at their Devotions, answering Questions put to them, and
telling them things far off; with many ludicrous Fits: and disputing with a
Papist Officer of the City, and whirling him often about, and at last cast him on
the Ground, and sending him home distracted with the Wages of his Curiosity, is
sufficiently attested by the Honorable Mr. Robert Boil, who prefixed an
Epistle to it; owning it a an undoubted Truth, being acquainted with the Author
Mr. ^errheand: as was also his Brother the Earl of Orkny, and Dr. Peter
Durmouling Prebend of Canterbury; all which have believed it and attested the
truth of it. Besides, could it be counterfited and never contradicted since the
first Publication of it, in a City where many of both Religions had leave to
crowd in at certain Houses, where they were certain Witnesses what was spoken
and acted by their sporting Devil Historian. Discourse of Apparitions and
Witches, p. 16.

3. The Story of the haunting of Mr. Mompesson's House in Wiltshire is famons,
and Printed in part by Mr. Joseph Glanvil. Mr. Mompesson is yet living, no
melancholy nor conceited Man; the truth not doubted of by his Neighbors:
within this Month, I spoke with one of them an Attorney, who said, that the
Noises heard, the visible moving about of the Boards before their Faces, and
such like, were all undoubtedly true; and the thing unquestioned by Mr.
Mompesson (who to his great Cost and Trouble was long molested by it) and his
Neighbors, and those that purposely went thither to see it. Notwithstanding,
that when some unbelievers went from London to be satisfied, nothing was done
when they were there; for as God owes not such Remedies to Unbelievers, so
Satan has no desire to cure them. Ibid. p. 41.

4. In May 1679. Sir William York being from home, there was a great Noise made
by the lifting up of the Latch of the outmost Door, which continued with great
Quickness and Noise for the space of two or three Hours, 'till betwixt ten and
eleven it Clock in the Night; his Lady then being at home with few Servants
apprehended it to be Thieves, and thereupon they went to the Door and spoke to
them and afterward winded a Horn and raised the Town, and upon the coming in
of the Town the Noise ceased, and they heard no more of it 'till May following.

And then Sir William being at London, the same Noise was made at the Door as
before, for two or three Nights together, and then they began to believe it to
be occasioned by some extraordinary means. This was heard alike by twenty
several Persons then in the Family, who looking out at the Windows over the
Door heard the Noise but saw nothing. About a Month after, when Sir William had
returned from London he being in Bed, and his Lady ready to go in, he heard the
same Noise again, which held about half a quarter of an Hour and then ceased,
and began again several times that Night; the same Persons being then in the
House also, and taking the same care to discover it: At the end of this
knocking, there was as if it were a thrusting with a Knee, only more violent.
These Noises continued with some variation to the great disturbance of the
whole Family, 'till such time as they thought of removing from the House, and
Sir William's Attendance was required at the Parliament in October following:
But from that time they were never heard more. Glanvil's Saducis. Triumph. p.
509.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Satan Hurting by Charms, Spells, Amulets, etc.
I Do not mean here that the Devil has always his desired Success upon the
Souls of Men in these things; but through the Permission of Almighty God he is
able, and oftentimes does strange and wonderful Actions upon the Use or
Application of Charms, Amulets, Spells, etc. on purpose to amuse the World, and
tempt Mankind to leave the ordinary, natural, lawful, or scriptural Methods,
and address to him in a way of superstitious or foolish Devotion. And I desire
the Reader to consider soberly with himself in cases of this nature, what Cause
within the Cope of mere Nature, or within the Bounds of that which is lawful,
just, and good, such Effects as I shall mention hereafter can be attributed to:
Lei him Read and Pause, and tell me seriously whether the Effects following are
to be fathered upon the Cause in sight; or whether there be not something
behind the Curtain latent to our Senses, that is the Author; and if so, Whether
a good or evil Spirit, at least a Spirit? and then let him proceed to draw
Inferences accordingly; which any Man of Sense and unbiassed in Judgment may
easily do.

1. Bodinus relates, how himself and several others at Paris, saw a young Man
with a Charm in French, move a Sieve up and down. More's Antid. against
Atheism, p. 164.

2. And that ordinary way of Divination which they call Coskinomancy, or
finding who stole this or spoiled that, by the Sieve and Sheers, Pictorius
Vigillanus professes he made use of thrice, and it was with success. Ibid.

3. A Friend of mine, says Mr. H. Moor, told me this Story concerning Charms,
that himself had an Horse, which it he had stood sound had been of a good
Value; his Servants carried him to several Farriers, but none of them had the
skill to Cure him. At last, unknown to their Master, they led him to a Farrier
that understood some tricks more then ordinary, and dealt in Charms or Spells,
or such like Ceremonies; by Virtue of these he made the Horse sound. The owner
of him after he had observed how well his Horse was, asked his Servants how
they got him cured; whence, understanding the whole matter, and observing also
that there was an S. branded on his Buttock, which he conceited stood for
Satan, chid his Servants very roughly, as having done that which was
unwarrantable and impious. Upon this profession of his dislike of the Fact, the
Horse forthwith fell as ill as ever he was, insomuch, as for his
unserviceableness he was fain to be turned loose to the Pasture. But a Kinsman
of the Owner's coming to his House, and after chancing to see the Horse in the
Grounds, took the advantage of so low a Price for so fair a Gelding, and bought
him; the Horse had no sooner changed his Master, but presently changed his
plight of Body also and became as sound as ever Ibid. p. 164, 165.

4. The Jews use the Zizith for an Amulet against Sorceries, and Preserver from
Dangers. Some superstitious Christian Women, in St. Hierom's time, wore Parvula
Evangelia, or short Sentences of the Gospel to the same purpose; and the
Papists at this Day permit the wearing about their Necks the beginning of St.
John's Gospel. Dr. Addison.

5. The Chinese (some of them) invoke the Devil at this Day, and use
Incantations. Many also in Guinea, and the East Indies, wear Rings (made by
their Fetissero for Gods) next their Bodies, for Preservatives. View of the
English Acquisitions in Guinea.

6. Martin Del-rio gives us the Relation of several Demons, expulsed out of
possessed Persons, by the recital of the Lord's Prayer, the Angels Salutation
(Ave Maria) the beginning of St. John's Gospel, (The Word was made Flesh) the
Name of Jesus, the Sign of the Cross, the Apostles Creed, the Rosary, the
Litanies of the Saints, Salve Regina, etc. the Relics of the Saints, Holy
Water, Agnus Dei's, pious Sentences, Psalms, Ringing of Bells, etc And is very
angry with those Heretics, (as he calls them) who have no more Modesty, or
Grace, than to laugh at these as superstitious Fancies Delrius Disquis. Mag. L.
6. C. 2. 3. Q. 3.

7. Most of the common Charms used by our Country People; and old Women, and
ignorant Quacks, are nothing else but a certain Jargon of hard Words, designed
on purpose to cheat the Fancies of the credulous Patient, into a strong
Imagination and Confidence of the Effect promised: as I remember a Friend of
mine told me once, when he was at the University, he wrote on a Piece of Paper
those words, Barbara Celarent Daris Fario Baralipton: which when he had done,
he chewed the Paper in his Mouth, and made it in the form of a Pill, and gave
it to his Bed-maker, an old Woman, then afflicted with an Ague, with this
assurance, That if the would take that, and swallow it down, it would certainly
cure her Ague: she did as she was directed, and as my Friend told me, was
afterward effectually cured.

8. This which follows, was not so innocent an application: When I was at
Oxford, one -- Smith. Apprentice to Mr. John Knibb, Clock-maker, still living
in that City, out of Curiosity went to an old Vagrant Fortune Tellers then in
Town, to know his Fortune; he receives from her a Scroli of Paper, which he was
to wear under his Heel that Day, and at Night to put under his Head: in the
Night he was disturbed with an unexpected Storm of Wind, which threatened to
blow down the House: upon which he awaked, lay sweating in Bed, and dreading
the Effects of it, 'till near Morning: when the Tempest ceasing he fell asleep,
and dreamed, That a Coach with two or three Gentlewomen in it, all in Mourning,
came to the House, where they made a stop, and one of them looks out of the
Coach, and invited him into them. I came to the House next Day, where his
Master and he, both told me, and others, the Story with some Concernment and
Passion.

About half a Year after the young Man removes to London, and there in a short
time fell sick and died.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Satan Hurting, by Interposing with Melancholy Diseases.
IT IS no Point of Generosity or Bravery to set upon Persons, when they are
infeebled with any Calamity, or afflicting Circumstances; yet the Devil, who
cares for nothing so much as the satisfying of his malicious Appetite, has
this cowardly Trick with him, that he takes opportunity from our Weaknesses, to
attack us with double Wickedness; to surprise us with Assaults, when Nature
most fails us; to countermine the Divine Goodness, which is most abundant to us
at such times: For as Man's Extremity is God's Opportunity, for showing of
Mercy, so it is the Devil's for the discovery of his Malice.

1. Aug. 24. 1662. says Mr. Baxter, a Gentlewoman of London came to me
secretly with her Sister, an Witness (Persons, as commonly called, of Quality
and Moderation) to be resolved how to expound a strange thing that had befallen
her; which was, That as she was Praying in secret, she begged for the
Deliverance of the Church and Religion, and Ministers, from the dreaded
Sufferings that were determined, and the sad Effects of Persecution, Division,
and Public Dangers; and it was suddenly given her as an Answer, That there
should he a speedy Deliverance, even in a very short time. She desired to know
which way: and it was by somewhat on the King; which I refused to hear our,
whether it was Change or Death: it being set strongly on her as a Revelation,
she earnestly prayed, That if this were a Divine Impulse and Revelation, God
would certify her by some visible Sign: and she ventured to choose the Sign
herself, and laid her Hand on the outside of the upper part of her Leg, and
begging of God, That if it were a true Answer, he would make on that place some
visible Mark: and there was presently the Mark of black Spots, like as if a
Hand had burnt it: which her Sister witnessed, she saw presently, and after;
there being no such thing before. But the Woman's strange Impulse and Mark,
proved but a Delusion. Hist. Disc. Appar. Witches, p. 181.

2. Mr. Clark gives this Account of the Sickness of Mr. Rich. Rothwell: He had
a Vertigo capitis, (Forty Fits in an Hour) and every one of them accompanied
with mischievous Temptations, which when the Fit was over, he dictated and writ
down: these held about three Weeks, in which time he had the Advice of learned
Physicians from London, York, New Castle, Durham, and other places, they all
jumped in their Judgments, imputing it to be much Study, Fasting, and inward
Trouble of Spirit; their Prescriptions wrought kindly, but removed not his
Disease: he desired diverse Christians to pray for him on a Day prefixed, and
promised to join with them as well as he could, with some others that should be
with him, assuring them, That he was confident that Disease would not be
removed but by Prayer and Fasting.

The Morning of that Day he had a Fit continued four Hours together upon him,
and the Devil set upon all that while, with most dreadful Temptations, telling
him, he would make him the Scorn of Religion, and every Man should reproach it
for his sake, that had before by his means looked toward it: that he should
never preach more, but should blaspheme the Name of God he had preached, with
many like Suggestions: God gave him Courage, Comfort, and Victory over them
all. The Devil told him, if he did fast and pray that Day, he would torment and
hinder him, etc. We met at the time appointed, and Master Rothwel would needs
have me to perform the Duty, which through God's Goodness I did, and the Devil
was not permitted to hinder or interrupt him or us, and God heard our Prayers,
so that he had never a Fit after that; and the Sabbath-sevennight following, he
preached, but after many Wrestlings with Satan, who told him, he would make him
mad, and before all the People in the Pulpit, make him a Scorn, if he did
adventure to preach. Nevertheless, his Faith in Christ overcame his Fear of
Stan, and he preached with great Assistance and Comfort upon that Text, Psalm.
116.9. I will walk before the Lord, in the Land of the Living. Nevertheless,
that Sickness did so weaken his Brain, that ever after he was inclining to some
Infirmities; which Love must cover. See his Life.

3. I have spoke elsewhere of Mr. Charles Langford in his Book; to which I
refer my Reader: only take Notice of the Complaint which he makes concerning
his own Case, in his own Words: If by Fever, Melancholy or other Bodily
Distempers, the Natural Spirits (which are the Cursitors between the Body and
the Soul) are made incapable of performing their Office aright, then is Satan
sure to be up and doing; every Affliction is an Hour of Temptation, the Dark is
his Delight; now is the time for him to lay his Delusions upon the Fantasy,
and to charge Sin upon the Soul, when he finds it most unable to resist, and
ready to embrace end believe it. Langford's God's Wonderful Mercy in the Mount
of Woeful Extremity, Preface.

See more in the next Chapter and in the Chapter of Discontentedness, etc.

CHAP. XC. Satan Hurting by Temptations, Injections, etc.
As for ordinary Temptations to ordinary Sins, in the common way, they are too
obvious to every sensible Christian, than to need a particular Discourse: all
that I intend here, is to make a Remark upon some that are more strange and
unusual; either as to the Greatness of the Sins the Temptations direct to, or
the Season, or the Conveyance. For Satan does not always keep the same Road,
nor the same Pace; but sometimes spurs on with more violence, and changes his
Path, and varies his Methods: sometimes he roars like a Lion, and drives on,
like Jehu, Furiously, as if he would drive Souls to Hell without fear of any
Opposition, or possibility of Remedy.

1. Anthony Wildgoose being visited An. 1634, with a violent burning Fever,
upon Recovery being visited by some Friends, who prayed with him, and sung a
Psalm or two, viz. Psalm. 15. and Psalm. 13. when they came to the last Verse, I
will give thanks unto the Lord, etc. Satan standing at his Right Hand, (to use
his own words) tempted him to blaspheme the great and dreadful Name of God,
with the words of Job's Wife, To curse God, and die, etc. And this he forced so
vehemently into his Mind, that he had no power to resist him; insomuch, that he
thought verily, he had done it indeed: which occasioned much Trouble of Mind to
him, so that he had very little Sleep Night or Day, and was verily persuaded,
the Devil would carry away suddenly Body and Soul into Hell: and so he
continued, crying out, That he had committed the unpardonable Sin, despairing
of God's Mercy; 'till upon a Minister's Vifit and Instructions, he recovered a
little; but by and by fell into worse Torment of Mind than before, as if he had
been fallen into the very Depths of Hell; and in a Trance of some Hours
continuance, after he had seemed to converse awhile with Devils, who tormented
him with Whips on a Bed of Iron; he though he was restored from thence, and
stood upon the Earth, and that all the Sky was on a Light-fire, and that Jesus
was come to judge the Earth, and was set upon his Throne, and he to appear
before him immediately. And then looking on himself as a most vile, black,
deformed, ugly Creature: Oh! (thought he) if I were but like such and such!
Afterward recovering from his Trance and Illness of Body, he continued in ill
State of Mind a long time; sometimes ready to make away himself, living
melancholy and discontented; once putting a Knife to his Throat, and drawing
Blood; but upon better Thoughts he withdrew, escaping as a Bird out of the
Snare, etc. Miracles of Mercies, p. 2, 3, 4.

2. While Mr. Eliot was preaching of Christ to the Indians, a Demon appeared to
a Prince of the Eastern Indians, in a shape that somewhat resembled the Person
of Mr. Eliot, or of an English Minister, pretending to be the English-man's
God. The Spectre commanded him, To forbear the Drinking of Rum, to observe the
Sabbath Day, and to deal justly with his Neighbors: all which had been
inculcated in Mr. Eliot's Ministry; promising withal unto him, That if he did
so, at his Death he would ascend unto a happy place; otherwise descend unto
Miseries. But the Apparition, all the while, never said one word about Christ;
which was the main Subject of Mr. Eliot's Ministry. The Sachim received such an
Impression from the Apparition, that he dealt justly with all Men, except in
the bloody Tragedies and Cruelties he afterward committed on the English, in
our Wars: he kept the Sabbath Day like a Fast, frequently attending in our
Congregations: he would not meddle with any Rum, though usually his Countrymen
had rather die, than to deny themselves. At last, and not long since, this
Demon appeared again unto the Pagan, requiring him to kill himself: and
assuring him, That he should revive in a Day or two, never to die any more. He
thereupon diverse times attempted it; but his Friends very carefully prevented
it: however, at length he found a fair Opportunity for this foul Business, and
hanged himself; you may be sure, without his expected Resurrection. But it is
easy to see, says my Author, what a Stumbling Block was here laid before the
miscrable Indians. Mather in Mr. Eliot's Life.

3. Mr. Powel speaking concerning a Woman, by Name E. C. who at the Birth of a
Child, she had very great Temptations of destroying herself, and have had
oftentimes a Knife put into her Hand to do it; so that she durst not be left by
herself alone: and when she had considered what the Cause of it might be, her
Conscience did hint most, her neglecting of Duties to have performed, they
being the Ordinances of God.

Thus she continued, 'till two Years ago she buried her Child, the which was a
very great trouble to her to part with: and then was she more convinced of Sin,
which caused her Burden to be the greater, so that she could seldom have any
other Thoughts but of Desperation; but the Lord keeping her by his great Mercy,
so that sometimes she could pray with Devotion; and discerning the Lord to
remove this great Trouble from her, she did plainly find, that those great
Temptations were very much lessened; the which is a great Comfort unto her
Spirit. Believers Experiences, p. 25.

CHAP. XCI. Satan Hurting by Dreams.
That God has made use of Dreams and Visions of the Night, to awaken Men to
their Duty, and a Sense of the Dangers they were in, is demonstrated already:
and it is not unreasonable to believe, that the Devil can in this Case too,
transform himself into an Angel of Light, and impose upon the Imaginations of
Men, by strange deluding Fancies and Idea's, formed on purpose to trick their
Minds into a Snare, and to allure them into some Trap of either Sin or Misery,
that he has laid for them.

1. King James the Fifth, of Scotland, was a great Enemy to the Light of the
Gospel, which in his Days broke forth in that Kingdom, viz. about the Year
1541; and out of a blind and bloody Zeal, was heard to say, That none of that
Sort should expect any Favor at his Hands; no, not his own Sons, if they
proved guilty. But not long after, Sir James Hamilton being suspected to
incline that way, was falsely accused of a Practice against the King's Life, and
being Condemned was Executed. Shortly after, the King being at Linlithgow, on a
Night, as he slept, it seemed to him, That Thomas Scot, Justice-Clerk, came
unto him with a Company of Devils. crying, Wo-worth the Day, that ever I knew
thee, or thy Service; for serving thee against God, and against his Servants; I
am now adjudged to Hell torments. Hereupon the King awaking, called for Lights,
and causing his Servants to arise, told them, what he had heard and seen.

The next Morning, by Daylight, Advertisement was brought him, of this Scot's
Death; which fell out just at the time, when the King found himself so
troubled, and almost in the same manner: for he died in great extremity, often
uttering these words, Justo Dei Judicio comdemnatus sum: (by the righteous
Judgment of God I am condemned). Which being related to the King, made the
Dream more terrible.

2. Another Vision he had in the same place, not many Nights after, which did
more affright him: Whilst he lay sleeping, he thought, He saw Sir James
Hamilton, whom he had caused to be Executed, come with a Sword drawn in his
Hand, wherewith he cut off both his Arms; threatening also to return within a
short time, and deprive him of his Life. With this he awaked; and as he lay
musing what this might import, News was brought him of the Death of his two
Sons, James and Arthur, who died at St. Andrews, and Strinling, at one and the
same Hour.

The next Year, viz. 1542, being overcome with Grief and Passion, himself died
at Faulkland, in the Thirty second Year of his Age. Archbishop Spoteswood 's
History of the Church of Scotland. Clark's Mirror, Chapter 7. p. 34, 35.

I am not sure, that these particular Instances are properly placed under this
Head: I leave it to my wise and judicious Reader to consider, whether or no,
these were Divine Admonitions, or Satanical Illusions. Mr. Clark has accounted
them as Satanical.

But it is certain, the Vulgar sort of People are so fond of observing their
Dreams, and some pretended wise Men and Women, of a superstitious Kidney, do
promote this Fancy extremely, and undertake to prescribe Rules for the making a
Judgment upon them; and by that means do no small hurt to some weak,
hypochondriacal, and melancholic Spirits.

How often shall we hear them whining out their Complaints, upon the Account of
some late Dream, in expectation of some sad Disaster, or Malady, that they
believe with much Confidence will befall them! And sometimes fretting and
pining to that extremity, that no Comfort will down with them, 'till the Date
of their Dream be fully expired, And I doubt not, but Comfort will down with in
promoting these silly and troublesome Conceits.

CHAP. XCII. Satan Hurting by Witchcraft.
ATheism and Sadducism have got such Ground in the World of late Ages, that
it is no vain Undertaking to write of Devils, and the Mischief done by them to
Mankind, by the Mediation of a sort of People, that have Familiar Communion
with them. To transcribe all has been writ upon this Subject by Dr. More, Mr.
Glanvil, Mr. Baxter, Scheggius, Remigius, Delrio, Mather, etc. would make up a
large Volume, enough to confute any, whose Faces are not harder than Brass, and
their Hearts than Iron: it shall be enough to say so much as shall suffice to
convince those, who are industrious enough to read, patient enough to
deliberate, and have humility and honesty enough to be serious and impartial.
And as for the rest, Qui vult Decipi decipiatur.

1. In Pinola there were some who were much given to Witchcraft, and by the
Power of the Devil did act strange Things: Amongst the rest, there was one Old
Woman, named, Martha de Carillo, who had been by some of the Town formerly
accused for Bewitching many; but the Spanish Justices quitted her, finding no
sure Evidence against her: with this grew worse and worse, and did much harm;
when I was there, two or three died, withering away, declaring at their Death,
That this Carillo had killed them, and that they saw her often about their
Beds, threatening them with a frowning and angry Look: the Indians for fear of
her, durst not complain against her, nor meddle with her. Whereupon I sent
(says my Author) unto Don Juan de Guzman, the Lord of that Town, that if he
took not Order with her, she would destroy the Town.

He hearing of it, got for me a Commission from the Bishop, and another Officer
of the inquisition, to make diligent and private Enquiry after her Life and
Actions. Which I did, and found among the Indians many and grievous Complaints
against her, most of the Town affirming, that she was certainly a most
notorious Witch; and that before her former Accusation, she was wont to go as
she had occasion about the Town, with a Duck following her; which when she came
to the Church, would stay at the Door 'till she came out again, and then would
return with her; which Duck they imagined was her beloved Devil, and Familiar
Spirit; for that they had often set Dogs at her, and they would not meddle with
her, but rather run away from her. This Duck never appeared more with her,
since she was formerly accused before the Justice; which was thought to be her
Policy, that she might be no more suspected thereby.

This Old Woman was a Widow, and of the poorest of the Town in outward show,
and yet she had always store of Money, which none could tell which way she
might come by it.

Whilst I was thus taking privy Information against her, (it being the time of
Lent, when all the Town came to Confession) she among the rest, came to Church
to confess her Sins, and brought me the best Present and Offering of the Town:
for whereas a Rial is common, she brought me four; and besides a Turkey, Eggs,
Fish, and a little Bottle of Honey. She thought thereby to get with me a better
Opinion than I had of her from the whole Town.

I accepted of her great Offering, and heard her Confession; which was of
nothing but Trifies, which could scarcely be judged sinful Actions. I examined
her very close, of what was the common Judgment of all the Indians, and
especially of those who dying, had declared to myself, at their Death, that she
had Bewitched them, and before their Sickness had threatened them with Death
about their Beds, none but they themselves seeing her? To which she replied
weeping, That she was wronged.

I asked her, How she being a poor Widow, without any Sons to help her, without
any Means of Livelihood, had so much Money, as to give me more than the richest
in the Town? How she came by that Fish, Turkey, and Honey, having none of this
of her own about her House? To which she replied, That God loved her, and gave
her all these Things; and that with her Money she bought the rest I asked her
of whom? She answered, That out of the Town she had them.

I persuaded her to much Repentance, and to forsake the Devil, and all
Fellowship with him: buy her Words and Answers were of a Saintly and Holy
Woman; and she earnestly desired me to give her the Communion with the rest
that were to receive the next Day: which I told her, I durst not do, using
Christ's Words, Give not the Childrens Bread unto Dogs, nor cast Pearls unto
Swine; and it would be a great Scandal to give the Communion unto her, who was
suspected generally; and had been accused for a Witch. This she took very ill,
telling me, That she had for many Years received the Communion, and now in her
Old Age it grieved her to be deprived of it. Her Tears were many yet I could
not be moved with them; but resolutely denied her the Communion, and so
dismissed her.

At Noon, when I had done my Work in the Church, I had my Servants go to gather
up the Offerings, and gave Order to have the Fish dressed for my Dinner, which
she had brought; but no sooner was it carried into the Kitchen, when the Cook
looking on it, found it full of Moggots, and stinking; so that I was forced to
hurl it away: with that I began to suspect my old Witch, and went to look on
her Honey, and pouring it our into a Dis^, I found it full of Worms; her Eggs I
could not know from others, there being near an Hundred offered that day; buy
after as I used them, we found some rotten, some with dead Chickens in them;
the next Morning the Turkey was found dead; as for her four Rials, I could not
perceive whether the had bewitched them out of my Pocket, for that I had put
them with many other which that day had been given me, yet as far as I could, I
called to Memory who, and what had been given me, and in my judgment and
reckoning, I verily thought that I missed four Rials; at Night when my Servants
the Indians were gone to Bed, I sat up late in my Chamber, betaking my self to
my Books and Study, for I was the next Morning to make an Exhortation to those
that received the Communion. After I had studied a while, it being between ten
and eleven of the Clock, on a sudden, the chief Door in the Hall (where in a
lower Room was my Chamber, and the Servants and three other Doors) flew open,
and I heard one come in, and for a while walked about; then was another Door
opened, which went into a little Room where my Saddles were laid; with this I
thought it might be the Blackamore Miguel Dalva, who would often come late to
my House to Lodge there, especially since my fear of Montenegro, and I
conjectured he was laying up his Saddle, I called to him by name twice or
thrice from within my Chamber, but no Answer was made, but suddenly another
Door that opened to my Garden flew open, wherewith I began within to fear, my
Joints trembled, my Hair stood an end, I would have called out to the Servants,
and my Voice was as it were stopped with the sudden Affrightments; I began to
think of the Witch, and put my trust in God against her, and encouraged my self
and Voice, calling out to the Servants, and knocking with my Cane at the Door
within that they might hear me, for I durst not open it and go out; with the
Noise that I made the Servants awaked and came out to my Chamber Door; then I
opened it, and asked if they had not heard some body in the Hall, and all the
Doors opened, they said they were asleep and heard nothing, only one Boy said,
he heard all, and related unto me the same that I had heard.

I took my Candle then in my Hand and went out with them into the Hall to view
the Doors, and I found them all shut, as the Servants said they had left them;
then I perceived that the Witch would have affrighted me, but had no power to
do me any harm; I made two of the Servants lie in my Chamber, and went to Bed;
in the Morning early I sent for my Fiscal the Clerk of the Church, and told him
what had happened that Night; he smiled upon me, and told me it was the Widow
Carillo, who had often played such tricks in the Town with those that had
offended her, and therefore he had the Night before come unto me from her,
desiring me to give her the Communion, lest she should do me come hurt, which I
denied unto him, as I had done unto herself: the Clerk bade me be of good
cheer, for he knew she had no power over me to do me any hurt.

After the Communion that day, some of the chief Indians came unto me and told
me, that old Carillo had boasted that she would play me some trick or other,
because I would not give her the Communion. But I to rid the Town of such a
Limb of Satan, sent her to Guatamala with all the Evidences and Witnesses that
I had found against her, unto the President and Bishop, who commanded her to be
put in Prison, where she died within three Months. Dr. Burthogge's Essay upon
Reason, p. 179. out of Mr. Gage 's New Survey of the West Indies, c. 20.

2. One called John Gondalez (in the County and Town aforesaid) was reported to
change himself into the shape of a Lion, and in that shape was shot in the Nose
by a poor barmless Spaniard, who chiefly got his living by going about the
Woods and Mountains, and shooting of Wild Dear and other Beasts to make Money
of them. He espied one day a Lion, and having no other aim at him but his Snout
behind a Tree, he shot at him, the Lion run away; the same day this Gondalez
was taken sick, I was sent for to hear his Confession, I saw his Face and Nose
all bruised and asked how it came; he told me then, that he had failen from a
Tree and almost killed himself, yet afterward accused the poor Spaniard for
shooting at him: the business was examined by a Spanish Justice, my Evidence
was taken for what Gondalez told me of his fall from a Tree; the Spaniard was
put to his Oath, who swore that he shot at a Lion in a thick Wood, where an
Indian could scarce be thought to have any business. The Tree was found out in
the Wood whereat the Shot had been made, and was still marked with the Shot and
Bullet; which Gondalez confessed to be the place; and was examined, how he
neither fell, not was seen by the Spaniard when he came to seek for the Lion,
thinking he had killed him; to which he answered, that he ran away least the
Spaniard should kill him indeed. But his Answers seemed frivolous, the
Spaniard's Integrity being known; and the great suspicion that was in the Town
of Gondalez his dealing with the Devil, cleared the Spaniard from that which
was laid against him Idem. p. 186.

3. The same Author adds, That one John Gomez, the chiefest Indian of that
Town, of near fourscore Years of Age; the Head and Ruler of the principallest
Tribe among the Indians, whose Advice and Council was taken and preferred
before all the rest; who seemed to be a very godly Indian, and very seldom
missed Morning and Evening Prayers in the Church, and had bestowed great Riches
there. This Indian very suddenly was taken sick (I being then in my other Town
of Mixco) the Mayor-domos, or Stewards of the Sodality of the Virgin, fearing
that he might die without Confession, and they be chid for their negligence, at
Midnight called me up at Mixco, desiring me presently to go and help John
Gomez to die, whom also they said much to see me. and receive some comfort from
me. I judging it to be a Work of Charity, though the time of the Night were
unseasonable, and the great Rain might have stopped my Charity, rid nine Miles
in the dark and wet; visited the sick Gomez, who lay with his Face all mufled
up, thanked me for my Pains and Care, confessed, wept, and showed a
willingness; to die and to be with Christ; I comforted and prepared him for
Death: I went home straight to refresh my self, was presently called up again
to give Gomez the extreme Unction. As I anointed him on his Nose, Lips, Hands,
Eyes, and Feet, I perceived he was swelled, Black and Blew; I went home again,
after a small nap, some Indians came to my Door to buy Candles to offer up for
John Gomez his Soul, whom they told me was departed, and that Day to be buried
solemnly at Mass. I arose with drowsy Eyes, went to Church, found the Grave
preparing, met with two or three Spaniards, who told me of a great stir made in
the Town concerning Gomez his Death: I amused at this Information, desired a
true Account of it. They told me that Gomez was the chief Wizard in the Town,
that he was often changed into a Lion, and so walked about the Mountains; that
he was ever an Enemy to Sebastian Lopez an Ancient Indian, and Head of another
Tribe, and that both of them had two days before met in the Mountain; Gomez in
the shape of a Lion, and Lopez of a Tiger, that they fought cruelly, till Gomez
the older and weaker was tired, much bit and bruised, and died of it: Lopez was
then in Prison, and the two Tribes striving about it.

I mightily wondering at this, and resolving never more to believe an Indian, if
Gomez had so much dissembled with me and deceived me; went straight to the
Prison, where I found Lopez in Fetters, called Alguazil Major, my great Friend,
and one of the Officers of the Town, and enquired of him the cause of his
Imprisonment; he loath to tell me for fear of the Indians, at last, being
pressed by me, and made to know that I had received some notice of it from the
Spaniards before, at last told me the whole matter.

This struck me to the very Heart, to think that I should live amongst such
People, whom I saw were spending all they could get upon the Church, Saints,
and in Offerings, and yet were so privy to the Counsels of Satan; it grieved me
that the Word I Preached did then; no more good -- At last came twenty of the
chiefest of the Town, with the two Majors, Jurates, and all the Officers of
Justice, desiring me to forbear that day the Burying of John Gomez, for that
they had resolved to call a Crown Officer to view his Corpse, and examine his
Death. I made as if I knew nothing, upon which they related all unto me, viz.
That there were Witnesses in the Town who saw a Lion and a Tiger fighting, and
presently lost the sight of the Beasts, and saw John Gomez and Sebastian Lopez
parting one from another; that immediately John Gomez came home much bruised,
and upon his Deathbed declared to some of his Friends, that Sebastian Lopez
had killed him; whereupon they had him in safe Custody: That they had never
known much Wickedness of those two chief Heads of their Tribes, and prayed me
not to conceive the worse of all for a few. The Crown Officer came, and found
the Body all bruised, scratched, bitten, and sore wounded. Lopez upon this was
had to Guatemala and there hanged. Dr. Burthogge, ibid. p. 190, 191, 192. out
of Mr. Gage.

The following Relations are to be found in Mr. Increase Mather's Book of
Providence.
THere have been many in the World, who have upon conviction confessed
themselves guilty of Familiarity with the Devil. A multitude of Instances this
way are mentioned by Bodinus, Codronchus, Delrio, Jacquerius, Remegius, and
others. Some in this Country have affirmed, that they knew a Man in another
part of the World, above fifty Years ago, who having an ambitious desire to be
thought a wise Man; whilst he was tormented with the Itch of his Wicked
Ambition, the Devil came to him, with promises that he should quickly be in
great Reputation for his Wisdom, in case he would make a Covenant with him; the
conditions whereof were, That when Men came to him for his Counsel, he should
labor to persuade them that there is no God, nor Devil, nor Heaven, nor Hell;
and that such a term of Years being expired, the Devil should have his Soul:
the Articles were consented to.

The Man continuing after this to be of a very civil Conversation, doing hurt
to none, but good to many; and by degrees began to have a Name to be a Person
of extraordinory Sagacity, and was sought unto far and near for Counsel, his
Words being esteemed Oracles by the Vulgar. And he did according to his
Covenant upon all occasions, secretly disseminate Principles of Atheism, not
being suspected for a Wizard.

But a few Weeks before the time indented with the Devil was fulfilled,
inexpressible Horror of Conscience surprised him, so that he revealed the
secret Transactions which had passed betwixt himself and the Devil. He would
sometimes with hideous Roarings tell those that came to visit him, that now he
knew that there was a God and a Devil, a Heaven and an Hell: So did he die a
miserable Spectacle of the righteous and fearful Judgment of God. And every Age
does produce new Examples of those that have by their own Confession made the
like cursed Covenants with the Prince of Darkness.

5. In the Year 1664, several who were Indicted at the Assizes held at Taunton
in Somersetshire, confessed that they had made an explicit League with the
Devil, and that he did Baptize Pictures of Wax with Oil, giving them the names
of those Persons they did intend mischief unto.

6. Anno. 1678. One John Stuart, and his Sister Annabil Steuart, at the Assizes
held at Paysley in Scotland, confessed that they had been in confederacy with
the Devil; and that they had made an Image of Wax, calling it by the name of
Sir George Maxwel, sticking Pins in the sides and on the breast of it.

Such an Image with Pins in it was really found in the Witches Houses; and upon
the removal of it, the Pins being taken out, Sir George had immediate ease, and
recovered his health.

7. And no longer since than the last Year, viz. on August 25. 1682. Three
Women who were Executed at Exon in Devonshire, all of them confessed that they
had had Converses and Familiarities with the Devil.

8. The following Relations of the New England Witches, are to be found in Mr.
Cotton Mather's Wonders of the Invisible World. THE Devil exhibiting himself
ordinarily as a small black Man, has (says Mr. Mather) decoyed a fears^^ knot
of proud, froward, ignorant, envious, and malicious Creatures, to list
themselves in his horrid Service, by entering their Names in a Book by him
tendered unto them. These Witches, whereof above a Score have now confessed and
shown their Deeds, and some are now tormented by the Devils for confessing;
have met in hellish Randezvouzes, wherein the Confessors do say, they have had
their diabolical Sacraments, imitating the Baptism and the Supper of our Lord.
In these hellish Meetings, these Monsters have associated themselves to do no
less a thing, than to destroy the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ in these
parts of the World; and in order hereunto, First, they each of them have their
Specter or Devils, commissioned by them, and representing of them, to be the
Engines of their Malice.

By these wicked Specter they sieze poor People about the Country with various
and bloody Torments; and of those evidently preternatural Torments there are
some have died. They have bewitched some even so far as to make
Self-destroyers; and others are in many Towns here and there languishing under
their evil Hands.

The People thus afflicted are miserably scratched and bitten, so that the
Marks are most visible to all the World, but the Causes utterly invisible: And
the same invisible Furies do most visibly stick Pins into the Bodies of the
Afflicted, and scale them, and hideously distort and disjoynt all their
Members; besides a Thousand others of Plagues beyond these of any natural
Diseases which they give unto them. Yea, they sometimes drag the poor People
out of their Chambers, and carry them over Trees and Hills for diverse Miles
together.

A large part of the Persons Tortured by these Diabolical Specter, are
horribly tempted by them, sometimes with fair Promises, and sometimes with hard
Threatenings, but always with felt Miseries to sign the Devils Laws in a
Spectral Book laid before them; which two or three of these poor Sufferers,
being by their tiresome Sufferings overcome to do, they have immediately been
released from all their Miseries, and they appeared in Spectre then to Torture
those that were before their fellow Sufferers.

The Witches, which by their Covenant with the Devil are become Owners of
Specter, are oftentimes by their own Specter required and compelled to give
their consent, for the Molestation of some, which they had no mind otherwise to
fall upon; and cruel Depradations are then made upon the Vicinage. In the
Prosecution of these Witchcrafts, among a Thousand other unaccountable things,
the Specter have an odd faculty of clothing the most substantial and
corporeal Instruments of Torture with Invisibility, while the Wounds thereby
given have been the most palpable things in the World; so that the Sufferers
assaulted with Instruments of Iron, wholly unseen to the standers by, though to
their Cost seen by themselves, have upon snatching, wrested the Instruments out
of the Specter hands, and every one has then immediately not only beheld, but
handled an Iron Instrument taken by a Devil from a Neighbor.

These wicked Specter have proceeded so far, as to steal several quantities of
Money from diverse People, part of which Mouey has before sufficient Spectators,
been dropped out of the Air into the Hand of the Sufferers, which the Specter
have been urging them to subscribe their Covenant with Death. In such
extravagant ways have these Wretches propounded the Dragooning of as many as
they can in their own Combination, and the Destroying of others, with lingering,
spreading, deadly Diseases, till our Country should at last become too hot for
us.

Among the Ghastly Instances of the Success which those bloody Witches have
had, we have seen even some of their own Children so dedicated unto the Devil,
that in their Infancy it is found the Imps have sucked them, and rendered them
venomous to a Prodgey.

9. A Modern Instance of Witches, Discovered and Condemned in a Trial before
that celebrated Judge, Sir Matthew Hale; as Printed in Mr. Cotton Mather's
Wonders of the Invisible World. IT may cast some Light upon the Dark things now
in America, if we just give a glance upon the like things lately happening in
Europe, We may see the Witchcrafts here most exactly resemble the Witchcrafts
there; and we may Judge Hale was a Person, than whom no Man was more backward
to condemn a Witch without full Evidence.

Now one of the latest Printed Accounts about a Trial of Witches, is of what
was before him, and it ran on this wife. [Printed in the Year 1682.] And it is
here the rather mentioned, because it was a Trial much considered by the Judges
of New England.

1. Rose Cullender and Amy Duny, were severally Indicted for Bewitching
Elizabeth Durent, Anne Durent, Jane Booking, Susan Chandler, William Durent,
Elizabeth and Deborah Pacy, and the Evidences whereon they were convicted,
stood upon diverse particular Circumstances.

II. Anne Durent, Susan Chandler, and Elizabeth Pacy, when they came into the
Hall, to give Instructions for the drawing the Bills of Indictment, they fell
into strange and violent Fits, so that they were unable to give in their
Depositions, not only then, but also during the whole Assizes. William Durent
being an Infant, his Mother swore, That Amy Duny looking after her Child one
Day in her absence, did at her return confess, That she had given Suck to the
Child, (though she were an Old Woman:) Whereat, when Durent expressed her
Displeasure, Duny went away with Discontents and Menaces.

The Night after, the Child fell into strange and sad Fits, wherein it
continued for diverse Weeks. One Dr. Jacob advised her to hang up the Child's
Blanket in the Chimney-corner all Day, and at Night when she went to put the
Child into it, if the found any thing in it, then to through it without fear
into the Fire. Accordingly at Night, there fell a great Toad out of the
Blanker, which ran up and down the Hearth. A Boy caught it, and held it in the
Fire with the Tongs, where it made an horrible Noise, and flashed like to
Gunpowder, with a Report like that of a Pistol; whereupon the Toad was no more
to be seen. The next Day a Kinswoman of Duny's told the Deponent, That her Aunt
was all grievously scorched with the Fire: and the Deponent going to her House,
found her in such a Condition, Duny told her, She might thank her for it; but
she should live to see some of her Children dead, and herself upon Crutches.
But after the burning of the Toad, this Child recovered.

This Deponent further testified, That her Daughter Elizabeth, being about the
Age of ten Years, was taken in like manner as her first Child was, and in her
Fits complained much of Amy Duny, and said, That she did appear to her, and
afflict her in such manner as the former. One Day she found, Amy Duny in her
House, and thrusting her out of Doors, Duny said, You need not be so angry,
your Child will not live long: and within three Days the Child died. The Deponent
added, That she herself, not long after, was taken with such a Lameness in both
her Legs, that she was forced to go upon Crutches and she was now in Court upon
them.

It was remarkable, that immediately upon the Jury's bringing in Duny Guilty,
Durent was restored unto the Use of her Limbs, and went home without her
Crutches.

III. As for Elizabeth and Deborah Pacy, and aged Eleven Years, the other Nine;
the Elder being in Court, was made utterly senseless, during all the time of the
Trial, or at least speechless, by the Direction of the Judge, Duny was
privately brought to Elizabeth Pacy, and she touched her Hand: whereupon the
Child, without so much as seeing her, suddenly leaped up, and flew upon the
Prisoner; the Younger was too ill to be brought into the Assizes. But Samuel
Pacy, their Father, testified, That his Daughter Deborah was taken with a
sudden Lameness; and upon the Grumbling of Amy Duny, for being denied
something, where this Child was then sitting, the Child was taken with an
extreme Pain in her Stomach, like the pricking of Pins; and shrieking at a
dreadful manner, like a Whelp, rather than a Rational Creature.

The Physicians could not conjecture the Cause of the Distemper; but Amy Duny
being a Woman of ill Fame, and the Child in Fits crying out of Amy Duny, as
affrighting her with the Apparition of her Person, the Deponent suspected her,
and procured her to be set in the Stocks. While she was there, she said in the
hearing of two Witnesses, Mr. Pacy keeps a great stir about his Child; but let
him stay 'till he has done as much by his Children, as I have done by mine. And
being asked what she had done to her Children, she answered, She had been fain
to open her Child's Mouth with a Tap, to give it Victuals.

The Deponent added, That within two Days the Fits of his Daughters were such,
that they could not preserve either Life or Breath, without the help of Tap:
and that the Children cried out of Amy Duny, and of Rose Cullender, as
afflicting them with her Apparition.

IV. The Fits of the Children were various: They would sometimes be lame on one
side, sometimes on ^other. Sometimes very sore, sometimes restored unto their
Limbs, and then Deaf, or Blind, or Dumb, for a long while together. Upon the
Recovery of their Speech, they would Cough extremely, and with much Phlegm, they
would bring up crooked Pins, and at one time, a Two-penny Nail, with a very
broad Head. Commonly at the end of every Fit, they would cast up a Pin. When
the Children read, they could not pronouce the Name of Lord, or Jesus, or
Christ; but would fall into Fits, and say, Amy Duny says, I must not use that
Name. When they came to the Name of Satan, or Devil, they would clap their
Fingers upon the Book, crying out, This bites, but it makes me speak right
well! The Children in their Fits would often cry out, There stands Amy Duny, or
Rose Cullender: And they would afterward relate, That these Witches appearing
before them, threatened them, that if they told of what they saw or heard, they
would torment them more than ever they did before.

V. Margaret Arnold, the Sister to Mr. Pacy, testified unto the like Sufferings
being upon the Children, at her House, whether her Brother had removed them.
And that sometimes the Children ( only) would see things like Mice, run about
the House; and one of them suddenly snap'd one with the Tongs, and threw it
into the Fire, where it screeched out like a Rat. At another time, a thing like
a Be flew at the Face of the younger Child; the Child fell into a Fit, and at
last Vomited up a Two-penny Nail, with a broad Head; affirming, That the Be
brought this Nail, and forced it into her Mouth.

The Child would in like manner be assauted with Flies, which brought crooked
Pins unto her, and made her first swallow them, and then vomit them. She one
Day caught an invisible Mouse, and throwing it into the Fire, it flashed like
to Gunpowder. None besides the Child saw the Mouse, but every one saw the
Flash. She also declared out of her Fits, That in them Amy Duny much tempted
her to destroy herself.

VI. As for Anne Durent, her Father testified, That upon a Discontent of Rose
Cullender, his Daughter was taken with much Illness in her Stomach, and great
and sore Pains, like the pricking of Pins, and then Swooning Fits; from which
recovering, she declared, She had seen the Apparition of Rose Cullender,
threatening to torment her. She likewise Vomited up diverse Pins. The Maid was
present at Court; but when Cullender looked upon her, she fell into such Fits,
as made her utterly unable to declare any thing.

Anne Baldwin deposed the same.

VII. Jane Bockin, who was too weak to be at the assizes; but her mother
testified, That her Daughter having formerly been afflicted with Swooning Fits,
and recovered of them, was now taken with a great Pain in her Stomach, and new
Swoooning Fits. That she took little Food, but every Day Vomitted crooked Pins.
In her first Fits, she would extend her Arms, and use Postures as if she
catched at something; and when her clutched Hands were forced open, they would
find several Pins diversely crooked, unaccountably lodged there. She would also
maintain a Discourse with some that were invisibly present, when casting abroad
her Arms, she would often say, I will not have it: but at last say: Then I will
have it: and closing her Hand, which when they presently after opened, a
Lath-Nail was found in it: but her great Complaints were, of being Visited by
the Shapes of Amy Duny, and Rose Cullender.

VIII. As for Susan. Chandler, her Mother testified, That being at the Search
of Rose Cullender, they found on her Belly a thing like a Teat, of an Inch
long; which the said Rose ascribed to a Strain: but near her Privy Parts they
found three more that were smaller than the former. At the end of the long Teat
there was a little Hole, which appeared as if newly sucked; and upon straining
it, a white Milky Matter issued out.

The Deponent further said, That her Daughter being one Day concerned at Rose
Cullender's taking her by the Hand, she fell very sick, and at Night cried out,
That Rose Cullender would come to Bed unto her. Her Fits grew violent, and in
the Intervals of them she declared, That she saw Rose Cullender in them, and
once having a great Dog with her. She also Vomited up crooked Pins; and when
she was brought into Court, she fell into Fits. She recovered herself in some
time, and was asked by the Court, Whether she was in a Condition to take an
Oath, and give Evidence? She said she could: but having been Sworn, she fell
into her Fits again; and Burn her, burn her, were all the Words that she could
find power to speak. Her Father likewise gave the same Testimony with her
Mother, as to all but the Search.

IX. Here was the Sum of the Evidence: which was not thought sufficient to
Convict the Prisoners. For admitting the Children were Bewitched; yet, said he,
it can never be applied unto the Prisoners, upon the Imagination of the Parties
only afflicted: inasmuch as no Person whatsoever could then be in safety.

Dr. Brown, a very Learned Person then present, gave his Opinion, that these
Persons were Bewitched. He added, That in Denmark there had been lately a great
Discovery of Witches; who used the very same way of afflicting People, by
conveying Pins and Nails into them. His Opinion was, That the Devil, in
Witchcrafts, did work upon the Bodies of Men and Women, upon a Natural
Foundation; and that he did extraordinarily afflict them, with such Distempers
as their Bodies were most subject unto.

X. The Experiment about the Usefulness, yea, or Lawfulness, whereof Good Men
have sometimes disputed, was diverse Times made, that though the Afflicted were
utterly deprived of all Sense in their Fits, yet upon the Touch of the Accused,
they would so screech out, and fly up, as not upon any other Persons. And yet
it was also found, that once upon the Touch of an innocent Person, the like
Effect followed: which put the whole Court unto a stand; although a small Reason
was at length attempted to be given for it.

XI. However, to strengthen the Credit of what had been already produced
against the Prisoners one John Soam testified, That bringing home his Hay in
three Carts, one of the Carts wrenched the Window of Rose Cullender's House;
whereupon she flew out, with violent Threatenings against the Deponent. The
other two Carts passed by twice, loaded, that Day, afterward; but the Cart
which touched Cullender's House, was twice or thrice that Day overturned.
Having again loaded it, as they brought it through the Gate which leads out of
the Field, the Cart stuck so fast in the Gate's Head, that they could nor
possibly get it through, but were forced to cut down the Post of the Gate, to
make the Cart pass through; although they could not perceive that the Cart did of
either side touch the Gatepost. They afterward did with much Difficulty get it
home to the Yard; but could not for their Lives, get the Cart near the place
where they should unload. They were fain to unload at a great Distance; and
when they were tired, the Noses of them that came to assist them, would burst
forth a Bleeding; so they were fain to give over 'till next Morning, and then
they unloaded without any difficulty.

XII. Robert Sherringham also testified, That the Axle-tree of his Cart,
happening in passing, to break some part of Rose Cullender's House, in her
Anger at it, she vehemently threatened him, His Horses should suffer for it. And
within a short time all his four Horses died; after which he sustained many
other Losses in the sudden dying of his Cattle. He was also taken with a
Lameness in his Limbs; and so vexed with Lice of an extraordinary Number and
Bigness, that no Art could hinder the Swarming of them, 'till he burnt up two
Suits of Apparel.

XIII. As for Amy Duny, 'twas testified by one Richard Spencer, that he heard
her say, That the Devil would not let her Rest, until she were Revenged on the
Wife of Cornelius Sandswell. And that Sandswell testified. That her Poultry
died suddenly, upon Amy Duny's threatening of them: and that her Husband's
Chimney fell, quickly after Duny had spoken of such a Disaster. And a Firkin of
Fish could not be kept from falling into the Water, upon suspicious Words of
Duny's.

XIV. The Judge told the Jury, They were to Inquire now, First, Whether these
Children were Bewitched? And, Secondly, Whether the Prisoners at the Bar were
guilty of it? He made no doubt, there were such Creatures as Witches: for the
Scriptures affirmed it; and the Wisdom of all Nations had provided Laws against
such Persons. He prayed the God of Heaven to direct their Hearts in the weighty
thing they had in hand: for to condemn the Innocent, and let the Guilty of
free, were both an Abomination to the Lord.

The Jury in half an Hour brought them in Guilty upon the several Indictments,
which were Nineteen in Number.

The next Morning, the Children, with their Parents, came to the Lodgings of
the Lord Chief Justice, and were in as good Health as ever in their Lives;
being restored within half an Hour after the Witches were Convicted.

The Witches were Executed, and Confessed nothing; which indeed will not be
wondered by them, who consider and entertain the Judgment of a Judicious Writer,
That the unpardonable Sin, is most usually committed by Professors of the
Christian Religion, falling into Witchcraft.

We will now proceed (says Mr. Mather) unto several of the like Trials among
our selves. He relates five Trials, but for brevity's-sake, I Will only insert
one of 'em, viz.

The Trial of Susanna Martin, at the Court of Oyer and Terminer, held at Salem,
June 29. 1692.
I. Susanna Martin, pleading, Not Guilty, to the Indictment of Witchcraft,
brought in against her, there were produced the Evidences of many Persons very
sensibly and grievously Bewitched, who all complained of the Prisoner at the
Bar, as the Person whom they believed the Cause of their Miseries. And now, as
well as in the other Trials, there was an extraordinary Endeavor by
Witchcrafts, with cruel and frequent Fits, to hinder the poor Sufferers from
giving in their Complaints, which the Court was forced with much Patience to
obtain, by much waiting and watching for it.

II. There was now also an Account given of what passed at her first
Examination before the Magistrates. The Cast of her Eye then striking the
afflicted People to the Ground, whether they saw that Cast or no. There were
these, among other Passages, between the Magistrates and the Examinate.

Magistrate. Pray, what ails these People?


Martin. I don't know.


Mag. But what do you think ails them?


Mar. I don't desire to spend my Judgment upon it.


Mag. Don't you think they are Bewitched?


Mar. No, I do not think they are.


Mag. Tell us your Thoughts about them then.


Mar. No, my Thoughts are my own, when they are in; but when they are out, they
are another. Their Master --


Mag. Their Master: Who do you think is their Master?


Mar. If they be dealing in the Black Art, you may know as well as I.


Mag. Well, what have you done toward this?


Mar. Nothing at all.


Mag. Why, it is you, or your appearance.


Mar. I cannot help it.


Mag. Is it not your Master? How comes your Appearance to hurt these?


Mar. How do I know? He that appeared in the Shape of Samuel, a glorified
Saint, may appear in any one's Shape.


It was then also noted in her, as in others like her, that if the Afflicted
went to approach her, they were flung down to the Ground. And when she was
asked the Reason of it, she said, I cannot tell; is may be, the Devil bears me
more Malice than another.

III. The Court accounted themselves alarmed by these Things, to enquire
further into the Conversation of the Prisoner, and see what there might occur,
to render these Accusations further credible: Whereupon John Allen, of
Salisbury, testified, That he refusing, because of the weakness of his Oxen, to
Cart some Staves, at the Request of this Martin, she was displeased at it, and
said, It had been as good that he had; for his Oxen should never do him much
more Service. Whereupon this Deponent said, Do thou threaten me, thou Old
Witch? I Will throw thee into the Brook. Which to avoid, she flew over the
Bridge, and escaped. But as he was going home, one of his Oxen tired, so that
he was forced to Unyoke him; that he might get him home. He then put his Oxen,
with many more, upon Salubury Beach, where Cattle did use to get Flesh. In a
few Days, all the Oxen upon the Beach were found, by their Tracts, to have run
unto the Mouth of Merimack River, and not returned; but the next Day they were
found to have come ashore upon Plum Island. They that sought them, used all
imaginable gentleness, but they would still run away with a violence, that
seemed wholly Diabolical, 'till they came near the Mouth of Merimack River,
when they ran right into the Sea, swimming as far as they could be seen. One of
them then swam back again, with a swiftness amazing to the Beholders, who stood
ready to receive him, and help up his tired Carcass: but the Beast ran
furiously up into the Island, and from thence through the Marshes up into
Newberry Town, and so up into the Woods, and there after a while found near
Amesbury: so that of Fourteen good Oxen; there was only this saved. The rest
were all cast up, some in one place, and son in another, drowned.

IV. John Atkinson testified, That he exchanged a Cow, with a Son of Susanna
Martin's, whereas she muttered, and was unwilling he should have it: going to
receive this Cow, though he Ham-string'd her, and Halter'd her, she, of a tame
Creature, grew so mad, that they could scarce get her along, She broke all the
Ropes that were fastened unto her; and though she were tied fast unto a Tree, yet
she macle her escape, and gave them such further trouble, as they could ascribe
to no Cause but Witchcraft.

V. Bernard Peach^ testified, That being in Bed, on the Lord's Day at Night, he
heard a scrabbling at the Window, whereat he then saw Susanna Martin come in,
and jumpt down upon the Floor: she took hold of this Deponent's Feet, and
drawing his Body up into an heap, she lay upon him near two Hours; in all which
time he could neither speak nor stir. At length, when he could begin to move,
he laid hold on her Hand, and pulling it up to his Mouth, he bit three of her
Fingers, as he judged, unto the Bone: whereupon she went from the Chamber, down
the Stairs, out at the Door: This Deponent thereupon called unto the People of
the House, to advise them of what passed; and he himself did follow her. The
People saw her not, but there being a Bucket at the Left Hand of the Door,
there was a Drop of Blood found upon it, and several more Drops of Blood upon
the Snow newly fallen abroad: there was likewise the print of her two Feet just
without the Threshold; but no more sign of an Footing further off.

At another time this Deponent was desired by the Prisoner, to come unto an
Husking of Corn, at her House; and she said, If he did not come, it were better
that he did. He went not; but the Night following, Susanna Martin, as he
judged, and another came toward him. One of them said, Here be a: but he
having a Quarter-staff, made a Blow at them. The Roof of the Barn broke his
Blow; but following them to the Window, he made another Blow at them, and
struck them down; yet they got up, and got out, and he saw no more of them.

About this time, there was a Rumor about the Town, that Martin had a broken
Head; but the Deponent could say nothing to that.

The said Peache also testified, the Bewitching the Cattle to Death, upon
Martin's Discontents.

VI. Robert Downer testified, That this Prisoner being some Years ago
prosecuted at Court for a Witch, he then said unto her, He believed she was a
Witch: whereat she being dissatisfied, said, That some She-Devil would shortly
fetch him away. Which Words were heard by others as well as himself.

The Night following, as he lay in his Bed, there came in at the Window, the
likeness of a Cat, which flew upon him, took fast hold of his Throat, lay on
him a considerable while, and almost killed him. At length he remembered what
Susanna Martin had threatened the Day before; and with much striving he cried
out, Avoid, thou She Devil: In the Name of God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, avoid. Whereupon it left him, leaped on the Floor, and flew out at
the Window.

And there also came in several Testimonies, That before ever Downer spoke a
Word of this Accident, Susanna Martin, and her Family had related, how this
Downer had been handled.

VII. John Kembal testified, That Susanna Martin, upon a causless Disgust, had
threatened him, about a certain Cow of his. That she should never do him any
more good: and it came to pass accordingly: for soon after, the Cow was found
stark dead on the dry Ground, without any Distemper to be discerned upon her.
Upon which he was followed with a strange Death upon more of his Cattle,
whereof he loft, in one Spring, to the value of 30 l. But the said John Kembal
had a further Testimony to give in against the Prisoner, which was truly
admirable.

Being desirous to furnish himself with a Dog, he applied himself to buy one of
this Martin, who had a Bitch with Whelps in her House; but she not letting him
have his choice, he said, He would supply himself then at one Blezdel 's.
Having marked a Puppy, which he liked at Blezdel's, he met George Martin, the
Husband of the Prisoner, going by, who asked him, Whether he would not have one
of his Wife's Puppies? and he answered, No. The same Day, one Edmond Elliot
being at Martin's House, heard George Martin relate, where this Kembal had
been, and what he had said: whereupon Susanna Martin replied, If I live, I Will
give him Puppies enough. Within a few Days after, this Kembal, coming out of
Woods, there arose a little black Cloud in the N. W. and Kembal immediately
felt a force upon him, which made him not able to avoid running upon Stumps of
Trees, that were before him, albeit he had a plain Cart-way before him; but
though he had his Ax also on his Shoulders to endanger him in his Falls, be could
not forbear going out of his way to rumble over them. When he came below the
Meeting House, there appeared unto him, a little thing like a Poppy, of a
darkish Color, and it shot backwards and forwards between his Legs. He had the
Courage to use all possible Endeavors of cutting it with Ax; but he could not
bit it: the Puppy gave a Jump from him, and went, as to him it seemed, into the
Ground.

Going a little further, there appeared unto him a black Puppy, somewhat bigger
than the first, but as black as a Coal. It Is Motions were quicker than those of
his Ax; it flew at his Belly and away; then at his Throat; so over his
Shoulders one way, and then over his Shoulders another way: his Heart now began
to fail him, and he thought the Dog would have tore his Throat out: but he
recovered himself, and called upon God in his Distress, and naming the Name of
Jesus Christ, it vanished away at once.

The Deponent spoke not one word of these Accidents, for fear of affrighting
his Wife: but the next Morning. Edmond Elliot going into Martin's House, this
Woman asked him, Where Kembal was? he replied, At home a Bed, for ought he
knew. She returned, They say he was frighted last Night. Elliot asked, With
what? she answered, With Puppies. Elliot asked, Where she heard of it? for he
had heard nothing of it. She rejoyned, About the Town. Although Kembal had
mentioned the Matter to no Creature living.

VIII. William Brown testified, That Heaven having blessed him with a most
pious and prudent Wife, this Wife of his, one Day, met with Susanna Martin; but
when she approached just unto her, Martin vanished out of sight, and left her
extremely affrighted.

After which time, the said Martin often appeared unto her, giving her no
little trouble; and when she did come, she was visited with Birds, that sorely
peck'd and pricked her; and sometimes a Bunch, like a Pullet's Egg, would rise
in her Throat ready to choke her, 'till she cried out, Witch, you shall not choke
me. While this good Woman was in this extremity, the Church appointed a Day of
Prayer on her behalf; whereupon her Trouble ceased: she saw not Martin as
formerly; and the Church, instead of their Fast, gave Thanks for her
Deliverance.

But a considerable while after* she being summoned to give in some Evidence at
the Court, against this Martin; quickly thereupon, this Martin came behind her,
while she was Milking her Cow, and said unto her, For thy Defaming me at the
Court, I Will make thee the miserablest Creature in the World. Soon after which,
she fell into a strange kind of Distemper, and became horribly frantic, and
incapable of any reasonable Actions; the Physicians declaring, That her
Distemper was preternatural, and that some evil Spirit had certainly Bewitched
her; and in that sad Condition she now remained.

IX. Sarah Atkinson testified, That Susanna Martin came from Amesbury, to their
House at Newbury, in an extraordinary Season, when it was not fit for any to
Travel. She came (as she said, to Atkinson) all that long way on Foot: she
bragged, and showed how dry she was; nor could it be perceived that so much as
the Soles of her Shoes wete wet. Atkinson was amazed at it; and professed.
That she should herself have been wet up to the Knew, if she had then come so
far: but Martin replied, She scorned to be drabbled. It was noted, that this
Testimony upon her Trial, cast her in a very singular Confusion.

10. X. John Pressy testified, That being one Evening very unaccountably
bewildred, near a Field of Martin's, and several times, as one under an
Enchantment, returning to the place he had left, at length he saw a mavelous
Light, about the bigness of an Half-bushel, near two Rod out of the way: he
gave it near forty Blows, and felt is a palpable Substance; but going from it,
his Heels were struck up, and he was said with his Back on the Ground, sliding,
as he thought, into a Pit; from whence he recovered by taking hold on the Bush;
although afterward he could find no such Pit in the place. Having after his
Recovery, gone five or six Rod, he saw Susanna Martin standing on his
Left Hand, as the Light had done before; but they changed no Words with one
another. He could scarce find his House in his return; but at length he got
home extremely affrighted.

The next Day, it was, upon Enquiry he understood, that Martin was in a
miserable Condition, by Pains and Hurts that were upon her.

It was further testified by this Deponent, That after he had given in some
Evidence against Susanna Martin, many Years ago, she gave him foul Words about
it; and said, He should never prosper more; particularly, That he should never
have more than two Cows; that though he was never so likely to have more, yet he
should never have them. And that from that very Day to this, namely, for twenty
Years together, he could never exceed that Number; but that some strange thing
or other still prevented his having any more.

XI. Jervace Ring testified, That about seven Years ago, he was oftentimes
grievously oppressed in the Night, but saw not who troubled him; until at last,
he lying perfectly awake, plainly saw Susanna Martin approach him. She came to
him, and sorceably bit him by the Finger; so that the Print of the Bite is now,
so long after, to be seen upon him.

XII. But besides all these Evidences, there was a most wonderful Account of
one Joseph Ring, produced on this occasion.

This Man has been strangely carried about by Demons, from one Witch-Meeting to
another, for near two Years together; and for one quarter of this time, they
have made him and kept him dumb, though he is now again able to speak.

There was one T. H. who having as it is judged, a design of engaging this
Joseph Ring in a Snare of Devilism, contrived a while to bring this Ring two
Shillings in debt unto him.

Afterward this poor Man would be visited with unknown Shapes, and this T. H.
sometimes among them, which would force him away with them unto unknown Places,
where he saw Meetings, Feastings, Dancings; and after his return, wherein they
hurried him along through the Air, he gave Demonstrations to the Neighbors
that he had indeed been so transported. When he was brought unto these hellish
Meetings, one of the first things they still did unto him, was to give him a
knock on the Back, whereupon he was ever as if bound with Chains, incapable of
stirring out of the place 'till they should release him.

He related, That there often came to him a Man who presented him a Book,
whereto he would have him set his Hand; promising to him, that he should then
have even what he would; and presenting him with all the delectable Things,
Persons, and Places, that he could imagine. But he resusing to subscribe, the
business would end with dreadful Shapes, Noises, and Screeches, which almost
scared him out of his Wits. Once with the Book there was a Pen offered him, and
an Ink-horn with Liquor in it that seemed like Blood, but he never touched it.

This Man did now affirm, That he saw the Prisoner at several of those hellish
Rendezvouzes.

Note, This Woman was one of the most impudent, scurrilous, wicked Creatures in
the World; and she did now throughout her whole Trial, discover herself to be
such an one. Yet when she was asked what she had to say for herself, her chief
Plea was, that she had led a most virtuous Life.

10. BUT is New England (continues our Author) the only Christian Country, that
has undergone such Diabolical Molestations? No, there are other good People
that have in this way been harressed; but none in Circumstances more like to
ours, than the People of God in the Sweedland. The Story is a very famous one;
and it comes to speak English by the acute Pen of the Reverend Dr. Horneck. I
shall only single out a few of the more memorable Passages therein occurring;
and where it agrees with what happened among our selves, my Reader shall
understand, by my inserting a Word of every such thing in Black Letter.

I. It was in the Year 1669, and 1670. That at Mobra in Sweedland, the Devils
by the help of Witches committed a most horrible Outrage. Among other Instances
of hellish Tyranny there exercised, One was, that hundreds of their Children
were usually in the Night fetched from their Lodgings, to a Diabolical
Randezvouz, at a place they called Blockula, where the Monsters that so
spirited them, tempted them all manner of ways to Associate with them. Yea,
such were the perilous Growth of this Witchcraft, that Persons of Quality began
to send their Children into Countries to avoid it.

II. The Inhabitants had earnestly sought God by Prayer, and yet their
Affliction continued. Whereupon Judges had a special Commission to find and
root out the hellish Crew; and the rather, because another County in the
Kingdom, which had been so molested, was delivered upon the Execution of the
Witches.

III. The Examination was begun with a day of Humiliation appointed by
Authority. Whereupon the Commissioners consulting how they might resist such a
dangerous Flood; the suffering Children were first examined; and though they
were questioned one by one apart, yet their Declarations all agreed. The
Witches accused in these Declarations, were then examined; and though at first
they obstinately denied, yet at length many of them ingeniously confessed the
Truth of what the Children said; owning with Tears, that the Devil whom they
called Locyta had stopped their Mouths; but he being now gone from them, they
could no longer conceal the Business. The things by them acknowledged most
wonderfully agreed with what other Witches in other Places had confessed.

IV. They confessed, That they did use to call upon the Devil, who thereupon
would carry them away over the Tops of Houses to a green Meadow, where they
gave themselves unto him. Only one of them said, that sometimes the Devil only
took away her Strength, leaving her Body on the Ground; but she went at other
times in Body too.

V. Their manner was to come into the Chambers of People, and fetch away their
Children upon Beasts of the Devils providing; promising fine Clothes and other
fine things unto them to inveagle them. They said, they never had power to do
thus till of late; but now the Devil did plague and beat them if they did not
gratify him in this piece of Mischief. They said, they made use of all sorts
of Instruments in their Journeys; of Men, of Beasts, of Posts; the Men they
commonly laid asleep at the place whereto they rode them, and if the Children
mentioned the Names of them that stole them away, they were miserably Scourged
for it, until some of them were killed. The Judges found the Marks of the
Lashes on some of them; but the Witches said they would quickly vanish.
Moreover, the Children would be in strange Fits after they were brought home
from these Transportations.

VI. The first thing they said they were to do at Blockula, was to give
themselves unto the Devil, and vow that they would serve him. Hereupon they cut
their Fingers, and with Blood writ their Names in his Book: and he also caused
them to be Baptized by such Priests as he had in his horrid Company. In some of
them the Mark of the cut Finger was to be found; they said, that the Devil gave
Meat and Drink as to them, so to the Children they brought with them; that
afterward their custom was to Dance before him, and Swear and Curse most
horribly. They said, that the Devil showed them a great frightful cruel Dragon,
telling them, If they confessed any thing, he would let loose that great Devil
upon them. They added, That the Devil had a great Church, and that when the
Judges were coming, he told them, He would kill them all; and that some of them
had attempted to Murder the Judges, but could not.

VII. Some of the Children talked much of a white Angel, which did use to
forbid them what the Devil bid them to do, and assure them, that these doings
would not last long; but that what had been done was permitted for the
Wickedness of the People. This white Angel would sometimes rescue the Children
from going in with the Witches.

VIII. The Witches confessed many Mischiefs done by them, declaring with what
kind of enchanted Tools they did their Mischiefs: They thought especially to
kill the Minister of Elfdala, but could not. But some of them said, that such
as they wounded would be recovered, upon or before their Execution.

IX. The Judges would fain have had them showed some of their Tricks; but they
unanimously declared, That since they had confessed all, they found all their
Witchcraft gone; and the Devil then appeared very terrible unto them,
threatening with an Iron Fork to thrust them into a burning Pit, if they
persisted in their Confession.

X. There were discovered no less then Threescore and Ten Witches in one
Village; Three and Twenty of which freely confessing their Crimes were
Condemned to Die. The rest (one pretending she was with Child) were sent to
Fahluna, where most of them were afterward Executed. Fifteen Children, which
confessed themselves engaged in this Witchery, died as the rest, Six and Thirty
of them between Nine and Sixteen Years of Age, who had been less guilty, were
forced to run the Gantlet, and be lashed on their Hands once a Week for a Year
together. Twenty more, who had less inclination to these Infernal Enterprises,
were lashed with Rods upon their Hands for three Sundays together at the
Church-door. The number of the seduced Children was about Three Hundred. This
Course, together with weekly Prayers in all the Churches through the Kingdom,
issued in the Deliverance of the Country.

XI. The most accomplished Dr. Horneck incerts a most wise Caution in his
preface to this Narrative, says he, There is no public Calamity, but some ill
People will serve themselves of the sad Providence, and make use of it for
their own ends; as Thieves, when an House or Town is on Fire, will steal what
they can. And he mentions a remarkable Story of a young Woman at Stockholm, in
the Year 1676. who accused her own Mother of being a Witch; and swore
positively, that she had carried her away in the Night; the poor Woman was
Burnt upon it, professing her Innocence to the last. But though she had been an
ill Woman, yet it afterward proved, that she was not such an one; for her
Daughter came to the Judges with hideous Lamentations, confessing that she had
wronged her, out of a wicked spite against her; whereupon the Judges gave
order for her Execution too.

Thus far Mr. Cotton Mather.

The Truth of the Matters of Fact here related, are attested in the most
Authentic manner that is possible.

The Attestation runs thus:
The Reverend and Worthy Author having at the Direction of his Excellency the
Governor, so far obliged the Public, as to give some account of the
Sufferings brought upon the Country by Witchcraft, and of the Trials which have
passed upon several executed for the same; upon perusal thereof, we find the
Matters of Fact and Evidence truly Reported; and a prospect given of the
Methods of Conviction used in the Proceedings of the Court at Salem.

Boston, October. 11. 1692. William Stoughton. Samuel Sewall.


The Author tells us, there were in all nineteen Witches Executed, one whereof
was a Minister, and that two Ministers more are accused. That there were a
hundred Witches more Imprisoned which broke Prison, and two Hundred more
accused; and that some men of great Estates in Boston have been accused for the
same Crime. And lastly, that those hundred now in Prison were accused by fifty
of themselves being Witches, some of Boston, but most about Salem, and the
Towns adjacent.

The Court for the Trial of the Nineteen Condemned and Executed, was held at
Salem, 1692.

11. But among the rest, one Martha Carrier was none of the least Notorious
among the Wretches Convicted for this black Crime. For to omit other
Particulars, several of her own Children confessed that they were Witches, and
that their Mother had made them so; which confession they made with great shows
of Repentance, and much demonstration of Truth, particularising Place, Time,
Occasion, Journeys, Meetings, and Mischiefs done by them, etc. which were
verified by other concurring Testimonies and Effects. But there was Evidence
enough against her besides theirs.

One Foster who confessed herself also a Witch, affirmed she had seen Martha
Carrier at their Witch-Meetings, and that it was she that had persuaded her to
be a Witch, adding this Circumstance of Proof, That as the Devil was one time
carrying them both upon one Pole to a Witch-Meeting, the Pole broke, and she
catching hold about Martha Caerrier's Neck, they both fell to the Ground, and
she then received a Hurt of the Fall, of which she was not yet quite Cured.

Also one Lacy, another confessing Witch, testified she had once seen Martha
Carrier bodily present at a Witch-Meeting in Salem Village, and that she knew
her to be a Witch, and to have been at a Diabolical Sacrament, and that she had
been the undoing of her and her Children, by enticing them into the Devils
Snare.

Another confessing Witch of the same Name, affirmed likewise, that Martha
Carrier was at a Witch-Meeting in Salem, where they had Bread and Wine
Administered to the; and in the time of the said Martha's Trial, one Susanna
Sheldon had both her hands unaccountably tied together in open Court with a
Wheel-band, so fast, that without cutting it could not be loosed; it was done
by a Spectre, and the Sufferer affirmed it was that of the Prisoner. In fine,
the said Martha Carrier was the Person of whom the Confessions of other
Witches, and of her own Children among the rest agreed, That the Devil had
promised her she should be Queen of Hell.

Observations on the late Trials of the New England Witches, by the Author of
the Complete Library.
I.
FIRST, It Is very remarkable to see what an impious and impudent Imitation of
Divine Mysteries is Apishly affected by the Devil, whereof the Confessions of
these Witches, and the Afflictions of the Sufferers have informed us. For the
Witches affirm, that they form themselves into Assemblyes much after the manner
of the Congregational Churches, and that they have a Baptism and a Supper, and
Officers among them, abominably representing those of our Lord. And indeed,
besides these sacramental Imitations, their striking down the bewitched Persons
with a fierce Look, and their making them rise again with a Touch of their
Hand, their Transportation through the Air, their Traveling in Spirit while
their Body is in a Trance, their causing of Cattle to run Mad and perish, their
entering their Names in a Book, their coming together at the Sound of a Trumpet,
their appearing sometimes clothed with Light or Fire, and their clothing
themselves and Instruments with Invisibility, are but so many sorts of
blasphemous Imitations of certain things recorded about our Savior, or the
Prophets, or the Saints in the Kingdom of God.

II.
Secondly, It seems an unaccountable thing, how the Witches can render
Themselves and Tools invisible; or indeed, how the Devils themselves can do it,
and yet that they do so, is most undoubted Matter of Fact.

This strange Operation makes our Author think that Witchcraft principally
consists in a Skill how to abuse the plastic Spirit of the World unto some
unlawful Purposes, by means of a Confederacy with Evil Spirits, to whom Witches
are engaged by a Magical Sacrament.

And here, to confute those Persons that are so dogmatical against these
Points; he inserts three strange Instances of the Truth of them, which I shall
repeat in few words.

One of the bewitched People of whom he speaks, pretending she was Assaulted by
a Spectre with a Spindle, though no body but she could see it; at last in her
Pains she gave a snatch at the Spectre and pulled away the Spindle, which as
soon as she got into her Hand, became visible to others then present, who found
it to be a real solid iron Spindle, belonging they knew to whom, which though
they locked up safe, it was unaccountably stolen away again by Demons.

Secondly, Another Woman was haunted by a very abusive Spectre, that she said
came to her in a Sheet, at which she likewise giving a snatch, tore away a
Corner of it, which in her Hand immediately became visible to a Room full of
Spectators, and was sound to be a palpable Corner of a Sheet. Her Father who
was then holding her caught, that he might hold what his Daughter had so
strangely seized, but the unseen Spectre had like to have torn off his Hand,
endeavoring to wrest it from him.

However, he still held it, and has it, says the Author, as he supposes still,
it being but a few Hours before his Writing this, it being at the beginning of
October, 1692. That this Accident happened in the Family of one Pitman at
Manchester.

Thirdly, A young Man delaying to procure Testimonials for his Parents, who
were in Prison upon suspicion of Witchcraft, was persued with very odd
Inconveniences, and once above the rest, an Officer going to put his Brand on
the Horns of some Cows that belonged to those People, which though he had
seized for their Debts, yet he was willing to leave in their Possession for the
subsistence of the poor Family.

This young Man helped him in holding the Cows thus to be Branded; the first
three Cows he held well enough, but when the hot Brand was clapped upon the
fourth, he winced at such a rate, that he could hold the Cow no longer; and
being asked the reason, he said, That at the same instant the Brand entered the
Cows Horn, he felt exactly the like burning Brand clapped upon his own Thigh, and
showed the lasting Marks of it to such as desired to see them.

Now let our Sadducees unriddle these Phaenomena's if they can.

A third remarkable Curiosity is, That the Execution of some of these Witches
has been immediately attended with the strange Recovery of some Persons that
had lain for many Years in a most sad Condition, under they knew not what evil
Hands.

And the Author inclines to believe, That many of the Self-murders lately
committed in those parts were the Effects of Witchcraft, letting fly Demons to
disturb the Minds of those poor Wretches, because several, who were before
distracted, and under the like Terrors of a despairing Humor, and the like
Temptations to Self-murder, had marvellously recovered their Senses, and a
calmness of Mind, upon the Execution of the late Witches.

Fourthly, The frequent Apparitions of Ghosts of murdered People, together with
the Specter of the Witches, is another strange Remarkable, and so much the
stranger, because all those People whose Ghosts have so seemed to appear to the
bewitched Persons, have been found in Fact, to have died very unaccountably.

And no less astonishing is the frequent Apparitions of Ghosts, even to other
Persons not bewitched, by which old Murders have been revealed had considered;
of which our Author gives a very signal and fresh Instance concerning a poor
Man lately pressed to Death, because he refused to plead for his Life; which he
Inserts in an Extract of a Letter written to the honorable Samuel Sewall, Esquire;
by one Mr. Putnam, to which I refer you.

Having already insisted longer on this Matter, than the Room we have here will
well permit, though I shall not think my Labor ill spent, if it may serve but to
convince any Unbeliever in the Points now so mainly contested about the Being
and Operation of Spirits, and other Wonders of the Invisible World.

CHAP. XCIII. Satan Restrained in Hurting, etc.
GOD only is Absolute, and restrained with no Limits: all the Creatures are
dependent upon his Will, tied with a Chain to his Throne; they have Bounds set
them, Pillars of Non-ultra, beyond which they may not pass. And it is well for
us, that not only Satan, but all his Agents are in Chains; that God has set a
Hook in Leviathan 's Jaws, that he can move no whither without leave and
permission: for it would be a sad World, if the Devil were absolute Ranger, and
Lord Paramount in it.

1. Upon a time, a certain Wizzard sent his Spirits to kill Ambrose; but they
returned Answer, That God had hedged him in, as he did Job. Another came with
his Sword to his Bedside, to have killed him; but he could not stir his Hand,
'till repenting, he was by the Prayer of Ambrose, restored to the Use of his
Hands again. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Wolphius wrote to Skenkius, That near Zurick, the Devil vexed a Melancholy
Woman, and solicited her to drown herself: she went and sat long on the
Flood-gate of a Pond; at last, by his Importunity she yielded, saying, [If it
must be so, on Gods Name, let it be so] and cast herself into the Water; where
she lay three Hours on her Back, and could not sink; and being found, and
brought home, her Body was light as Straw, and she recovered her Health. Hist.
Disc. of Apparitions and Witches. p. 97.

3. About the Year 1644. the Lord Grandison, a Scottish Nobleman, took up his
Habitation, for some time, at Berwick upon Tweed, and brought his Family with
him; in which, amongst others, was the Steward of his House, who was a very
Religious Man, but was then very much afflicted in Mind: among others, Mr.
Robert Balsam, a very Religious Minister in those Parts, came to Visit him, and
spoke comfortably to him: whereupon the Man's Tongue swelled out of his Mouth,
and a Voice came out of his Throat, without any Motion of his Tongue, saying,
What do thou talk to him of Promises, and Free Grace? he is mine. Mr. Balsom
replying, That Satan was a Liar, and Bound, and that the Blood of Christ
cleanses us from all Sin.

Satan beginning to Curse, Swear, and Blaspheme, in a most terrible manner: Mr.
Balsom promising to pray for the Man, and to get all the Force that he could in
the Town to join with him, he returns home about Eleven of the Clock at Night
and finding there several Persons whom he intended to have sent for: he desired
them to join their Prayers with his, on this Man's behalf; which they continued
for some part of he Night.

The next Morning Mr. Balsom going to Visit him again, sound him in a very
comfortable Condition, and asked him how he did? he answered, Through the
Goodness of God, I have overcome Satan, and am now as full of Comfort, as I was
before of Trouble. Thus he continued cheerful (though very weak) all that Day,
and the next Morning died, no Disease being apparent on him. Clark's Martyr.
etc. Wonderful Prod. p. 47.

4. The Devil of Mascon, that so long molested the House of Mr. Perrheaud,
complained, that he could not do any hurt there, because they prayed so much.
Printed Narrative.

5. Senercleus tells of a plain Country Fellow, at Friburg in Germany, to whom,
as he lay on his Deathbed, the Devil appeared in the Shape of a tall, grim
Man, claiming his Soul, saying, Thou have been a notorious Sinner, and I am now
come to set down all thy Sins: And thereupon drew out Paper and Ink, and
sitting down at a Table that stood by, began to write. The sick Man said, My
Soul is Christ's, and all my Sins are nailed to his Cross: but if thou desire
to set down my Sins, write thus: All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags.
The Devil set that down, and bid him say on. He did: But thou, Lord, have
promised for thine own Name's-sake, to blot out all our Iniquities, and to make
our Scarlet Sins White as Snow. The Devil would not write these Words; but was
very earnest with the Man to go on with his former Confession. Then said the
sick Man with great cheerfulness: The Son of God appeared to destroy the Works
of the Devil. Whereupon the Devil vanished, and shortly after the sick Man
died: Clark's Mirror, chapter 7. p. 33.

6. Mr. White, of Dorchester, to the Devil standing at his Bed's Feet, said, If
thou have nothing else to do, thou may stand there still; and I will betake
myself to my Rest. And so composing himself to Sleep, the Devil vanished away.
Ibid.

7. Luther lodging in the Castle at Wartzburg, being troubled with Noises of
the Devil's making, drove him away, with saying, -- Omnia subjecisti pedibus
ejus, (Thou have put all Things under his Feet.) Ibid.

8. Mr. Jos. Allein in his Illness, a little before his Death, uttered these
Words: Away, thou foul Fiend, thon Enemy of all Mankind; Art thou come now to
molest me? Now that I am just going, now I am so weak, and Death is upon me!
Trouble me not; for I am none of thine. I am the Lord's, Christ is mine, and I
am his. His by Covenant: I have sworn my self to be the Lords; and his I will
be. Therefore be gone, be gone, be gone, etc. See his Life.

9. A. C. 1663. One Thomas Sawdie, a Boy of twelve Years of Age. Servant to
Joh. Roberts, of Trebilian, in the Parish of Lawrack, and County of Cornwall,
being possessed by the Devil in a strange manner, from whom he had received
Money, and falling sick after it, sometimes with Fits like the Epilepsie, in
which he would continued for the space of seven or eight Hours; sometimes like
the Convulsion, of which he had forty or fifty in a Day, swelling of his
Throat, Distension of Limbs, tearing off his Hair, biting his own Flesh,
hollowing, yelling, whilstling, neighing like a Stone-Horse, lying as in a dead
Sleep all Night, halled out of his Bed, and laid under the Bed, with Arms
spread abroad, and such a stiffness in his Limbs, that there was no bending of
them, without breaking them; flying away from his Friends, and in his Flight
throwing off all his Clothes, Shirt, and every thing, presently: drawing his
Hands out, and putting them in again, when bound strait with a Napkin in three
hard Knots, getting his Legs, one Arm, and most of his Head, through a Window
(where the Moulins were scarce three Inches asunder; shooting his Body into a
little Hole in the Wall, up to the Waste (of no capacity in the ordinary Course
of Nature to contain such a Body as his was,) etc. yet at last this Boy, by the
Prayers of three or four Ministers, and other Neighbors, was recovered out of
this Share of the Devil.

He affirmed after his Recovery, That at prayers he felt something as alive,
move out of his Belly toward his Throat, upon which he then cried out, He is
gone, he is gone: and that the next Morning in the Field, he went out like a
Rat into a Fire, which appeared near the hedge, and both ascended into the Air,
and seemed to pass over to St. German's Town.

Attested by Mr. Toms, Ministers. Mr. Lydston, Ministers. Mr. Travers,
Ministers. Mr. Teag, Ministers. John Roberts, the Boy's Master; and Elizabeth
his Wife. Dorothy Sawdie. Mrs. Jane Brooking; and Mrs. Isabel, her Daughter.
Tho. Geffery. Hen. Palmer, Constable.


With several others. See the Printed Relation, called, A Return of Prayer,
Printed 1664.

CHAP. XCV. Satan hurting by Obsessions, Possessions, etc.
BY Obsessions, I mean immediate Attempts and Assaults made upon the Disturbed
Person by Satan or his Agents, in such a manner, as to discover themselves
plainly to be of the Diabolical kind: By Possessions, the Insults of Satan in
the very Body of the Person; and this last way of Vexation I look upon as one
of the worst, when the Devil has Power, not only to Besiege the Town, but to
Enter the very castle, and Domineer there; and though there are some very late
Authors, that resolve all the History of the Demoniacks in the Gospel into
Physical Distemperature of the Brain, or Hypochondria, yet I think they will be
hard put to it, to solve all the Difficulties and strange Occurrences of
subsequent History.

1. Mr. John Bruen of Stapleford in Cheshire, Records the Story of a Boy,
called Thomas Harrison of Northwich, about Eleven or Twelve Years of Age,
possessed with the Devil; who by his Torments was brought so low, that he was
almost nothing but Skin and Bone; yet for the space of Twenty four Hours every
day (having only one half hour respite, which they called his Awaking time, and
wherein they gave him some Food) he was of that extraordinary strength, that if
he folded his hands together, no Man could pull them asunder; if he rolled his
Head, or tossed his whole Body, no Man could stay or restrain him: He would, to
the great Astonishment of the Hearers, Howl like a Dog, Mew like a Cat, Roar
like a Bear, Froth like a Boar; when any prayed with him, his passions were
strongest, his Rage and Violence greatest, ready to fly in their Faces, and to
drown their Voices by his yellings and outcries: If any one came near him with
a Bible, though under his Cloak, and never so secret, he would run upon him,
and use great violence to get it from him; and when he could get any, he rent
them in pieces. Sometimes he would lie along, as if stark Dead, his Color
gone, and Mouth so wide open, that he would on a sudden thrust both his Hands
into it. And notwithstanding his great weakness, he would Leap and Skip from
his Bed to the Window, from thence to the Table, and so to Bed again, with that
nimbleness and agility, as no Tumbler could do the like; and yet all this while
his Legs grown up close to his Buttocks, so that he could not use them.
Sometimes we saw his Chin drawn up to his Nose, that his Mouth could scarce be
seen; sometimes his Chin and Forehead drawn almost together like a bended Bow;
his Countenance fearful by yawning, making mowes, etc. The Bishop hearing of
the strange Torments of this poor Child, sent for him: His Parents brought him,
and once the Bishop prayed with him, but the Boy was so outrageous, that he
flew out of his Bed, and so frighted the Bishop's Men, that one of them fell
into a Swoon, and the Bishop was glad to lay hold on the Boy, who ramped at the
Window to have got out; hereupon this Bishop granted a License for a private
Fast in the Child's Father's House, for his Help and Release, and that in these
Words:

Having seen the bodily affliction of this Child, and observed in sundry Fits,
very strange Effects and Operations, either proceeding from some Natural and
unknown Causes, or some Diabolical Practices; we think it fit, and convenient,
for the Ease and Deliverance of the said Child, from his sad grievous
Affliction, that Prayer be made publicly for him by the Minister of the
Parish, etc. and that certain Preachers, namely these following, Mr. Gerrard,
Mr. Harvey, Mr. Pierson, etc. these, and none other, to repair to the said
Child by turns, as their Leisure will serve, and to use their Discretion by
private Prayer and Fasting, for the Ease and Comfort of the Afflicted.

Richard Cestrens. Griffith Vaughan. David Yale. Hugh Barcly.
Which accordingly was performed by two Godly Ministers, and by Mr. Bruen, with
diverse others; yet God gave not Deliverance at that time. When he was in his
Fits, without either understanding or knowledge of what he did or said, he
would often say,

Jesus says (for so he began all his Speeches) the Devil, when he comes, takes
away my Hearing, Seeing, Understanding, Hands, Legs, that I should have no
Senses, nor Limbs to Glorify God withal.

Jesus says, if they would have cast out the Evil Spirit, they should have
come better provided.

Jesus says, some Men did think that he that Prayed had a better Faith than
the other, but he had not.

Jesus says, I have but three Devils; it is like one of the Spirits will go
out of me, and take Counsel of a great number of foul Spirits, and come again,
and trouble me worse.

Jesus says, that some Folk will say, that the Witch will not look one in the
face; but she will look here-away and there-away, etc. Mr. William Hind, in the
Life of Mr. Bruen.

CHAP. XCVI. Satan Hurting by Storms, etc.
ST. Paul calls Satan the Prince of the Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. And it is
certain, that by Divine permission, he is allowed a considerable Range in that
Aetherial Region; for we find in the C^se of Job, when the Lord had given him
Power over all that he had, it is presently added, that Satan went forth from
the Presence of the Lord; and in the subsequent verses we are told, that the
Fire of God fell from Heaven, and burnt up the Sheep, and the Servants, and
consumed them; [Which is by Expositors taken for Thunder and Lightning] and at
last, there came a great Wind from the Wilderness and smote the four Corners of
the House, and it fell upon [his Sons] so that they died, Job 2.13, etc.
Consider seriously these Stories following, and believe them so far as they
deserve.

1. That certain Words or Ceremonies do seem at least to cause an Alteration in
the Air, and to raise Tempests, Remigius writes, That he had it witnessed to
him by the free Confession of near Two hundred Men that he Examined: Where he
adds a Story or two, in which there being neither Fraud nor Melancholy to be
suspected, I think them worth the mentioning. The one is of a Witch, who, to
satisfy the Curiosity of them that had power to Punish her, was set free, that
she might give a proof of that Power she professed she had to raise Tempests:
She therefore being let go, presently betakes her self to a place thick set
with Trees, scrapes a hole with her Hands, fills it with Urine, and stirs it
about so long, that she caused at last a thick Cloud, charged with Thunder and
Lightning, to the Terror and Affrightment of the Beholders. But she bad them be
of good Courage, for the would cmmand the Cloud to discharge upon what place
they would appoint her, which she made good in the sight of the Spectators.

2. The other Story is of a young Girl, who to pleasure her Father, complaining
of a drought, by the guidance and help of that ill Master her Mother had
Devoted and Consecrated her unto, raised a Cloud, and watered her Father's
Ground only, all the rest continuing dry as before, H. More's Antidnote against
Atheism, c. 3. l. 3.

3. Let us add (says the same Author) to these, that of Cuinus, and Margaret
Warine, Whilst this Cuinus was busy at his Hay-making, there arose suddenly
great Thunder and Lightning, which made him run homeward, and forsake his Work,
for he saw six Oaks hard by him overturned from the very Roots, and a seventh
also shattered and torn in pieces: He was forced to lose his Hat, and leave his
Fork or Rake for haste; which was not so fast, but another crack overtakes him,
and rattles about his ears: Upon which Thunderclap, he presently espied this
Margaret Warine, a reputed Witch, upon the top of an Oak, whom he began to
chide. She desired his Secrecy, and she would promise that never any injury or
harm should come to him from her at any time.

4. This Cuinus deposed upon Oath before the Magistrate, and Margaret Warine
acknowledged the Truth of it, without any force done unto her, several times
before her death, and at her Death. See Remigius Daemonolatr. lib 1. cap. 29.
Remigius conceives she was discharged upon the top of the Oak at that last
Thunder Clap, and there hung amongst the Boughs; which he is induced to believe
from two Stories he tells afterward. The one is of a Tempest of Thunder and
Lightning, That the Herdsmen, tending their Cattle on the brow of the Hill
Alman in the Field of Guicuria, were Frighted with, who running into the Woods
for shelter, suddenly, saw two Contrymen on the top of the Trees, which were
next them, so Dirty, and in such a Pickle, and so out of Breath, as if they had
been dragged up and down through Thorns and Mirey Places; but when they had
well eyed them, they were gone in a moment out of their sight, they knew not
how, nor whither. These Herdsmen talked of the business, but the certainty of
it came out not long after. For the free Confessions of those two Men, they
then saw, being so exactly agreeing with what the Herdsmen had related, made
the whole matter clear and undoubted.

5. The other Story is of the same Persons, known afterward by their Names,
viz. Amantius and his Partner Rotarius, who having coursed it aloft again in
the Air, and being cast headlong out of a Cloud upon an House, the latter of
them being but a Novice and unexperienced in those supernatural Exploits, was
much astonished and afraid at the strangeness of the matter; but Amantius being
used to those Feats from him Youth, his Parents having devoted him from his
Childhood to the Devil, made but a sport of it, and laughing at his Friend,
called him Fool for his fear, and bad him be of good Courage; for their Master,
in whose Power they were, would safely carry them through greater dangers than
those. And no sooner had he said these words, but a Whirlwind took them, and
set them both safe upon the ground: but the House they were carried from so
shook, as if it would have been overturned from the very Foundations. This,
both those Men (Examined apart) confessed in the same words, not varying in
their Story at all; whose Confessions exactly agreed in all Circumstances, with
what was observed by the Common People concerning the time and the manner of
the Tempest, and shaking of the House, ibid. page 172, 173.

6. Remigius, out of whom Mr. More cites these Relations, has some others of
the like nature, and at last concludes, What is more common in our Times, than
both the frequent and daily Assertions of Witches concerning this very thing;
and the Testimonies of Men agreeing thereto, who have steadfastly affirmed, not
only in ordinary Conversation, but Solemnly upon their Oaths, That they have
seen, not in their Dreams, or with their Senses drawn aside by the Arts of
Magic, but with waking Eyes, these kind of Women shaken out of the Clouds, and
hang upon the Tops of Trees, or the Roofs of Houses? c. 12. l. 3.

7. Martin Delrio, who quotes the very same Stories out of the same Author,
concludes thus: Have not the like things happened in Italy, in the Case of
Lucrece? In Switzerland, at Schiltac^, in case of the Witch mentioned by
Erasmus in his Epistles? In Holland, concerning that unwary curious young Man
of Rousey? Why, tell me, I beseech you, Might not that which has happened in
Italy, Switzerland, Holland, etc. happen likewise in France? Delrius, in Mag.
Disq. Sect. 3. l. 5.

8. There was a Witch of Constance, who being vexed that all her Neighbors in
the Village where she lived, were invited to the Wedding, and so were drinking,
and dancing, and making merry, and she solitary and neglected, got the Devil to
transport her through the Air, in the midst of the Day, to a Hill hard by the
Village; where she digging a Hole, and putting Urine into it, raised a great
Tempest of Hail, and directed it so, that it fell only upon the Village, and
pelted them that were dancing, with that Violence, that they were forced to
leave off their Sport. When she had done her Epxloit, she returned to the
Village; and being spied, was suspected to have raised the Tempest, which the
Shepherds in the Field that saw her riding in the Air, knew well before, who
bringing in their Witness against her, she confessed the Fact. More's Antid.
against Ath. c. 4. l. 3.

Mr. Baxter, speaking of Lightnings, and Thunderbolts, falling more upon
Churches, than upon other Buildings, has these Words:

9. The Church that my Grandmother was born near, had a Ball of Fire, by
Lightning, came in at the Belfry-Window, and turned up the Grave-stones, and
went out at the Chancel-Window.

10. The Church that I Baptized in, ( High Ercall, close to London
Newport's-House,) had, in such a Storm, the Leads rolled up, and cast on the
backside of the Church; (and in the War, was levelled with the Ground.)

11. The Church of Anthony in Cornwall, near Plymouth, was torn by Lightning, at
the time of Worship, on Whitsunday, 1640. and some People hurt, and the Brains
of one struck up to a Pillar. (It is in Print.)

12. 'So was used much like, the Church of Withicomb, in Devonshire, at the
same time.

13. The Church, where the Earl of Dorset and Middlesex his Ancestors Monuments
were, was torn by Lightning that came in at the Steeple, melted the Bells, and
went up to the Chancel, and there tore the Monuments in pieces. I saw pieces of
the Monuments, that had some of the golden Letters, which a truly worthy Lady
brought home, that went from Tunbridge Waters to see the Church.

Many and many Churches have been thus torn, proportionably so much beyond all
other Buildings, especially of Stone, that I cannot but think there is some
knowing Agent that makes she Choice, though I know not who, nor why.

14. Except a few Hayricks, I remember not, that till this Seventy sixth Year
of my Age, I have known Lightnings to have had hurting Power on any Buildings
but Churches, save very rarely, and small; (as this last Year, at Istington, it
entered a House, and killed a Woman, and Child:) Nor to have torn any Wood but
Oak, (which in Trees, and Buildings, I have seen torn where I dwelt.) But
diverse Persons have been killed and scorched by it: And an eminent Knight that
I knew, is commonly said to have been struck dead by it in his Garden. Hist.
Discourse of Appar. and Witches, p. 165.

15. Though Porphyry, and Procus, and Jamblicus, tells us, That bad Demons
will often speak for Good Actions, and against Bad, in Pride and Subtilty to be
thought Good; yet it is hard to think, that it is not rather a good Spirit,
that speaks for some notable Good Work, where no By-end is discernable: As that
mentioned by Mr. Glanvil, and Dr. More, of Dr. Britton's Wife, whose Likeness
appeared after Death, to her Servant-Maid, and showed her a parcel of Land,
that was as part of her Brother's, and told her, it belonged to the Poor, and
was unjustly alienated from them; and bid her tell the Possessor, That he must
Restore it; and gave her a Secret to tell him, if he refused. And upon the
angry Refusal, when he heard the Secret, he yielded and restored the Land to
the Poor, who now possess it. Ibid.

16. An. 1553. Two Witches were taken, which went about, by Tempest, Hail, and
Frost, to destroy all the Corn in the Country. These Women stole away a little
Infant of one of their Neighbors, and cutting it in pieces, put it into a
Cauldron to be boiled; but by God's Providence, the Mother of the Child came in
the mean while, and found the Members of her Child ^^^s cut in pieces, and
boiled. Whereupon the two Witches were taken; and being examined, answered,
That if the Boiling had been finished, such a Tempest of Rain and Hail would
have followed, that all the Fruits of the Earth in that Country should have
been destroyed; but God prevented it by his just Judgment, in causing the
Witches to be put to Death. Dr. Beard relates this Story, but without Notation
of the Time and Place, and otheir Circumstances, which will be enquired into in
this incredulous Age, in his Theater of God's Judgments, p. 419. I hope Authors
will be more careful for the future in such Relations, to obviate the
Prejudices and Objections of Skeptical and Atheistical Men.

CHAP. XCVII. Satan hurting by Apparitions.
THOUGH the Devil hides sometimes behind the Curtain, when he is intent upon
Mischief, and employs other Agents in a harmless Disguise to act for him, yet
it is not always so: Sometimes he puts on some for midable Shape, and appears
in some dreadful Idea, in the Prosecution of his Designs, and is not concerned,
though his own Cloven Foot appear in the Figure, and the Representation appear
Genuine, and truly Diabolical. But what particular Reason to assign for these
kind of bold Apparitions, I acknowledge my self in the dark; and I do believe,
it will not be easy for us Mortals to solve all the obscure Phenomenon 's of
their Hellish Policy.

1. Mr. Franklin, Minister of a Town in the Isle of Ely, had a Child to which a
Spirit often appeared at his Father's House, and grew so bold and free, as very
ordinarily to come in whilst Company was in the House, and Mr. Franklin in the
Room, and sit down by the Body. At due Years, about the Year 1661 or 1662, he
was bound an Apprentice to a Barber in Cambridge, (or at least as a
Probationer.) One Night the Spirit appeared to him in the usual Habit of a
Gentlewoman, and would have persuaded him to go home again, asking him what he
did there? etc. The Boy, after some Treaty, replied, he would not go. Upon
which, he received a great Blow on the Ear, and grew very ill; and continuing
so, his Master present took Horse, and rid to acquaint his Father. In the
Forenoon of that Day, the Boy sitting by the Kitchen Fire, his Mistress being
by, suddenly cries out, Oh Mistress, look, there is the Gentlewoman! The Woman
turns to look, sees nothing; but while her Head was turned, hers a noise as of
a great Box on the Ear; then turns again, and sees the Boy bending down his
Neck; and he presently died. About the same Hour, so near as they could guess,
while the Master was sitting at Dinner, in the Isle of Ely, with the Father,
the Appearance of a Gentlewoman comes in, looking angrily; and taking a turn or
two, disappeared. Attested by Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cooper, and Mr. Franklin himself.
Historical Discourse of Apparitions and Witches, p. 64.

2. At Danbury-Church, in Essex, the Devil appeared in the Habit of a Minorite,
to the incredible Astonishment of the Parishioners; and at that time there was
such a terrible Tempest with Lightning, and Thunder, and Fireballs, that the
Vault of the Church was broken, and half the Chancel was carried away. Speed's
Hist. p. 628. Wanley's Wonders, c. 27. l. 6.

3. There is (says Aventinus) a Town in Austria, called Greinou, near unto
which there are huge and high Rocks, through which the Danube passes foaming
along, and with a mighty noise. Henry the III. was sailing this way, and Bruno,
the Bishop of Witzburg, his Kinsman, in another Ship accompanied him: As they
passed by a high Rock, there stood one in the form of a Negro, which called to
Bruno, saying, Ho! Ho! Bishop, I am an evil Genius; thou art mine, and
wheresoever thou shall betake thy self, thou shall be mine: I have at present
nothingagainst thee, but in short space thou shall see me again. All that heard
this, were astonished. The Bishop signed himself with the sign of the Cross,
and adjuring the Spirit, it vanished away. Not far from thence, I think about
Ten Miles, the Emperor, and his Nobles, were entertained at Bosenberg, by
Richilda, the Widow of Adelbort, then lately dead; where the Widow besought the
Emperor, that Bosenburg, and the Farms about it, held byher late Husband
gratis, might be so held by Welpho, her Brother's Son. There were then present
with the Emperor, Bruno, Alemannus President of Ebersperg, and Richilda. While
the Emperor was reaching out his Hand, as a Sign of his Grant, the Floor of the
Chamber fell down under them. The Emperor fell into a Bathing-Vessel, without
hurt; Bruno, Alemannus, and Richilda, were thrown upon the sides of that
Vessel, in such a manner, that they were fore bruised, and in a few Days after
died of that Fall. Camerar. Oper. Subcisio, Cent. 2. c. 16. Wanley's Wonders,
c. 27. l. 6.

Mary, the Wife of Antonio Hortado, dwelling near the Salmon-falls, in
New England, gave this Information, Aug. 13. 1683. That in June, 1682. she
heard a Voice at the Door of her House, saying, What do you here? About an Hour
after, standing at the Door, she had a Blow on her Eye, that struck her Head
against the Door-post; and two or three Days after, a Stone, as she judged,
about a Pound weight, was thrown along, within the House, into the Chimney; and
going to take it up, it was gone; all the Family were in the House, and no Hand
appeared which might be instrumental in throwing the Stone. About two Hours
after, a Drying Pan then hanging in the Chimney, was heard to ring so loud,
that not only they in the House heard it, but others above an Hundred Rods
distant: Whereupon, she and her Husband going in a Canow over the River, they
saw something like the Head of a Man newly shaved, and the Tail of a white Cat,
about three Foot distance from each other, swimming over before the Canow, but
no Body appeared to join Head and Tail together; and they returning over the
River in less than an Hour, the same Apparition followed them back again, and
disappeared at their landing. A Day or two after, the Woman was struck on the
Head (as she judged) with a Stone, which made it swell, and become very sore;
she was then in the Yard: And going back into the House, she was bitten Black
and Blue on both Arms, and had one of her Breasts scratched; the Impression of
the Teeth, being like those of a Man, were seen by many. Whereupon, removing to
sojourn with a Neighbor on the other side of the River, there appeared to her,
in that House, a Woman in a green Safeguard, a short blue Cloak, and a white
Cap, making an Offer to strike here with a Firebrand, but did not touch her.
The Day following, the same Shape appeared to her again; but now clothed with
a gray Gown, white Apron, and white Head-cloaths, and seemed to laugh several
times, but no Voice was heard. Since which time, this Mary has been freed from
those Molestations, Essay Provid. p. 165. Hist. of D^m. p. 30.

I have said so much of this nature upon other Subjects in this Book, that I
think it unnecessary to enlarge any further in this Place. I am sure enough is
said to convince a Reader of an ingenuous and impartial Temper, and more will
not satisfy a Man that is resolved upon Incredulity.

CHAP. XCVIII. Satan hurting by False Promises or Threatenings.
THAT the Devil has been a Liar, and grand Impostor, we have had the
Experience of all Ages from the Beginning. He cheated our first Parents at his
first Appearance in the World; and has proceeded success^^ly to the present
time, to dilude all subsequent Generations; and yet (which is the Mischief of
it) Mankind is still so shallow, and of so dull Intellectuals, that upon the
Prospect of a pleasant Bait, he (...) a Surrender of his Heart, and Senses, and
believes and acts as this great Juggler would have him. It Is (...) observe, how
miserably Men are deluded with his false Promises, or affrighted with his
deceitful Menaces; and (...) still the Tragedy is carried, on, and will be to
the End of the World!

1. Bodin tells us of a French Baron, that confessed, That he Worshipped the
Devil, and prayed to him, and had sacrificed Nine Children to him, and intended
to have sacific'd one of his own. And he asked him for what he did this? And he
said, That he promised to make him Great, and yet that he never gave him any
thing, but had told him more Lies than Truths. This Promise of Knowledge was
the old Temptation to Eve: And yet Knowledge is the great Gift of our great
Comforter, the Holy Ghost; so that there is a true comforting Knowledge which
God gives, and a deceitful Shadow of it; and a useless hurtful Knowledge, by
which Satan comfort the Deluded. It Is true, Needful Saving Knowledge, that
is of God. Many Conjurers have, by the Desire of knowing what vain Curiosity is
pleased with, become the Devil's Slaves.

2. Dr. Dee, of whom we make mention elsewhere, was allured by Satan with
repeated Promises of the Philosopher's Stone; and in comfident Expectation
thereof, he spent his Time, Study, and Estate, and boasted to the Emperor of
Germany of it. But instead thereof, he had nothing performed, but a blind
aenigmatical Recipe from his supposed Angels, for the finding out of the Stone;
which was this,

Take common Audcal ( i. e. Gold,) purge and work it by Rlodur of four diverse
Digestions, continuing the last Digestion for Fourteen Days, in one swift
Propottion, until it be Dlased, ( i. e. Sulphur,) fixed in a most red and
luminous Body, the Image of Resurrection. Take also Lulo (the Mother) of red
Roxtan, (pure and simple Wine,) and work him through the four fiery Degrees,
until thou have his Audcal, (his Mercury,) and there gather him.

Then double every Degree of your Rlodur, and by the Law of Coition and
Mixture, work and continue them diligently together, notwithstanding backward,
through every Degree, multiplying the lower and last Rlodur, his due Office
finished by one degree more than the highest: So does it become Darr, (the
Angelical Name of the Stone, forsooth,) the Thing you seek for; a holy, most
glorious Red, and dignified Dlased. But watch well, and gather him so at the
highest; for in one Hour he descends or ascends from the Purpose.

This was communicated to the deluded Doctor, as appears by his own Writings,
after earnest Prayer, and great Importunity used, and a serious Complaint of
his Poverty; at Prague, A. D. 1585. And this was all he could obtain. See his
Actions with Spirits, p. 387.

3. A. C. 1530. There was in Norimberg a Popish Priest, that studied the
Black-Art, who coveting Riches, the Devil showed him, through a Crystal,
Treasures hidden in a part of the City. Thither therefore did the Priest go,
with another Companion; and having dug an hollow Pit, he perceived at the
bottom a Coffer, with a great black Dog lying by it; which whilst he beheld,
the Earth fell upon him, and crushed him to death. Clark's Examp. Vol. 1. c. 8.
out of Wierus.

4. Thomas Sawdie (mentioned in the Chapter of Satan restrained from Hurting)
received some, and was promised more Money from the Devil, in the Shape first
of a Man, then a Dog, but withal was possessed by him.

5. It were not difficult to give more Instances of Diabolical IIIusions in this
kind, as of Dr. Fanstus, of Cundligen, in Germany, who, after he had
entertained others with deceitful Banquets, and cheated himself with false
Hopes, at last was found dead in a certain Village, near Wirtemberg, with his
Neck broke, and the House beaten down with a terrible Storm.

6. Wierus says, Cornelius Agrippa, after his great Skill in Necromancy, and
his great Learning in all the Sciences, and Expectations of great things in the
World, upon the taking off an enchanted Collar from his Dog's Neck, died
miserably. Witness P. Jovius.

I shall only take notice, That almost all Witches, and Conjurers, live
contemptibly Poor, or Scandalous, and die accordingly.

7. But the Devil does not always use these gross ways to impose upon Man;
every body will not be taken with such Baits; some are of somewhat more fine
Intellectuals, and these are cajoled by other Methods, and decoyed to their own
Destruction by more plausible Devices and Temptation. The Highway-man, and
Pyrate, are sometimes Agents in the Devils Cause, and Successful too; and, as
Deputies and procurators under him, propund Golden Mountains, Rich Purses, an
easy and luxurious way of Living, for a Reward to them that will be of their
Society: But what shameful and miserable Ends they come to, I appeal to the
Golden Farmer, and Mr. Every the Pirate, lately taken into Custody, and a
Thousand more, who, in our own Times, and Nations, have ascended the Gallows
for their last Preferment, and looked the World in the Face with the
Inscription of Guilt and Ignominy in their Foreheads.

8. Yea, the Devil spins sometimes a finer Web than any of these. Tell but such
a Lie, use such an Equivocation, turn with the Wind of the Age, and observe
which way Wealth and Preferments are disposed by the Court-Party, and tack
about accordingly, and you shall rise higher than your Fellows; live more
bravely, plentifully, prosperously, than other sneaking Vertuoso's: And this
Bait too often takes with Men of no solid Principle. Multitudes are caught in
this Net, and for the time are mightily pleased with it, till some unexpected
Occurrence, or Old Age, and sad Experience, convinces them, that it was but a
Trick of the Devil to catch Fools with; and that they had better have stuck
close to the Rules of a steady Piety, and trusted God, though he did not pay
presently, but seemed to be asleep, while he exercised their Faith and
Patience. They that have to be Rich, fall into Temptations, and the Snare of
the Devil.

9. I have given no Instances of Satan's Hurting by Threatening Signs, or
Apparitions, yet: But what does he drive at, or propound to himself, by the
frequent Noises and Disturbances which he makes in Peoples Houses? When I first
began this Work, I heard a rapping at my Hall-door, as with a Horse-whip,
twice; and my Maid heard it likewise at the same time, though she was in the
Kitchen, and I in the Parlour, at that very Juncture. My Wife suspected it to
be a Token of some Funeral out of the Family, within such a set time, as a
Year, or so, etc. Many People have had the like, and yet no Harm followed: And
I quere, Whether, by the Appearance of the Ghosts of Persons departed, he does
not design to promote the Doctrine of Purgatory, or some other superstitious
Fancies? I am sure, many of the wild and fantastical Notions and Practices that
have been adopted into Religion, by Jews, Greeks, Papists, and Pagans, have
been fathered upon such Causes, viz. Visions and Revelations, Ominous Signs and
Apparitions.

10. Joan Williford, a Witch, confessed before the Mayor, and other Jurats of
Feversham, 1645. That the Devil promised her, that she should not lack: But
never brought her more than Eight Pence, or one Shilling at a time. See the
Examination and Confession of the said Joan, and others, 1645.

CHAP. XCIX. Divine Judgments by way of Retaliation.
THERE is no juster Law, says the old Poet, than that those who are the
Authors of Contriving a Mischief for others, fall into it themselves; and the
Sacred Scripture agrees thereto; and we have many Instances of such Judgments:
And certainly, if any Evils in the World carry in them the Signature and
Indication of the Cause, these do.

1. Haman was hanged upon the same Gallows that he prepared for Mordecai.

2. David, for his Adultery with Bathsheba, was threatened with a Punishment of
the like kind, which was accordingly inflicted on him, 2 Samuel 16.22. when
Absalom spread a Tent upon the top of the House, and went in unto his Father's
Concubines.

3. Those that accused Daniel to Darius, and procured the throwing of him into
the Lions Den, were afterward thrown there themselves, Dan. 6.24.

4. The Story of Phalaris's Bull, invented for the Torment of others, and
serving afterward for himself, is notorious in Heathen Story.

5. The Lord Cromwell, in Henry the VIII's Reign, is remarked for suffering
capital Punishment, without ever coming to a Trial, by a Law, which, they say,
himself, out of a servile Flattery to his Prince, procured for others. Of which
Michael Drayton thus writes, "Those Laws I made alone my self to please,
"To give a Power more freely to my Will,
"Even to my Equals hurtful several ways,
"Forced to things, that, most do say, were Ill;
"Upon me now as violently seize,
"By which, I lastly perished by my Skill,
"On mine own Neck returning, as my due,
"That heavy Yoke, wherein, by me, they drew. Winstanly's Worth. p. 216.


6. The Duke of Somerset in the Fifth Year of Edward VI. died by a Law, which,
but a year before was Passed by himself; Spelman.

7. The Papists pitched upon the Fifth of November for their Gunpowder-Plot,
but that was by Divine Providence seasonably Discovered; and some of the
Traitors flying into Worcestershire, etc. with two pounds of Powder which they
had Rifled out of the Lord Windsor's House, and laid to dry at the Fire, by
occasion of a Spark flying upon it, Catesby, Rookwood, and Grant, were much
scorched both in their Bodies and Faces, and at the same time the Roof of the
House was blown up with the violence of the Powder. And upon the same day, viz.
November 5. 1623. according to the Popish Account, by the fall of a House in
Black-fryars, London, at a Popish Conventicle, where one Drurie Preached, at
least Ninety Persons were killed. Again, upon the same day, November. 5. (to the
best of my Remembrance) King William III. by Divine Favor, and a special
Conduct of Providence, entered England, in order to the Delivering of us from
Popery and Arbitrary (or Tyrannical) Government.

8. It was a voluntary Judgment which Archbishop Cranmer inflicted on himself,
when he first thrust that very hand into the Fire, and burnt it, with which he
had Signed to the Popish Articles, crying out, Oh! my Unworthy Right Hand! but
who will deny that the Hand of the Almighty was also concerned in it?

9. The Spaniards, who exercised so much Cruelty in the West Indies, telling
the poor Natives that they had a Disease upon them, which Gold was a Sovereign
Remedy for, were many of them Taken and Slain by the Indians, and Gold poured
down their Throats in a Reproachful way, as if it were their God.

10. The Bishop of Mentz, who Burned the Poor of his Neighborhood in a Barn,
and called them Rats (mentioned elsewhere in this Book) was afterward punished
to death with Rats.

11. I have read of a Man, that was haled out of doors in a violent manner by
his own Son, who cried out to him; Oh! pray, no further; for just so far I
dragged my Father.

12. Often the very instrument of our Sin is the Instrument of our Punishment,
as a Child that we Cocker too much; a Persons we Love inordinately; any thing
we dote upon.

13. Sisera annoys God's People with Iron Chariots, and is Slain with a Nail of
iron. Jezabel's Brains, that devised Mischief against the Innocent, were
strewed upon Stones. By a Letter to Jezreel she shed the Blood of Naboth, and
by a Letter from Jezreel the Blood of her Sons was shed. Nebuchadnezzar
destroyed Solomon's Temple (that seven years work of so many Thousands)
therefore let him be turned a Grazing, and seven Seasons pass over him Dan.
4.16.

14. Frederick Barbarossa, Emperor of Germany, had often punished the City of
Milan for siding with the Pope against him: Yet on a time when Beatrix the
Empress came to the Town, the uncivil Citizens first Imprisoned her, and then
in a Scornful manner, set her on a Mule with her Face toward the Tail, which
they caused her to hold in her hand instead of a Bridle: And having thus
Disgracefully carried her through all the Town, they brought her to a Gate and
kicked her out. The Emperor to Revenge this Wrong, Besieged the City, and at
last took it, adjudging all the People to Death, but such as would redeem their
Lives in this opprobrious manner: He caused a Bunch of Figs to be fastened
between the Buttocks of a skittish Mule, and such as would live, must with
their hands bound behind them, run after the Mule, till with their teeth they
had snatched out one or more of the Figs; which condition, with the hazard of
many a sound kick, was accepted, and performed by many of them. Heyl. Geog. p.
214.

15. The Donatists that cast the Holy Elements in the Lord's Supper, to Dogs,
were themselves afterward devoured by Dogs. Zonaras.

16. The Archbishop of Tours, made suit for the Erection of a Court called
Cambre Ardent, wherein to condemn the Protestants to the Fire, and was himself
stricken with a Disease called the Fire of God, which began at his Feet, and so
ascended upwards, that he caused one member after another to be cut off, and so
he died miserably. Acts and Monuments.

17. There was one Christopher, an Unmerciful Courtier, who suffered a poor
Lazar to die by him in a Ditch, and himself shortly after perished in a Ditch,
Idem.

18. Laurentius Valla Censured all that wrote before him, and Erasmus comes
after, and Censures him as much. Trapp.

19. A. C. 1628. A Debauched Fellow in Banbury, in Cheshire, by Name Robinson,
by Profession a Beat-ward, (following that unlawful Calling, and especially
upon Festivals) was cruelly rent in pieces by a Bear, and so died fearfully. M.
S. of Mr. Burghal's of Acton.

20. An Attorney approving of Mr. H. Burton's losing his Ears, and Cursing him
with a ( What a Pox, etc.) his own Ear fell immediately a Bleeding plentifully.
See the Chapter of Divine Judgments upon Cursing; the last Example.

CHAP. C. Divine Judgments upon Superstition.
To do what is not Commanded, or to insist upon little observances which are no
part of Religion, as if they would commend us to God, is that which we commonly
call Superstition: Such were the ^^raclites forbearance to eat of the Sinew
which shruck, Genesis 32.32. Gideon's Ephod, the Philistines not treading on the
Threshold, 1 Samuel 5.5. Racher's Stealing her Father's Idols; Micha 's House of
Gods; Worshipping in High Places. The Scribes and Pharisees Traditions, their
frequent Washings, etc. and such Unscriptural Preciseness God has in all Ages
declared himself against. For, who more fit to prescribe in his own Worship
than himself? If Men will therefore presume to amend by their own Devices, and
make Supplies for the Defects of Infinite Wisdom, they do it to their Peril,
For who has required those things at their hands?

1. Observable are the Words of Holy, Humble, Self-denying Musculus on 1 Cor.
11. Now adays thou shall find very many, who in very many years do not so much
as once partake of this Sacrament, especially the Swenckfeldians, who did so
reject the Ecclesiastical Communion of all Churches, that they themselves had
none at all. When at Ausperge, I once asked a Ringleader of the Sect when he
had partaken with the Church of Christ, of the Bread and Cup of the Lord; he
expressly answered, he had then abstained about twelve years from the Communion:
being demanded why he had so done, he replied, That he had as yet not found any
Church which was inwardly and outwardly Adorned with the Gifts and Virtues of
the true Spouse of Christ, and therefore he did put off, and deferred his
Communion until he could find such a Church rightly Settled or Ordere; This
Principle carried a Pious Gentleman of a good Family in England much farther.
"Mr. Edward Grefwold shut up himself and his Children in his House, and would
come at no Man, nor suffer any Man to come at him, lest he shoud communicate
with them in their sin. Sustenance for him, and his Children was brought unto
them, and put in at some hole, or window, but he suffered no Man to come in and
minister unto them, no, not when his Children and himself lay sick in great
misery; when by Order his House was broken open (for the Justices of Peace, in
consideration of his Case, were constrained so to do) two of his Children were
found dead in the House, and one had lain so long unburied, that the Body was
Corrupted, and did annoy the Room; the Gentleman himself sick on his Bed in
woeful plight. He had gone through his Bible, and cut out the Contents, Titles,
and every thing but the Text it self. It is very likely that if hearing the
Doctrine of Grace he did communicate with them in their sins, much more was
guilt contracted by civil conversings, and if it be tried in right Reason, I
cannot see how that Consequence can be avoided. Now he, desirous to stick to
what he had learned, and not to delude himself with vain distinctions, as too
many of the Separation do, fell first into deep perplexities, and then at last
came unto that desperate conclusion to shut up himself and his Children. Mr. H.
Hickman 's Sermon at St. Aldate's, Oxon, 1664. p. 39, 40.

2. The Superstitions of the Heathen World are Gross and Notorious, the
Egyptians Worshipping a dead Isis, Serapis, Anubis, living Dogs, Cats,
Crocodiles, etc. The Carthaginians, Romans, Scythians, Gauls, Indians, etc.
Sacrificing Men's Flesh to Saturn, or rather Satan, Moloch, etc. At Nagracut in
the Great Mogul's Country, thousands of Indians cut out their own Tongues, and
Offer them in Sacrifice to an Idol called Matta: The Peruvians often put out
their own Eyes, that they may with more Reverence serve the Sun, Moon, and
Stars; (this is certainly a blind Devotion!) Amongst the Mahometans there are a
great many Superstitious Sects, concerning which I have said so much in my
History of all Religions, that I will say no more here; but only Remark to the
Reader, That such mufled Superstition is a Punishment to it self, by producing
only a wild, dark, confused and groundless Peace and Satisfaction to the
Consciences of the Votaries.

3. A. C. 1170. In the Reign of King Henry II. Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury, but a Rebel and Traitor to his King and Country, being Murdered,
was at first obscurely buried; but shortly after, his Body was taken up, and
laid up in a most sumptuous Shrine in the Cathedral of Canterbury, by his
Successor Stephen Langton, and by the Pope he was made a Martyr, to whose
Shrine People of all Degrees, and from all Parts flocked in Pilgrimage, and
loaded it with such large Offerings, that the Church round about, did abound
with more than Princely Riches, the meanest whereof was of pure Gold, garnished
with many precious Stones: The chiefest whereof was a Rich Gem, Offered by King
Lewis of France, and such pressing there was to touch his Coffin, and such
creeping and kneeling to his Tomb, that the prints of their Devotion in the
Marble Stones remain to this day: Yea, the Church it self that was Dedicated to
Christ, was forced to give place to the Name of St. Thomas; his Blood was
almost matched in Virtue with our Savior's; and his old Shoe was devoutly
kissed by all Passengers: His Shrine was built about a Man's height, all of
Stone, and above of plain Timber, within which, in an Iron Chest were his
Bones: The Timber-work was covered with Plates of Gold, garnished with
Branches, Images, Angels, Chains, Precious Stones, and great Orient Pearls, of
inestimable value. [ Erasmus when he was in England, went to visit it, but
laughs at the Superstition of the Age, which was so Prodigal upon a Dead
Carcass, when so many Living Christians were ready to Starve with Poverty, and
extremely wanted the Charity of their Neighbors. Erasm. Colloq.] But in the
Reign of King Henry VIII. A. C. 1538. the Shrine was spoiled, and the Spoils
were so great, that they filled two great Chests, one of which six or eight
strong Men could scarce carry out of the Church. Weaver's Mon. p. 202. Clark's
Examp. Vol. 1. P. 655.

It were tiresome to reckon up all the Superstitions of the Roman Church, their
particular Saints, with their particular Virtues, their Penances, Pilgrimages,
Largesses of Devotion, Postures of Worship, Habits, Ceremonies, Holy Days, etc.
all which have made such a noisome stench in the World, that in the beginning
of the Reformation, the Protestants cried out aloud, Vaugh upon them, and now
the Quietists among themselves hold their Noses, out of a Principle of
Nauseousness and Abhorrency of them, and rather choose to lay aside all the
external part of Worship (or almost all) than carry so long a Train of
Superstitious Observances along with them, when they go to the Church of God.

CHAP. CI. Divine Judgments upon Blasphemy and Profaneness.
BY Blasphemy, I mean Speaking Irreverently and Disrespectfully of Sacred
things; and by Profaneness an open Conversation agreeable to such
Dish^^^^rable and Rude Idea's: And such Crimes certainly have no foundation of
Security, no ground to build any hopes of Impunity upon, for so long as there
is a God existent in the World, and that God concerned in the Government of the
World, he will take notice of such open Disrespects, or none. It Is the Interest
of the Deity, at least now and then, to make a sharp Animadversion upon such
open Impiety, even in this World.

1. Eugenius being Emperor, Flavianus the Prefect, desired Leave of him to
Build an Altar to Victory at Milan, which Ambrose hearing of, departed from
thence to Bononia; but after a while returned again, ( Eugenius and Flavianus
being gone to War against Theodosius;) But before their departure they had sent
word, That when they returned Conquerors, they would make the Great Church in
Milan a Stable for Horses: but God prevented them; for Engenius was Slain by
his own Soldiers, and Theodesius got the Victory. Clark's Marrow of
Ecclesiastical History.

2. A. C. 1617. Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, a Man Old
and Corpulent, and so unfit for Travel, being almost at his Journeys end by
Nature, came into England, leaving his Country, [ Italy] as he affirmed, for
Religion, whereof he set forth in Writing many Reasons, and being thereupon
Entertained, he Preached, Railed, and Writ against Rome, extolling the
Protestant Religion, till he became Dean of Windsor, and Master of the Savoy,
which he enjoyed for some few years. Then, whether he had higher hopes at home,
or the Humor and Fancy altering, he went Retrograde: And after five years stay
here, he Retracted all that he had said and written: which so Incensed King
James, that he commanded him (within three days) at his Peril, to depart the
Realm: Who thereupon went to Rome, and there in veighed as bitterly against the
Protestants, as he had done in England against the Papists, hoping at least for
Pardon, if not for Preferment. But, notwithstanding his Recantation, according
to the Law of the Inquisition, having once Revolted (though now Returned,) he
Suffered the Death of an Heretic, had the Punishment of a Martyr, though not
the Honor: For he was publicly burnt at Rome, yet not burnt alive, but dying
in Prison, and being Buried, his Body was afterward taken up and Burnt. Such
Honor have all such Saints; For they hold it as a Maxim, That that Foundation
is never to be Built upon that was once of a Tottering Temper. Sir Richard
Baker's Chron. Clark's Examples C. 10. P. 27.

3. A. C. 1550. There was at Ferrara in Italy, on Faninus, who, by Reading of
good Books, was by God's Grace Converted to the knowledge of the Truth, wherein
he found such Sweetness, that by constant Reading, Meditation and Prayer he
grew so expert in the Scriptures, that he was able to instruct others: And
though he durst not go out of the Bounds of his Calling to Preach openly, yet
by Conference and private Exhortations he did good to many. This coming to the
knowledge of the Pope's Clients, they Apprehended, and Committed him to Prison;
where, by the earnest Solicitation of his Wife and Children, and other Friends,
he was over-perswaded to Renounce the Truth, and thereupon was Released out of
Prison. But it was not long before the Lord met with him for it: So as falling
into horrible Torments of Conscience, he was near unto utter Despair, for
preferring the Love of his Kindred, and Friends before the Service of Jesus
Christ; neither could he possibly be freed from these Terrors before he had
fully resolved to venture his Life more faithfully in the Service of Christ.
Clark's Examples, p. 27.

4. About the Year 1541. There was one William Barber, Master of Art in Oxford,
a Godly and Learned Man, that Disputed stoutly and accurately against the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation: Yet, through the Iniquity of the Times, was at
last brought over to make a Recantation; after which, he never Prospered, but
wore away with Grief and Sorrow till he died, Ibid.

5. In the Reign of Queen Mary, there was one Sir James Hales, Justice of the
Common Pleas, who though he had adventured his Life for Queen Mary, by refusing
to Subscribe to her Disinheriting by King Edward the VI's. Will; yet, for
giving the Statutes in Charge against the Pope's Supremacy, etc. at the
Sessions he was cast into Prison, and there so cruelly handled, and terrified
with the apprehension of the Torments, which (they said) were preparing for
him, that partly by the Flattery of the Bishops, and partly by their Threats,
he was drawn to Recant. After which, he fell into such terrors of Conscience,
that he attempted to kill himself with a Penknife; Yet, being by God's
Providence prevented, and his Wounds he had given himself Cured, he was
delivered out of Prison, and went home to his House; but neither could he have
any inward Peace by reason of his Apostasy: But setting his House in Order, he
drowned himself in a River not far from his Habitation. Ibid.

6. A. C. 1556. There was one Mr. Thomas Whittle, an Essex Minister,
apprehended and carried before Bishop Bonner, by whom he was laid in the
Porter's Lodge all night upon the bare ground: The next day the Bishop sent for
him to his Chamber, and asked him many Questions about the Sacraments of the
Altar, etc. to which Mr. Whittle returned such Answers as much angered the
Bishop; whereupon he told him that he should return to Prison and be fed with
nothing but Bread and Water; and not content with Threats, he fell upon him and
beat him with his Fists, and then put him into a little Room, where he lay two
Nights upon a Table; shortly after, the Bishop sent for him again, Flattered
him, proffering him Articles cunningly drawn up, and at last prevailed with him
to Subscribe them: But (said he) after I had done it, I had little Joy; for by
and by my Conscience told me, by God's Word I had done Evil, by so slight a
means to shake off the sweet Cross of Christ. Oh! the Crafty Subtilty of Satan
in his Members. Let every Man whom God shall deliver into their Hands, take
heed of them, and cleave fast to Christ: For they will leave no corner of his
Conscience unsearched, but will attempt by all guileful and subtle means to
corrupt him, and to cause him to fall from God and his Truth.

The Night after he had Subscribed he was greatly troubled, and through
Affliction of Conscience could not Sleep, neither could his Mind be eased till
he had procured his Subscription, and tore out his Name. Being Condemned to be
Burned, he thus said: My Mind, and Conscience I Praise God, is now quiet in
Christ; and I, by his Grace, am very willing and content to give over my Body
to the Death for a Testimony of his Truth, and pure Religion, against
Antichrist, and all his false Religion and Doctrine. Ibid. p. 28.

7. In Suffolk, among others there was one Peter Moon and his Wife, who were
Charged for not coming to Church, and for neglecting other Popish Ceremonies.
Moon was first Examined, Whether the Pope was not the Supreme Head of the
Church? Whether the Queen were not the right Inheritrix of the Crown? Whether
Christ's Body was not Really Present in the Sacrament, etc? and being of a
timorous Disposition, he so answered as his Adversaries were satisfied. His
Wife also, by his Example was drawn into the same Dissimulation, and so they
were dismissed. But when they came home, and began to bethink themselves what
they had done, they fell into such Trouble and Horror of Conscience, that they
were ready wholly to Despair: And Moon seeing a Sword hanging in his Parlor,
was tempted to have slain himself with it, which yet the Lord was pleased to
prevent; and afterward, upon their unfeigned Repentance, to restore and
comfort them. Ibid.

8. Sir John Check, who had been Tutor to King Edward VI. in the Reign of Queen
Mary, was cast into the Tower, and kept close Prisoner, and put to this
miserable choice; either to forego his Life, or that which was more precious,
his Liberty of Conscience: Neither could his Liberty be procured by his great
Friends, at any lower Rate, than to Recant his Religion. This he was very
unwilling to accept of, till his hard Imprisonment, joined with threats of much
worse in case of his refusal, and the many large promises made upon his
Submission, with what other means humane Policy could invent, wrought so upon
him, whilst he consulted with Flesh and Blood, as drew from him an
Abrenuntiation of that Truth which he had so long Professed, and still
Believed: upon this, he was Restored to his Liberty, but never to his Comfort;
for the Sense of, and Sorrow for his own Apostasy, and the daily sight of the
cruel Butcheries exercised on others for their constant adherence to the Truth,
made such deep Impressions upon his broken Spirit, as brought him to a speedy,
yet through God's Mercy and Goodness, to a comfortable end of his Miserable
Life. A. C. 1557. ibid. p. 28.

9. There was one Ralph Allerton, who coming into his Parish Church of Bently
in Essex, and finding the People idle, or ill employed, he exhorted them to go
to Prayers, and after he had read to them a Chapter out of the New Testament;
for which, being Apprehended, he was carried before Bishop Bonner, who by his
subtle persuasions and flatteries so prevailed with this poor Man, that he drew
him to Recant his former Profession, and so dismissed him.

But this base Cowardice of his brought him into such Bondage and Terrors of
Conscience, and so cast him down, that if the Lord had not been exceeding
gracious unto him, he had Perished for ever: But the Lord looking upon him with
the Eyes of Mercy, after he had Chastned, raised him up again; giving him not
only hearty and unfeigned Repentance of his Backsliding, but also a constant
boldness to profess his Name and Gospel, even unto Death, ibid.

10. In the City of Bristol, there was one Richard Sharp, a Weaver, who being
Apprehended for Religion, was carried before Doctor Dalby, the Chancellor, who,
after he had Examined him about the Sacraments of the Altar, so wrought upon
him by Persuasions, that he drew from him a promise to make a public
Recantation, and the time and place were appointed for it. But after this
Promise, Sharp felt such an Hell in his Conscience, that he was not able to
follow any Business; and he decayed in his bodily Health, and wholly lost his
Color. Whereupon, on a Sabbath, going to his Parish Church, he pressed to the
Quire-door, and with a loud Voice, said: Neighbors, bear me Record that yonder
Idol (pointing to the Altar) is the greatest and most abominable Idol that ever
was; and I am sorry that ever I denied my Lord God: For this he was carried to
Prison, and Sealed the Truth with his Blood. Ibid. p. 29.

11. When Jerome of Prague came to the Council at Constance, they sent him to a
Town, where they tied him fast to a great Block, and set his Legs in the
Stocks, his Hands also being made fast unto them; the Block being so high that
he could not possibly sit thereon, but his Head must hang downward; where also
they allowed him nothing but Bread and Water. But within eleven days, hanging
thus by the Heels, he fell very sick: Yet thus they kept him in Prison almost
Twelve Months and then sent to him, requiring him to Recant, and to Subscribe
that John Huss was justly put to Death; which he did, partly out of fear of
Death, and hoping to escape their hands. Yet they sent to Examine him again,
but he refused to Answer, except he were brought in Public before the Council:
(and they presuming that he would openly confirm his former Recantation) sent
for him, May 25. 1416. subborning False Witnesses to Accuse him: But he so
learnedly cleared himself and refuted his Adversaries, that they were
astonished at his Oration which he concluded with this; That all such Articles
which Wickliff and Huss had written against the Enormities, Pomps, and
Disorders of the Prelates, he would firmly Hold and Defend, even unto Death:
And that all the Sins he had committed did not so much gnaw, and trouble his
Conscience as did that most Pestiferous Act of his in Recanting what he had
justly spoken, and to the consenting to the wicked Condemnation of Huss; and
that he repented with his whole Heart that ever he did it. For this he was
Condemned and Burned. Ibid. p. 30.

12. Some of the Friends of Galcacius Garacciolus, Marquess of Vico, having
promised to accompany him in his voluntary Exile; but afterward looking back,
and turning again to their Vomit, they were Apprehended and cast into the
Inquisition, were they were forced publicly to Recant and to Abjure their
Religion; and so they became the Subject of Misery and Infamy, and were equally
Odious to both Parties. Ibid. p. 30.

13. Tho. Bilney, A. C. (1531.) of Cambridge, Professor of both Laws, Converted
Thomas Arthur, and Mr. Hugh Latimer; but after, recanting his Principles, for
the space of two years lived in great Anguish of Mind, and found no Rest till
Repentance; and therefore, afterward Preached publicly that Doctrine which he
had Abjured. Church Hist. Britan.

14. James Bainham, A Gentleman of the Middle Temple, being Imprisoned for his
Religion, and Racked, Abjured his Principles, and had his Liberty; but he asked
God and the World Forgiveness before the Congregation in those days, which was
in a Warehouse in Bow-Lane, and immediately after he came to St. Austin's with
the New Testament in his hand in English (and the Obedience of a Christian Man)
in his Bosom, and there declared with Tears before the People, that he had
denied God, and prayed the People to forgive, and beware of his Weakness. Ibid.

15. A. C. 1584. Francis Spira, living at Citadella, a Civil Lawyer, when he
had received the Doctrine of the Gospel and explained it among his Friends,
being brought into Danger, after long deliberation on both sides, he publicly
Renounced: But not long after fell into illness both of Body and Mind; and
began to despair of the Mercy of God: Being brought from Citadella to Padua
that he might make use of his Physicians, he received no Comfort; and scarce
took any Meat to support Nature: Whereupon returning home (professing himself
to be Condemned to Eternal Torments for Abjuring the known Truth) ended his
Life Miserably. Thus for Sleidan in his Commentaries.

He that Writes the Story at large, adds, That he called for a Sword to
dispatch himself with; that he professed, that his heart was estranged from
God, saying, I cannot call him Father, from my heart: All good Motions are now
quite gone; my heart is full of Malediction, Hatred, and Blasphemy against God.
I find I grow more and more hardened in heart, and cannot stoop nor help my
self: Your Prayers for me shall turn to your own benefit, but they can do me no
good. When this Friend took his Leave of him, Spira said: Although I know that
nothing can bring any benefit to me, a Reprobate, but that every thing shall
tend to my deeper Condemnation: Yet I give you most hearty thanks for your kind
Office of Love and Good will, and the Lord return it unto you with a plentiful
increase of all good.

As he was going down, he saw a Knife on a Table, and running to it, he
snatched it up, therewith to have mischieved himself, but that his Friend
prevented it; thereupon he said: I would I were above God, for I know that he
will have no Mercy on me. He lay about eight weeks in this case, in a continual
Burning, neither desiring, nor receiving any thing but by force, and that
without Digestion; and was like an Anatomy, vehemently raging for Drink; ever
Pining, yet fearful to live long, dreadful for Hell, yet coveting Death, in a
continual Torment, yet his own Tormentor. And thus consuming himself with Grief
and Horror, Impatience, and Despair, like a living Man in Hell, represented an
extraordinary Example of God's Justice and Power; and thus he ended his
miserable Life. See it more largely in the History it self.

16. Near akin to this is the Story of the second, Spira, published at London.
1692. though the early publication of it, together with the dreadful Contents,
and the natural tenderness of Relatives and Contrymen, and indeed the
unwillingness of almost all People to believe things so full of Terror, rendered
it to the apprehensions of some scarce credible: And my self, at Reading of it,
wished it were not true; yet upon a serious and impartial Inquiry, I do firmly
believe, that there is more Truth in it than will be granted by many of the
present Generation. See the Narrative it self.

17. The Story of Nightingale is generally known, which Mr. Fox relates, how he
fell out of his Pulpit and brake his Neck, whilst he was abusing that
Scripture, 1 John 1.10.

18. A Copy of a Letter directed to me since I undertook this Work.
SIR,
FInding in one of the Mercuries a Proposal for Printing The Most Remarkable
Providence, etc. I would, according to my weak Capacity, let you know, That
sometime since, though not very long, a Neighbor dying, the News came while I
was at Dinner; and one in Company said thus, We must all go, and none knows how
soon: I, out of a scoffing way, made answer, I was sure I should live whilst I
had eat the Meat I had. Before I had got one Bit of it in my Mouth, I was
struck quite Senseless, and had much ado to rise from the Table where I sat,
and did not expect ever to think of telling my blasphemous Expression to any:
But now meeting with a Work, which may be Profitable for all, but especially to
young Ones, I am willing to attest this, the Truth of which some can testify,
as I in the Presence of the Almighty have wrote.

Yours, JOHN EREEVE.
London, June 4. 1695.

19. There was a Woollen-Draper in Warwick, who made a Profession of Religion,
but many times brake out into scandalous Practices: Mr. Cartwright, on a time,
walking with him in his Garden, dealt plainly and faithfully with him, rebuking
him for his Miscarriages, and showing him the Dishonor that he brought to God,
and the Gospel thereby. Which so wrought upon him, that he presently sunk down;
and being carried home, died within a few Hours after. Mr. Clark in the Life of
Mr. Cartwright.

20. One John ap Howel, in Queen Mary's Reign, standing by William Maudon, as
he was reading in a Primer, at Greenwich, mocked him after every Word with
contrary gaudy and flouting Expressions. Whereupon Maudon said to him, John,
take heed what thou do; thou mockest not me, but God in his Word, though I be
simple that read it. Yet went he on in his Mocking, till Maudon reading, Lord
have Mercy upon us, Christ have Mercy upon us; the other with a Start said
suddenly, Lord have Mercy upon me! With that Maudon, turning to him, said, What
aileth thee, John? To which he answered, Nothing, but that he was afraid.
Afraid! of What? says Maudon. Nothing now, said the other. But presently
after, he confessed, That at the reading of those Words, Lord have Mercy upon
us, etc. the Hair of his Head stood an end with the great Fear that came upon
him. On the next Day he ran Mad, was bound in his Bed, and lay continually Day
and Night, crying out of the Devil of Hell, etc. Clark's Exampl. Vol. 1. c. 199.

CHAP. CII. Divine Judgments upon Scoffers at other Men's Imperfections, or
such as Counterfeited to have them, when they had them not.
TO Commiserate the Infirmities of our Brethren or Neighbors is a Branch of
Charity which the Gospel calls earnestly for; but to deride them for their
Defects and Imperfections, is a Point of Impiety that is founded in Pride and
Arrogance, and a Conceit of our own Dignity and Merit, not God's Grace and
Mercy: For which Reason, God is very angry with those that make the Defects of
other Men the Object of their Irrision and Scorn, as if they were over-looked
by their Creator with more Contempt, as being more Vile than their Neighbors.
Our Savioar gave a Check to this Humor, when he vindicated the Blind Man in
the Gospel, and told his Auditory, the Cause was neither his Sins, nor his
Parents.

1. Martial, who was a notable Scoffer, makes a Mockery at Coelius in his
Epigrams, who counterfeiting to be Gouty, anointed himself with Oils, and other
things, wrapping and binding up his Joints, because he would have nothing to do
at the Court, either by Night or by Day, or attend (as Courtiers do) upon any
Great Person: But in the end, his Fortune so fell out, that he happened to have
the Gout indeed. Treasur. of Anc. and Mod. Times.

2. Appianus Alexandrinus reports also of another Roman, who, to escape the
Proscriptions of the Roman Triumviri, and not to be known for what he was, by
such as might take notice of him, kept himself close, and wore an Emplaster of
Velvet upon one of his Eyes, which he continued for a long time. After all such
Search and Pursuit was passed over, the Man took off his Plaster, and found
the utter Loss of the Eye indeed. Ibid. p. 272.

3. During those Troubles of the Union or League in France, it chanced, that
(near unto a Castle) certain honest Men were set upon by Thieves, and robbed in
such sort, that they had nothing left them but their Shirts. When they
perceived the Castle, they went presently thither, and entreated the Lord
thereof, that he would lend them some Assistance, for the Apprehension of the
Thieves, in regard that he had a certain Knowledge of them, and was armed with
such Authority, as might (at least) help them to their Garments again. But the
uncharitable Gentleman would afford them no Favor; no, not so much as to see
them; but feigned that he had the Cholick, and was unable to stir out of his
Bed, or to attend upon any Business whatsoever. It was then the coldest Season
of the Year; and the Servants (albeit unknown to their Master) lodged these
despised poor Men (for that Night) in a Stable; whence they departed homeward
the next Morning, without drawing the least Courtesy that could be, from that
ungenteel Gentleman. Now I know not whether it happened by just Vengeance of
Heaven, or by some natural Occasion thereto leading; but he fell into the
Cholick indeed, and was forced to keep his Chamber for the space of Twenty
Days, and at last died by the violent Extremity thereof. Ibid. p. 273.

4. An Abbot of Guyenne, and Archdeacon in a Bishopric, was cited by the
Bishop and Chapter, to appear at a Visitation, for Assessing of each Benefice
in the Diocese, (according to their Faculties) for the Relief of poor Parishes,
from whence they derived Demesnes and Rents. The Abbot made Excuse, saying he
had a Pleurisy, (which was merely false) and therefore he could not be there
present. But within few Days after, he was taken with such a grievous Pain in
his Side, that he kept his Bed a whole Year together, and was glad to have his
Side cauterized in two Places: Notwithstanding which, he could not recover
Health while he lived. Ibid. c. 14. p. 273.

5. Suibdager, King of Swecia, being very Covetous, counterscited Deafness, to
the end be might hear to Requests made to him, for bestowing of any Gifts: For
in that Country, he negotiated his whole Reign by Conference with the People,
and not by Writing or Petition, as they do to this Day. But in a short time the
King became both Deaf and Blind indeed. Ibid.

6. I knew a young Scholar, descended of good Parentage, in the Franche-Comte,
who was a very facetious Scoffer and Mocker, and continually used to
counterfeit the Gate, Gesture, and Behavior of his Sister, (the Wife of his
elder Brother, descended of a very Worthy and Virtuous Family, and who had
brought great Estates and Means for her Portion) who was Lame, and as she
halted, so (in scorn) he would do the like: But (undoubtly by God's Judgments)
he chanced to break one of his Legs, which could never after be recovered, or
brought to any Form, so that he halted downright to his Dying-day. Ibid.

CHAP. CIII. Divine Judgments upon Atheism.
ATheism, and the Effects of it, are bidding an open Defiance to all the Powers
of Heaven; so that it is no Wonder, if the Almighty, who resides there, and
governs here, resents the Crime with a mere than ordinary Indignation. The most
Renowned for Professed Ungodliness ( says Bishop Fotherby) are these: In Holy
Writings, King Pharach, and Anti^^hus, the King of Tire, and the Two Her^ds: in
Ecclesiastical History, Caligula, Domitian, Maximinus, and Julian; in Profane
History, Pr^tagoras, Diagoras, Theodoras, Socrates, Epicurus, Bion, Pherecides,
and Dionysius. Of all whom, there was not one that cited in his Nest of a fair
and kindly Death, saving only this last, whose Damnation yet slept not; but all
the rest of them ended their Lives by the Stroke of God's Justice.

1. Julius Caesar suffered as an Atheist. Dr. Tenison.

2. There are a Sect of Atheists in Turkey, sprung up of late Years, called
Muserin; i. e. The True Secr^t is with us: Which Secret is no other, than the
absolute Denial of a Deity; that Nature, or the Intrinsical Principle in every
individual Thing, directs the ordinary Course, which we see and admire; and
that the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, have thence their Original and Motion;
and that Man himself rises and fades like the Grass and Flower. It is strange
to consider what Quantities there are of Men that maintain this Principle in
Constantinople, most of which are Cadi's, and Learned Men in the Arabian
Legends, and others are Renegado's from the Christian Faith, who, conscious of
their Sin of Apostasy, and therefore desirous all Things may conclude with this
World, are the more apt to entertain those Opinions which come nearest to their
Wishes. One of this Sect, called Mahomet Effendi, a Rich Man, educated in the
Knowledge of the Eastern Learning, I remember, was in my Time executed for
impudently proclaiming his Blasphemies against the Being of a Deity; making it,
in his ordinary Discourse, an Argument against the Being of a God, for that
either there was none at all, or else not so wise as the Doctors preached he
was, in suffering Him to live that was the greatest Enemy and Scorner of a
Divine Essence, that ever came into the World. And it is observable, says my
Author, That this Man might, notwithstanding his Accusation, have saved his
Life, would he but have confessed his Error, and promised for the future an
Assent to the Principles of a better: But he persisted still in his
Blasphemies, saying, That though there were no Reward, yet the Love of Truth
obliged him to die a Martyr. Mr. Ricaut's History of the Present State of the
Ottoman Empire, Book II. c. 12. p. 246.

A great Raja, a Gentile, a notorious Atheist, glorying to profess, That he
knew no other God than the King, nor believing nor fearing any other Deity,
fitting upon a time at dalliance with his Women, one of them plucked a Hair
from his Breast, which being fast rooted, plucked off a little of the Skin,
that the Blood appeared. This small Scar festred and gangreened incurably, so
that in few Days he despaired of life; and being accompanied with his Friends,
and diverse Courtiers, he brake out into these excellent Words: Which of you
would not have thought, that I, being a Man of War, should have died by the
stroke of a Sword, Spear, or Bow? But now I am enforced to confess the Power of
that Great God, whom I have so long despised, that he needs no other Lance than
a little hair, to kill so Blasphemous a wretch, and contemner of his Majesty,
as I have been. Dr. Burthogge, out of Purchase, in his Essay upon Human Reason,
p. 177.

Mr. Greenham, in his Works (which I have not now by me, and therefore cannot
quote the particular Place and Page, as I should do) tells us, That a certain
Man, not well grounded in his Religion, took view of the Papists Life, but not
finding it so glorious as they pretended it was, joined with the Familists, in
whom he so stayed, that he grew into Familiarity with them; the first
Principle, that there was no God, boiled so much in him, that he began to draw
Conclusions, viz. If there be a God, he is not so Just and Merciful, as they
say; if there be no God, then there is neither Heaven nor Hell; or if any, the
Joys and Pains not so Eternal, as some have taught; why then do I sell my
Pleasures in this World for uncertain Pleasures in another World? So this
Devilish Illusion prevailed on him to steal a Horse, for which he was
Apprehended, and at last condemned: But by the Providence of God, meeting and
conferring with a Godly Minister, was Reprieved till the next Assize, in hope
of his Conversion. He confessed himself an Atheist, but could not be brought
any thing from his Atheism. The Assize following drew near, when he was to be
executed, and the Place assigned: And at the Place of Execution, when he should
be turned off the Ladder, cried out directly, For Christ's sake stay my Life;
whereupon he spoke these or the like words: Well, let the World say what they
will, doubtless there is a God, and the same God is Just for ever to his
Enemies, and everlastingly keeps his Mercies with his Children. Now turn me
over. And so he made an end of his Speech, and of his Days. This Story I took
down in Writing out of Mr. Greenham's Works Five or Six and Twenty Years ago;
but not having the Book at present, I must deliver it with a Latitude, without
particular Quotations. And it is the more credible, because Mr. Greenham (if my
Memory fail me not extremely) is charactered by Bishop Joseph Hall, for a Saint.

5. Mr. Mather, speaking of the Obstacles which Mr. Eliot met with in Preaching
the Gospel to the Indians in New England, tells us, That Elliot made a tender
of the Gospel to King Philip, Ringleader of the most calamitous War that ever
the Pagan Indians made upon them; but Philip entertained it with Contempt and
Anger, and after the Indian Mode, he took hold of a Button upon Mr. Eliot's
Coat, adding, That he cared for his Gospel just as much as he cared for that
Button. The World has heard (says my Author) what a terrible Ruin soon came
upon that woeful Creature, and upon all his People: It was not (says he) long,
before the Hand which now writes, upon a certain occasion took off the Jaw from
the Blasphemous exposed Skull of that Leviathan; and the renowned Samuel Lee is
now Pastor to an English Congregation, sounding and showing the Praises of
Heaven, upon that very spot of Ground, where Philip and his Indians were lately
worshipping the Devil. Cotton Mather, in Mr. Eliot's Life, page 114.

6. Pope Leo the Tenth was so Impudent, as to make the Promises and Threats
contained in the Word of God, things to be laughed at, mocking the simplicity
of those that believe them: And when Cardinal Bembus quoted upon ocasion a
place out of the Gospel; The Pope Answered, Quantum nobis profuit fabula haec
de Christo? O, what Profit has this Fable of Christ brought unto us? The Pope
having by his Pardons and Indulgences scraped together vast Sums of Money to
maintain his Courtezans and Whores, and to enrich his Bastards: As he was one
day at Meat, News was brought to him of the Overthrow of the French in
Lombardy, which he much rejoiced at, and doubled his Good Cheer; but before he
arose from the Table, God's Hand struck him with a grievous Sickness, whereof
he died within three days. Clark's Mar. Chap. 9. p. 40.

7. Pope Julius the Third, another Atheist, a despiser of God and his Word; on
a time missing a cold Peacock, which he had commanded to be kept for him,
raged, and blasphemed God exceedingly; whereupon a Cardinal that was present,
entreated him not to be so angry for such a Trifle: What, (says he) if God was
so angry for eating of an Apple, as to thrust Adam and Eve out of Paradise;
should not I, who am his Vicar, be angry for a Peacock, which is of far more
worth than an Apple?

8. Francis Ribelius was so Profane, that he made a mock at all Religion,
counting it a thing to be laughed at: But the Lord struck him with Madness, so
that he died mocking at all those that talked of God, or made any mention of
God's Mercy to him.

CHAP. CIV. Divine Judgments upon Cursing.
RAshness is a fault in any Humane Action, but in no cases more dangerous than
in meddling with edged Tools; but above all in the Imprecation of Divine
Judgments. Men had need to be deliberate and well-advised, before they Appeal
to Heaven for Vengeance; for God is not to be played with. And oftentimes it
seems good to the Almighty, to hear the Prayers of these rash People beyond
their Expectation, on purpose to strike them with a more dreadful awe of the
Divine Majesty; and let every one beware by the Examples which follow, how they
play with the Thunderbolts of Heaven, lest they are checked, as the Apostles,
Luke 9.54, 55.

1. In France, a Man of good Parts, and well instructed in Religion, yet in his
Passion Cursing, and bidding the Devil take one of his Children, the Child was
immediately possessed with an Evil Spirit: From which, though by the fervent
and continual Prayers of the Church, he was at length released, yet ere he
fully recovered his Health, he died. Beza.

2. Anno Christi 1557. at Forchenum in the Bishopric of Bamberg, a Priest
Preaching about the Sacrament, used these, and suchlike blasphemous Speeches:
O Paul, Paul, if thy Doctrine touching the Receiving of the Sacrament in both
kinds be true, and if it be a wicked thing to Receive it otherwise, then let
the Devil take me: And if the Pope's Doctrine concerning this Point be false,
then am I the Devil's Bond-slave, neither do I fear to pawn my Soul upon it.
Presently the Devil came indeed, in the shape of a tall Man, black, and
terrible, with a fearful Noise, and roaring Wind, and took away the Old Priest,
that he was never after heard of. Fincelius, etc. Clarks Examples, Vol. I.
Chap. 38.

3. In Helvetia, Anno 1556. a certain Man that earned his Living by making
clean foul Linen, in his Drunkenness used horrible Cursings, wishing that the
Devil might break his Neck if ever he went to his old Occupation again; yet the
next day when he was sober, he went into the Field again about it, where the
Devil attended him in the likeness of a big swarthy Man, asking him, If he
remembered his Wish, and withal struck him over the shoulders, so that his Feet
and Hands presently dried; yet the Lord gave not the Devil Power to do him so
much hurt as he wished to himself. Fincelius.

4. Lamentable is the Relation of what happened in Holland, in June, 1681. as
it is written by Theodorus Paludamus, a Protestant Minister at Lewarden in
Friezland; a Person named Dowee Sitses, a Mason in that County, being reported
to be in a desperate case, I accompanied a Gentleman, who was sent to him by
Order from the Lords of the Provincial, where we found two Master-Chirurgeons,
and their two Servants busy in making of Plasters, and dressing the Patient,
and he in such a lamentable Condition, as we could not behold but with
Amazement; his Hair was burnt off his Head to his Ears, his whole Face burnt,
except his Eyes, his Arms burnt in several places, his Hands to the end of his
Fingers were burnt like a roasted Fowl, but could move all his Fingers; his
Breast and Back burnt in several places, and yet his Shirt whole; his Belly
under the Navel, for about the breadth of an hand, was as black as a stock, in
which place the Surgeons made several Incisions, and he felt it not; his
Privities, Hips, Thighs, and Legs were terribly burnt, yet not his Stockings,
his Feet were also burnt, and indeed no Part was free, so that he was a woeful
sight. After the Patient was dressed, and had got a little breath, both he and
his Wife gave a full Account of the following Passages upon Oath: Upon the
15th. of June at Evening, this Dowee Sitses came Drunk into a Tavern, where he
with the Man of the House, and another, drank three Quarts of Wine, and coming
home at Ten at Night, he lay down to sleep upon Cushions in the Kitchen, and
fell into a Dream about a Story he had read in a Book of Simon de Vries, of a
certain Company that danced in Masquerade, with every one a lighted Torch in
their hand, wherewith they burnt one another; whereupon he awaked, and stood
up, thinking to go into the Yard to make Water, and of a sudden he found
himself of a light flame in the midst of the Room, which burnt him thus
dreadfully, and some part of his Clothes; upon which he cried out for Help, but
none came; then he began to faint, and in his Distress cried out, O God, be
gracious unto me, a poor sinner, and thereupon the flame ceased in the
twinkling of an Eye, but he growing faint, laid his Head upon a Cushion in the
Room; about Two in the Morning his Wife came down, and found him in this sad
Condition, and felt something under her Feet, which was like a parcel of
Red-ashes, and burnt Rags, and taking hold of her Husband, had only a burnt
piece of his Sleeve in her Hand, whereupon she cried out, O Lord, Dowee, thou
art grievously burnt: He answered, the Devil has brought me in this case; upon
which she called in the Neighbors and Surgeons: His Wife said, he had been
much given to Drunkenness, and often reproved in vain by the Ministers; that he
drank much Brandy, and other strong Liquors, though he had often sworn against
it, and usually cursed himself, wishing, that if he were Drunk again, the Devil
might tear him Limb from Limb: So that God makes use of the Devil as an
Executioner of his Judgment, to bring the miserable Man's own Curse upon him,
not one Limb or Member being left upon him. R. B. his Wonderful Prodigies, p.
25. out of a Book, called, The Drunkard fore-warned.

5. A Woman in derby-shire having cozened a Boy of some Money, was charged with
it, but she stiffly denied it, and being further urged to confess the Truth,
she in a fearful manner prayed God, that the Earth might open, and swallow her
up quick, if she had it; and immediately the Earth under her opened, and she
sank into it, and being afterward dug for, they found her Nine Foot within
the Earth, and that very Money was found in her Pocket. This happened about the
beginning of April 1661. and is well attested by the Neighbors, as appears by
the Printed Narrative. And the same Story is abbreviated by Mr. Samuel Clark in
his second Vol. of Examples.

6. Since my return from Exile, says Mr. H. Burton, a certain Attorney at Law,
being in the House of one Mrs. Monday, dwelling near Aldersgate, Feb. 17th.
1640. and mention being made of my Name and Sufferings, and Mrs. Monday saying,
That England had never thriven since he suffered; and that though she had never
seen him, yet she had shed many a Tear for him. The said Attorney replied,
Could so many wise Men and Judges by deceived, for he suffered no more than he
deserved, nor so much neither; and therefore what a Pox should you be sorry for
such a Man as he? No sooner had these words passed from him, but his Right Ear
suddenly and strangely fell a bleeding at the lower tip of it, and so long it
bled, as it wet a whole Handkerchief, so as it might have been wrung out;
whereat his Heart so fainted, that he sent for half a Pint of Sack, and drank
it up himself alone: Whereat his Brother then present, with sundry more, said
to him, You may see, Brother, what it is to speak against Mr. Burton: Yet such
was this Man's Spirit, that instead of taking notice of the Hand of God herein,
he continued Cursing, saying, What a Pox, had I not spoken a Word against Mr.
Burton, my Ear would have bled; though he could not at that time show any
Reason, or natural Cause, why his Ear should then bleed, it being whole and
sound; so as, upon the ceasing of the Blood, Mr. Monday's Maid wiping the Blood
off his Ear, and looking wistfully upon it, could not discern whence the Blood
should issue, but only a small bore or hole no bigger than a Pin's point could
go into, there being neither Scratch, nor Scab, nor Scar, in his Ear. Witnesses
of this were the Attorney's Brother and his Wife, Mrs. Adcock, Mrs. Anne Roe,
Mrs. Joan Monday, and Eleanor Hutton her Servant. See his Life, p. 50.

7. Mr. Vincent, Minister of Bednal, in the County of Stafford, gives a short
but true Relation of a dreadful Judgment that happened upon one John Duncalf,
of Kings-Swinford, which is related more at large by others; and I my self
living in the next adjacent County, at the same time, can assure the Reader,
from the Information of several Friends, that it is a real Truth: In January,
1677. this John Duncalf coming to the House of Humphrey Baby, at Grangewel,
about Three Miles from Wolverhampton, he begged of the Woman Victuals and
Drink, who, formerly knowing him, and compassionating his Condition, freely
gave it to him; but while she was stooping to draw him some Drink, he stole her
Bible, and sold it afterward, for Three Shillings, to a Maid not far off;
whereby the Woman came to hear of it, and paying her the Money, received it
again, but could not hear what was become of the Man. But a while after, John
Duncalf hearing it discoursed, that he stole a Bible, grew very angry, and gave
out threatening Words against a young Man that reported it; but being severely
charged with it, he did not only deny it with some fierceness, but execrated,
and cursed himself, wishing his Hands might rot off if it were true: Which
Words he had no sooner uttered, but by his own Confession to diverse that came
to see him in his miserable Condition, he said, That immediately thereupon he
had an inward Horror and Trembling upon him, a Dread and Fear of the Divine
Majesty and Justice of God, that within a few Days after his Cursing himself,
his Flesh began to look black at the Wrists of his Hands, and so continued
diverse Weeks, with faintness; and fearing an Ague, was going to his
Acquaintance, but not being able to go farther, he laid himself down in a Barn,
and there continued two Days and Nights before he was found, from whence he was
removed to another Barn near Wolverhampton, and had a Keeper appointed him. His
Flesh began first to rise in great Knots at his Wrists and Knees, and to break
and run with putrid Matter; the Flesh shrunk from the Bones, his Pain was
exquisite, the Smell very offensive, Worms bred in the putrid Flesh, and his
Hands and Legs fell off. And thus continued he, begging the Prayers of those
Divines that came to visit him, and acknowledging the just Judgment of God for
his Stealing, Lying, and Cursing, etc. for some Weeks, a dreadful Spectacle of
the Divine Vengeance. See the printed Narrative, or Abbreviations by others.

8. Anno 1677. at Atherbury, in Oxfordshire, a Woman that kept a petty
Alehouse, having much addicted her self to Oaths and Curses, one Morning a
neighboring Woman coming thither for some strong Drink she had occasion for,
and offering a piece of Money to pay for it, she would have Two Pence or Three
Pence more for a former Debt, which the other resolutely denied: The Hostess
began to swear, and use several profane and abominable Wishes, and
Imprecations, as God-damn me, and the Devil burn me, if it be not so; which
last Words she often repeated, thrusting the other Woman violently out of her
House, shutting the Door, and locking it against her. Her Husband not long
after coming home, wondered to find the Door fast; but at last, with one or more
of his Neighbors, he forced it open, and to his great Surprizal, finds in the
midst of the Floor the Relics of his Wife; one side of her Body, and the
Clothes on it, from the Sole of her Foot to the Crown of her Head, burnt to
Ashes, and nothing left, but the Skeleton, or part of the Bones; whereas the
other side remained whole, and the Clothes not so much as touched or singed,
though it was observed, that the Flesh and Skin was all turned black. See the
Relation called God's Strange and Terrible Judgments in Oxfordshire, Licensed
May the 10th. 1677. Rog. L'Estrange.

9. Much the like Story was published not many Years ago, concerning a Maid in
Dublin.

CHAP. CV. Divine Judgments upon Swearing, etc.
THOUGH God has allowed us, for the Confirmation of a Truth, in necessary and
solemn Cases, to use an Oath, and make our Appeal to him; yet in ordinary
Conversation He requires us to keep close to our Yea and Nay, a bare and simple
Affirmation and Negation, without proceeding any further: For a common Use of
Appealing to Heaven in little and trifling Concerns, would much invalidate the
Strength and Authority of Sacred Oaths, and contribute much to the Dishonor
and Contempt of the Divine Majesty: And therefore in the Third Commandment, God
does not only forbid the taking of his Name in vain, but threatens withal to
have a watchful Eye upon those that do it; and however Men may, through
Remissness of Discipline, neglect their Duty, and account such Customary
Swearing no Sin, yet God will not hold them guiltless that take his Name in
vain.

1. Bishop Ridly, in a Sermon at Paul's- Cross, related a Story of a young
Gentleman of Cornwall, in the Days of King Edward the Sixth, who riding in
Company of other Gentlemen, began to Swear and Swagger; and being reproved for
it, he swore the more, and raged worse: To whom one Mr. Haines, a Minister,
with gentle Words, said, That he should one Day give an Account thereof.
Whereat the Gentleman being in a Fume, bade him take no thought for him, but to
prepare for his own Winding Sheet. Well, said the other, Amend; for Death gives
no Warning. God's Wounds, said he, care not thou for me; still raging worse and
worse; till coming to a Bridge (which passed over an Arm of the Sea) the young
Gallant so spurred and switched his Horse, that he leaped over with him into
the Water; who, as he was going cried, Horse and Man, and all to the Devil.
Act. and Mon. etc. Clark's Mirr. c. 129.

2. A Serving-man, in Lincolnshire, for every Trifle used to swear by God's
precious Blood, and would not be warned by his Friends, till at length falling
into a grievous Sickness, he was again much persuaded by his Friends to Repent,
which Counsel he still rejected; and hearing the Bell to toll, in the very
Pangs of Death he started up, swearing, God's Wounds the Boll tolls for me, but
he shall not have me yet. Whereupon the Blood issued out in a most fearful
manner from all the Joints of his Body, from Muth, Nose, Wrists, Knees, Heels,
and Toes, and other Parts thereof, and so he died. Mr. Perkins. Clark's
Mirror, c. 129.

3. Michael, a Jewish Rabbin, as he was swearing, and blaspheming the Name of
Jesus, fell down and broke his Neck. Socrat. Eccles. Hist.

4. One who for Twelve or Sixteen Years together used to swear by God's Arms;
in the end his own Arm being hurt with a Knife, could not be healed by any
means, but it rankled and festered from Day to Day, and at last so rotted, that
it fell away piecemeal, and himself through anguish and pain thereof died.
Phil. Stubs.

5. I my self knew a Woman, near Whit-Church, in Shrop-shire, called the Widow
Maurice, by Profession a Midwife, who in ordinary Conversation, lifting up her
two Hands toward Heaven, and stretching out her Fingers to the full length,
used to swear by these Ten Bloody Bones: This Woman had a Son called Stephen
Maurice, who was born with two Thumbs upon a Hand; and he likewise marrying,
had several Children born in like manner with two Thumbs a-piece upon each
Hand; all which supernumerary Thumbs, she, in a bloody manner, with her own
Hand cut off. This Woman assisted my Mother, as Midwife, when she brought me
into the World, W. T.

6. Sir Roger Mosson, of Mosson, in Flint-shire, had a Coal-pit sunk pretty
deep by some Workmen, who discovered a good Mine of Coal; but meeting with a
Fire-damp, were so affrighted, that they deserted the Work: At last a bold
Fellow, that was a notorious Swearer, came, and undertook to go on with it. He,
with two or three more Men, goes down into the Pit, leaving the other Men near
the Eye thereof, whilst himself with a Candle lighted goes forward, but
presently was so attacked with the Fire-damp, that the other Men were struck
down with it in great amazement, and had much ado to recover themselves, and
an Engine of a vast bulk and weight, that stood near the Eye of the Pit, was
carried up into the Air, as high as the tops of some Trees that grew upon a
Hill near adjoining; and the Man himself, that went foremost with the Candle,
miserably and irrecoverably perished. This I had out of the Philosophical
Transactions, printed some Years ago; but in what Year particularly, I remember
not, having not the Pamphlet by me at present.

7. Anno Christi, 1649. about the end of June, there was a Soldier at Ware,
going with some others to wash himself in the River; but finding the Water
shallow, he asked if there was no deeper a Place for him to swim in. Some told
him, that there was not far off a deep Pit, but that it was very dangerous, and
therefore advised him to take heed how he went into it: To whom he answered,
God damn me, if it be as deep as Hell I will go into it; which accordingly he
did, but immediately sunk to the bottom, never rising again, but was there
drowned. Attested by good Witnesses. Clark's Mirr. c. 129.

8. One Mr. Barrington, a great Swearer, going forth a Hunting or Hawking on a
Lord's Day, or a Festival, and not speeding to his Mind, came to an Alehouse
at Puckrych, Five Miles from Ware, in the way to Cambridge, and called for
Drink, beginning to swear after his unhappy Custom, saying, By God's Blood this
is an unlucky Day; and presently after he bled at the Nose, which so vexed him,
that he began to rail and blaspheme the Name of God, swearing, Passion, Wounds,
Flesh, Nails, Blood and Body, etc. till at last he proceeded farther to bleed
at the Ears, Eyes, Wrists, joints of his Hands, and of all his Body, at the
Navil and Fundament, in a wonderful great Quantity, and Streams of Blood,
blaring out his Tongue in a fearful manner, as black as Pitch, so that no
Person durst come near him. This continued, faith my Author, till the Devil and
Death made an end of him. Next day the Body was laid on a Cart, carried to
Stond^n, and buried in the Highway. Mr. Batman in his Doom, warning to the
Judgment, p. 418. Who says, he had it from Mr. Barrington's wife, afterward
married to Mr. Carington in Cambridge.

CHAP. CVII. Divine Judgments upon Sabbath Breakers.
AS God requires us to Remember the Sabbath Day, so as to keep it Holy; so
himself Remembers them that dare to Profane it. The Child that gathered Sticks
on that Day, among the Israelites, in the early Times of the Mosaic Economy,
was, by the Order of God himself, stoned to Death. And as he began to show his
Severity betimes, in the Punishing of this Sin, so he has continued to the
present Age, to show his great Displeasure against it; insomuch that, I think,
King James was much in the right, when he caused his Declaration for Sports
upon that Day, to be torn out of his printed Volume of Writings, where it is
not now to be seen.

1. A certain Nobleman profaning the Sabbath, usually in Hunting, had a Child
by his Wife, with a Head like a Dog, and with Ears and Chaps, crying like a
Hound.

2. Stratford upon Avon was twice, on the same Day Twelve month (being the
Lord's Day) almost consumed with Fire; chiefly for Profaning the Lord's Day,
and Contemning his Word, in the Mouth of his Faithful Minister.

3. Feverton in Devonshire (whose Remembrance makes my Heart bleed) was
oftentimes admonished by her Godly Preachers, that God would bring some heavy
Judgment on the Town for their horrible Profanation of the Lord's Day,
occasioned chiefly by the Market on the Day following. Not long after his
Death, on the 3d. of April, Anno Dom. 1598. God, in less than half an Hour,
consumed with a sudden and fearful Fire the whole Town, except only the Church,
the Courthouse, and the Almshouses, or a few poor Peoples Dwellings; where a
Man might have seen Four Hundred Dwelling-Houses all at once on fire, and above
Fifty Persons consumed by the Flame. Not many Years after this, a Misfortune of
the like nature, befell the Town again; for on the Fifth Day of August, 1612.
(Fourteen Years since the former Fire) it was again fired and all consumed,
except some Thirty Houses of poor People, with the School-House, and
Almshouses. They are blind which see not in this the Finger of God. God grant
them Grace, when it is next built, to change their Market Day, and to remove
all Occasions of Profaning the Lord s-Day. Let other Towns remember the Tower
of Siloe, Luke 13.4. and take Warning by their Neighbors Chastisements: Fear
God's Threatenings, Jerem. 17.27. And believe God's Prophets, if they will
prosper, 1 Chronicles. 20.20. Thus far Dr. Bread, in his Theater of God s Judgments,
p. 419, 420.

4. Mr. Smythyes, Curate of St. Giles's Cripplegate, in the Confession and
Discovery of a Condemned Prisoner, executed May the 25th. 1687, (for Theft)
says, that it was his Earnest Desire, That all young Men especially, should
take care not to mispend the Lord's Day. And I do now know, says he, that ever
I observed any Repentance in a Condemned Malefactor, who did not bitterly
lament his Neglect of his Duty to God on that Day.

5. Edmund Kirk, Vintner, executed at Tyburn, July 11. 1684. for murdering his
Wife, in his Confession acknowledged himself frequently guilty of Profaning the
Lord's Day: Upon which Holy Day, says he, I committed the heinous Sin of
murdering my poor Wife. Thus Sin was punished with Sin, a Less with a Greater,
and the Greater with the Gallows, and that Greater committed near the same
Gallows! And himself confessed, That he had (to his Wife, asking, whilst she
passed by, what Place that was?) told, it was Tyburn, where John Gower was
lately hanged for killing his Wife. O Lord, how dear to me thy Counsels are!
but how just and terrible are thy Judgments!

6. Famous and memorable also is that Example which happened at London, January
the 13th. 1583. at Paris-Garden, where, upon the Sabbath Day, were gathered
together (as accustomably they used) great Multitudes of profane People, to
behold the Sport of Bear-baiting, without respect of the Lord's Day, or any
Exercise of Religion required therein: Which profane Impiety, the Lord, that he
might chasten in some sort, and show his Dislike thereof, he caused the
Scaffolds suddenly to break, and the Beholders to tumble headlong down; so that
to the number of Eight Persons, Men and Women, were slain therewith, besides
many others which we re sore hurt and bruised, to the shortening of their Days.

7. The like Example happened at 3 Town in Bedfordshire, called Risley, in the
Year 1607. where the Floor of a Chamber, wherein a Number were gathered
together to see a Play on the Sabbath Day, fell down, by means whereof many
were sore hurt, and some killed. Surely a Friendly Warning to such as more
delight themselves with the Cruelty of Beasts, and vain Sports, than the Works
of Mercy and Religion, the Fruits of a true Faith, which ought to be the
Sabbath-Day's Exercise.

8. Not long since, in Bedfordshire, a Match at Football being appointed o the
Sabbath in the Afternoon; whilst Two were in the Belfry tolling of a Bell, to
call the Company together, there was suddenly heard a Clap of Thunder, and a
Flash of Lightning was seen by some that sat in the Church Porch, coming
through a dark Lane, and flashing in their Faces, which much terrified them,
and passing through the Porch into the Belfry, it tripped up his Heels that was
tolling the Bell, and struck him stark dead; and the other that was with him,
was so sorely blasted therewith, that shortly after he died also. Dr. Twiss on
the Sabbath. Ibid.

9. At a place called Tidworth, on the Sabbath Day, many being met together to
play at Football in the Churchyard, one had his Leg broken, which presently
Gangrening, he forthwith dyed thereof. Eodem.

10. Anno, 1634. on a Lord's Day, in the time of a great Frost, Fourteen Young
Men, while they were playing at Football, on the Ice, on the River Trent, near
to Gainsborough, meeting all together in a Scufflle, the Ice suddenly brake,
and they were all Drowned. Ibid.

11. In the Edge of Essex, near Drinkley, two Fellows working in a Chalk. Pit,
the one was boasting to his Fellow how he had angered his Mistress with staying
so late at their Sports the last Sunday Night. But he said, he would anger her
worse next Sunday. He had no sooner said this, but suddenly the Earth fell down
upon him, and slew him outright; and by the fall thereof is Fellows Limb was
broken, who had been also sharer with him in his Jollity on the Lord's Day.
Ibid.

12. At Al^ester in Warwickshire, upon the coming forth of the Declaration, for
Sports, a Lusty Young Woman went on the Sabbath Day to a Green, not far off,
where she said, she would Dance as long as she could stand: but while she was
dancing, God stuck her with a violent ^^isease, whereof, within two or three
Days after, she died. Ibid.

13. Also in the same place, not long after, a Young Man presently after the
Evening Sermon was ended, brought a Pair of Cudgels into the Street, near to
the Minister's House, calling upon diverse to play with him, but they all
refused, at the length came one, who took them up, saying, Though I never
played in my Life, yet I will play one bout now: But shortly after, as he was
jesting with a Young Maid, he took up a Birding-piece, which was charged,
saying, Have at thee, and the Piece going off, shot her in the Face, whereof
she immediately died: for which Act, he forfeited all his Goods, and underwent
the Trial of the Law. These two I knew when I lived there. Ibid.

14. At Woolston in the same County, a Miller going forth on the Sabbath Day,
to a Wake, when he came home at Night, found his House, Mill, and all that he
had, burnt down to the Ground. This I also saw, says Mr. Clark in his Mirror.
c. 115.

15. At Woolston in the same County, many loose Persons kept a Whitson-Ale, and
had a Morris-dancing on the Sabbath Day, in a Smith's Barn, to the great Grief
of the Godly Minister, who labored all that he could to restrain it: But it
pleased God, that shortly after a Fire kindled in that Smith's Shop, which
burnt it down, together with his House, and Barn; and raging furiously, going
sometimes with, and sometimes against the Wind, it burnt down many other
Houses, most of which were prime Actors in that profanation of the Lord's Day.
I my self knew these Four last Examples. ibid.

16. In the County of Devon, one Edward Ameridith a Gentleman, having been
pained in his Feet, and being somewhat recovered, one said unto him, he was
glad to see him so nimble; Ameridith replied, that he doubted not but to dance
about the May Pole the next Lord-day: but before he moved out of that place, he
was smitten with such feebleness of Heart, and dizziness in his Head, that
desiring help to carry him to any House, he died before the Lord's Day came.
ibid.

17. At Walton upon Thames, in Surrey, in a great Frost, 1634. Three Young Men
on the Lord's Day, after they had been at Church in the Forenoon, (where the
Minister pressed the Words of his Text, out of 2 Cor. 5.10. That we must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, etc. they gave little heed thereto,
but whispered all the while as they sat:) went in the Afternoon together over
the Thames, upon the Ice, unto a House of Disorder, and Gaming; where they
spent the rest of the Lord's Day, and part of the Night also, in revelling. One
of them in a Tavern merrily discoursed the next day, of his Sabbaths Acts, and
Voyage over the Ice; but on Thursday next after, these Three returning
homewards, and attempting to pass again over the Ice, they all sunk down to the
bottom as Stones, whereof only one of them was miraculously preserved, but the
other two were drowned. These Four last are attested by good Hands. ibid.

Mr. Fauconer Minister of Burford, near Salisbury, in his Book entitled, The
burden of England, Scotland and Ireland, and styles himself, Ed. de. claro
vado; Printed for Thomas Slater, and to be sold at his Shop in Du^^ Lane, at
the Sign of the Angel, relates a fearful Example of God's Justice about the
year 1635. p. 1^4. which was this.

18. A Profane company of Young men, on the Lord's Day early in the Morning,
went to Claringdon Park to cut down a May Pole, and having laden the Cart with
it, at Milner's Bars, entering into the City of Salisbury, one of the Cart
wheels fell into a Rut, which made the young Tree in the Cart (which they had
stolen for a May Pole to give a great Surge on one side, which struck one of the
Company such a blow on the Head, that it beat out his Brains, so that he
presently died in the place, and lay there a fearful Spectacle of God's Wrath,
both against that Heathenish Sport, and wilful Profaning of the Sabbath;
whilst he makes the very thing they had chosen for their Sport and Pastime, to
be the Instrument of executing his Fury. The truth of this I diligently
enquired after, at my first, coming to Sarum, and very many Godly, and Credible
Persons, who had seen that sad Spectacle in my hearing attested it to be so.
Ibid.

19. Mr. Hugh Clark Preaching about Oundle in Northamptonshire, where the
People were generally very Ignorant, and much addicted to the profanation of
the Lord's Day, by Whitson-Ales, Morris-Dance^, etc. which he much set himself
against, endeavoring to convince them of the evil, and denouncing God's
Judgments in case of their obstinate perseverance: They being trained up in
those Courses, and hardened by Custom, persisted still in their wickedness. At
last, on a Lord's Day, the Leader of the Dance, a lusty young man, in the midst
of their Profane Pastimes, fell down suddenly and died, but they soon shaking
off their Fear, returned to their Vomit again: The Lord's Day following Mr.
Clark took occasion from this sad dispensation to quote that Text, Jer 17.27.
If thou will not hearken to me, to Hallow the Sabbath Day, etc. then will I
kindle a fire in the Gates thereof, etc. The People still kicked against these
Admonitions, and the Eve following returned to their Sports again, among whom
was a Smith, that was a chief Ringleader; but it pleased God, the very next
day, two Husbandmen coming to his Shop, to sharpen their Plough-shares, a
Spark from the red-hot Iron as he was beating it upon the Anvil, flew into the
Thatch, which both the Smith and his Neighbors saw, but had not power to move
toward it; which presently burnt down the Shop, House, and all the Smith's
Goods. This Mr. Clark pressed upon their Consciences, but nothing would
prevail, till at last, upon a Sabbath Day at night, when they were retired to
their several homes, there was heard a great noise, and rattling of Chains up
and down the Town, which was accompanied with such a smell and stink of Fire
and Brimstone, that many of their guilty Consciences suggested to them, that
the Devil was come to fetch them away quick into Hell; and now, and not till
now, they began to think in good earnest of a Reformation. Mr. Clark, in his
Father's Life. p. 128.

And thus much for the Examples of the first Table, whereof, if some seemed to
exceed Credit, by reason of the strangeness of them, yet let us know, that
nothing is impossible to God; and that he does often work Miracles to control
the obstinate Impiety and Rebellion of mortal Men against his Commandment.
Besides, there is not one Example here mentioned, but it has a credible or
probable Author for the Avoucher of it. Let us now, out of all this that has
been spoken, gather up this wholesome Lesson, to love God with all our Heart and
Affection, to the end we may Worship him, Invocate his holy Name, and repose
all the confidence of our Salvation upon him alone through Christ Jesus,
seeking by pleasing and obeying his Will, to set forth his Glory, and render
him due thanks for all his benefits.

CHAP. CVIII. Divine Judgments upon Scorners of their Pastors, Preachers, etc.
THe Psalmist David has ranged Scorners in the highest Class of Sinners, Psalm.
1.1. and Solomon tells us, that Judgments are prepared for the Scorners, Prove.
19.29. and again, He that being often Reproved, hardneth himself, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy, Prove. 29.1. Upon which
considerations Scornfulness is justly looked upon by wise persons, as the must
visible mark and characteristic of a Reprobate Sinner, a Person not worthy of
more instruction from Man, but like Ephraim, joined to Idols, to be left to
himself, and the Wisdom of Heaven. Reprove not a Scorner -- Can not that which
is Holy to Dogs.

1. Mr. Batman tells us of himself, -- I was, says he, in present danger to
have been slain in the House of him, whom I took to be my Friend, laying to my
charge such things as I was innocent of, being only his surmise, which
afterward was confessed by him: he was then in Wealth, but how he died, if his
name were known, it would soon be discerned. Not many years after, I fell into
the hands of inconstant men, whose double dealings I referred to God; and one
of them was stricken blind, after much molesting me, which, when he had
disclosed in part his old Malice, died, I trust Penitent: another falling into
a Dropsy, confessed his attempted wrongs with tears, and died, I trust, a good
Christian: Two others, for reproving them for their manifest Whoredom, it is
well known, that if Grace to Repent be as far from them, as that wealth they
once possessed, they cannot die without Shame in the World, and Vengeance of
God. Doom. Warning, etc. p. 410, 411.

2. Gildas preaching to the old Britains Repentance, and forewarning them of
Plagues to come, was laughed to scorn, and taken for a false Prophet: But what
followed? God sent in their Enemies on every side, and destroying them, gave
their Land to other Nations. Beard's Theater, p. 144.

3. John Wickliff, preaching against the Idolatry and Superstitions of the Age,
was despised, together with his Sermons; and both burnt after his Death
(himself and Books.) What ensued? A most heavy Vengeance: Their lawful King
slain, Three others set up on a row, under whom all the noble Blood was spilt,
and half the Commons destroyed; a War with France, Civil Discord at Home,
Cities and Towns decayed, and the Land brought half to a Wilderness. Ibid.

4. Hemingius, a learned Divine, in his Exposition upon the First Chapter of
St. John's Gospel, reports, That about the Year 1550. there was a certain
lewd Companion in Denmark, who had long made a Profession to mock at all
Religion, and at devout Persons: This Fellow entering into a Church, where there
was a Sermon made by the Minister of the Place, began (contrary to all those
that were present) to behave himself most profanely, and to show, by lewd
Countenances and Gestures, his Dislike and Contempt of that holy Exercise. To
whom the Preacher (being instant upon his Business in hand) spoke not a Word,
but only sighing, prayed unto God, that this Mocker might be suppressed: Who
seeing that the Preacher would not contest against him, but contemned his
unworthy Behavior, goes out of the Church; but yet not out of the Reach of
God's Vengeance; for presently, as he passed out, a Tyle fell from the House,
upon his Head, and slew him upon the Place. A just Judgment upon so profane a
Wretch, from whence all Scorners and Deriders of godly Sermons, and the
Preachers of the same, may take Example for their Amendment, if they have any
Grace in them. Ibid.

5. Christopher Turk, a Counselor of State to a great Nobleman in Germany,
going one Day to Horse, and mocking at a certain Nobleman who was then Prisoner
in his Enemy's Hands, uttered these or suchlike Speeches: See what is become
of these Gallants that sung so much one with another, When any one does wrong
us, God is our Succor and Defense. But he had scarce ended his Words, whenas a
sudden Grief took him, so that he was forced to alight from his Horse, and to
be carried to Bed, where instead of singing he died in Despair, drawing forth
his Tongue as black as a Coal, and hanging out of his Mouth. This happened the
Ninth of June, 1547. Ibid.

6. Mr. Job Williams, of Preston-Baggot, having made a Journey to London, to
enter his Minister, Mr. Benjamin Lovel, into the High Commission Court, (though a
worthy Man) on his Return was struck with such Terrors of Conscience, that he
fell sick, sent for Mr. Lovei, and begged his Pardon; telling him, That so soon
as he had sealed the Bond for his Prosecution, the Devil appeared to him, and
said he would have him without any Remedy. Thus he continued, crying out, there
was no Mercy for him; and about a Fortnight after, in his own House, with a
piece of Bed-cord he hanged himself. Related from Mr. Lovel's own Mouth.
Clark's Exampl. Vol. 1. c. 85. See the last Example in the Chapter of Divine
Judgments upon Murder.

7. One of my Parishioners, where I was Minister formerly, having given
Occasion of Scandal, by his Drunkenness, and reproachful Tongue, and
Execrations, was by me dissuaded from coming to the Sacrament, till such time
as he had given some Proof of his Reformation. He took this so disdainfully,
that he left our Communion, went first to a Meeting of dissenting Protestants
in the Town, then to the Papists; and at last falling ill of a strange Disease
in his Bowels, from which he could find no Ease or Relief, but by taking a
daily Dose of Laudnum; his only Child died, his Wife became lame on her Arm,
and he continued pining away some Years, and at last died in extreme Poverty,
and was carried like a Sack of Corn, with only one Man attending, on Horseback
to his Grave.

CHAP. CIX. Divine Judgments upon Persecution.
WE find the Evils done to God's People have been repaid by a just Retribution
to their Enemies. Pharaoh and the Egyptians were cruel Enemies to God's Israel,
and designed the Ruin of their poor innocent Babes; and God repaid it, in
smiting all the Firstborn of Egypt in one Night, Exodus 12.29. Haman erected a
Gallows fifty Cubits high for good Mordecai, and God so ordered it, that
himself and his ten Sons were hanged on it: And indeed it was but meet, as the
Reverend Divine says, That he should eat the Fruits of that Tree which himself
had planted, Esther 7.10. A^hitophel plots against David, and gives Counsel
like an Oracle how to procure his F^ll; and that very Counsel, like a
surcharged Gun, recoi^s upon himself, and precures his Ruin, etc. The Arm
which Jeroboam stretched out, to smite the Prophet, God smites. Oberve the few
Instances which follow.

1. Maximinus, that cruel Emperor, who set forth his Proclamation, engraven in
Brass, for the utter Abolishing of the Christian Religion, was speedily smitten
like Herod, with a dreadful Judgment, swarms of Lice preying upon his Entrails,
and causing such a Stench, that his Physicians could not endure to come nigh
him, and for Refusing it were slain. Hundreds of like Instances might easily be
produced to confirm this Observation. And who can but see by these Things, that
verily there is a God that judges in the Earth.

2. Charles the IX. most inhumanely made the very Canals of Paris to stream
with Protestant Blood, and soon after he died miserably, his Blood streaming
from all Parts of his Body. Flav. Div. Cond. p. 26.

3. Stephen Gardener, that burnt so many of God's dear Servants to Ashes, was
himself so scorched up by a terrible Inflammation, that his very Tongue was
black, and hung out of his Mouth, and in dreadful Torments ended his wretched
Life. Ibid. and Fox's Mar.

4. Laurentius Surius, a German, Chronicler to Charles the V. Emperor, heard
this strange Accident, by People worthy of Belief, who made Report thereof to
the Emperor because they were there present at that time. And since then, I my
self (says my Author) have heard it confirmed by diverse honorable Gentlemen,
who traveled for certain Knowledge thereof. The Islands of the Molucques are
many in Number; but among the rest, there are Five more great and remarkable
than all the other, which are named Tidora, Terrenata, Mata, Matila, and
Matiena; in which Islands, there is much greater Increase of Spices, than in
any other, as is yet discovered, as of Pepper, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cloves, and
Mace, besides Rice, and many other Fruits. Charles the V. who had an Interest
in these Islands, having need of Money to serve his Wars in Italy, Germany, and
France, quitted his Rights to the King of Portugal, for 350000 Ducats. At
which time, Mansor, King of the great Island Tidora, entertained the Portugals
very courteously, permitted all his Subjects to be instructed in the Christian
Religion, and so many of them as pleased to be Baptized. But this good King
dying, his Son not only interdicted the Portugals Commerce with his Subjects,
but also commanded his People (as suddenly as they could) to kill them, and
that none should be so bold, as to make Profession of the Christian Faith, or
to meddle with any matter thereof. This was no sooner understood by some, who
were but badly affected to Christianity; but (before they could prevent it)
many Portugals were slain, and such as had any means of Escape, fled into their
Ships, lying near at Anchor, and returned home to Portugal with these ill
Tidings,

Here ye are to note, That after this disloyal Act of so evil Usage toward
Strangers, and Breach of Fidelity, without any Cause given to procure it,
(albeit the Deceased King Mans^r, whose own Letters cleared from all such
Barbarous and Mohammedan Perfidie, had granted to the Portugals free Liberty to
slay any that hindered their Commerce, or any way scandalized their Religion,
which they refused to do) they carried themselves very patiently in all the
Injuries that these Mahometist Molucques offered them, who were much assisted
in their Violence by the Arabian Merchants. After this Massacre of the
Christians, for the space of two Years, the Land of Tidora, and other Isles
adjacent, became Barren: Their Trees brought forth no more Fruits, no Spices;
and although the Grounds were sowed and resowed many times together, yet did they
not produce any Corn; and the Rice which they kept for further sowing,
putrefied of it self; the sweet Waters became salt; the Cattle, as Elephants,
Oxen, Kine, Camels, Sheep, and such like, died (well near) all, and caused the
Death of many People beside.

5. The several Deaths of the principal Actors in that bloody Tragedy (the
Parisian Massacre) are worthy Observation: The King died wallowing in Blood,
not only issuing from all the Passages of his Body, but as it were in a sweat
of Blood from all the Pores of it; the two Guises, the Duke and Cardinal were
Assassinated by Command of King Henry the III. The Queen, a few Days after
them, died of Grief, lamented of none, but hated by every Body, (as the Bishop
of Rhodez affirms;) and the Duke of Anjou, who after the King's Decease came to
the Crown, under the Name of Henry the III. was slain by a Stab from a Jacobin
Friar. Author of the Interests of Princes and States.

6. Philip (King of Spain) the II. having once escaped a great Danger at Sea,
at his Arrival in Spain, appointed two Days of Thanksgiving, one at Validolid,
the other at Sevil, whither he caused those in Prison for Religion to be
brought from several Places of his Kingdom: Upon which Days, Scaffolds being
made, (which a Distinction of Seats for Spectators, according to their
Quality,) the Prisoners were with triumphant Ceremonies, and dressed in Antic
manner, led to the Fires, and burnt before them, etc. The King also himself put
to Death his eldest Son, Charles, partly upon Suspicion of being a Favourer of
them; but he died also of Blood issuing from all the Passages of his Body, with
a continual Vomiting of Vermin, as the Bishop of Rhodez, in his History of
Henry the IV. relates. Ibid.

7. George Eagles, Martyr, hanged at Chelmsford in Essex, was cut down before
he was dead, and sadly mangled by the Bailiff, William Swallow; his Body
opened, his Heart pulled out, and his Quarters set up in several Places: But
shortly after, Swallow's Hair fell from his Head; his Eyes were so closed, that
he could scarce see; the Nails fell off from his Fingers and Toes; a Leprosy
overspread his whole Body; and his Estate so wasted, that he soon fell into
Beggary, and died wretchedly. Fox's Martyrol.

8. One Robert Baldwyn, a Neighbor, having searched the House of Will. Seaman,
and finding him at home, very unneighbourly carried him to Sir Jo. Tyrrel, in
order to the Prosecuting of him; but on the way a strange Light fell from
Heaven betwixt them, upon which Baldwyn, though then in the Flower of his Age,
was so struck, that he pined away till he died. Ibid.

9. Mr. Swingfield, a Deputy in Thames Street, with three others, carried one
Mrs. Angel, a Midwife, from a Woman in Labor (her self being with Child too)
to Bishop Bonner, who put her into Lollard's Tower; but within ten Weeks
Swingfield and his three Companions were all dead. Ibid.

10. Burton, Bailiff of Crowland in Lincolnshire, a Protestant in King Edward's
Time, a Papist in Queen Mary's, goes to Church, speaks to the Curate (then
Reading the English Service) Sirrah, will you not say Mass? Buckle your self to
it, you Knave, or by God's Blood, I Will sheath my Dagger in your shoulder.
Shortly after, riding with a Neighbor over Fen-Bank, a Crow flew over his
Head, with her usual Note, voided her Excrements on his Nose, which ran down
upon his Beard, and set him so a Vomiting, that he hastened home, and to Bed,
where he continued Vomiting, Swearing and Cursing at the Crow, till at last he
died. Ibid.

CHAP. CX. Divine Judgments upon Uncharitableness, Covetousness, etc.
WITH what Measure ye mete it shall be meted to you again, says our Savior;
and it is but just and reasonable, that those People, who shut up their Bowels
and Streams of Charity from their Neighbors, should suffer by a Retaliation.
Sometimes Man himself, and sometimes God Almighty in a more immediate way
remembers and recompenseth the Unkindness of these Men, and repays them in
their own Coin, As they sowed sparingly, they shall reap so too; and as
themselves were not merciful, so they shall find no mercy.

1. John Cameron, Bishop of Glasgow, was a very Covetous Man, given to Violence
and Oppression, especially toward his poor Tenants and Vassals; but God
suffered it not long to go unpunished: For the Night before Christmas Day, as
he lay asleep in his House at Lockwood, seven Miles from the City of Glasgow,
he heard a Voice summoning him to appear before the Tribunal of Christ, and
give an Account of his doings: Whereupon he awaked, and being greatly
terrified, he called to his Servants to bring a Light, and sit by him; he
himself also took a Book in his Hand, and began to read: But the Voice calling
the second time, struck all the servants into an Amazement: The same Voice
calling the third time, far louder, and more fearfully, the Bishop, after a
heavy groan, was found dead in his Bed, his Tongue hanging out of his Mouth. A
fearful Example of God's Judgment against the sin of Covetousness and
Oppression. Spotswood's History of the Church of Scotland.

See the Story of Gresham and Rich. Antonio, under the Chap. of Discov. of
things secret by Omens, etc. Of Hatto, Archbishop of Mentz, under the Chap. of
Divine Judgments upon Murder.

2. Sir Walter Rawleigh, a Man otherwise of Excellent Parts, and a great Soul,
yet not being able to look Poverty in the Face, when he was set at Liberty out
of the Tower, procures a Commission from King James to make a Voyage to Guiana,
in hopes of finding there Mines of Gold, to enrich both the King and himself
(though at that time in the 76th. Year of his Age, sets out for the Indies,
where the Spaniards, having notice beforehand, had raised several
Fortifications; he with Sir Nicholas Kemish and others finding things otherwise
than they expected, Sir Nicholas kills himself, and Sir Walter Storms the Town
of St. Thomas, where he lost his Son Walter, returns home disappointed, finds
the Court disgusted, the King offended, and notwithstanding his Commission from
the Royal Hand, Anno 1618. October. 28. after some Months Imprisonment, lost his
Head. Detection of the Court and State of England, during the four last Reigns,
p. 56, 57.

3. Cromerus, an Author of good Credit, tells us of a certain rich Man, a
Polonian, who was very Covetous, much given to Rapine and Oppression, who
falling Sick, and being like to die, was admonished by his Friends to sue to
God for Mercy, which he refused to do, saying, That there was no hope of
Salvation for him, no place of Pardon left. No sooner had he thus spoken, but
immediately there was heard of the standers by, a noise of most vehement
Stripes, and Blows, which appeared manifestly upon the Body of this dying
Wretch, who presently gave up the Ghost, to the great Terror and Amazement of
all (who were many) then present Eyewitnesses of this Tragical Story. Clark's
Examples, Vol. I. p. 115.

Anno Christi 1570. at Rye in Sussex there was a strange Example of God's
Judgment upon a Covetous Gentleman, who living near the Sea, had a Marsh,
wherein upon Poles Fishermen used to dry their Nets, for which he received of
them Yearly a sufficient Sum of Money. But at length being not content with it,
he caused his Servants to pluck up the Poles, not suffering the Fishermen to
come upon his Ground any longer, except they would compound at a larger Rate:
But it came to pass the same Night, that the Sea breaking in, overwhelmed all
his Marsh, which continues till this day, says my Author. Hollin.

5. Nero, that Monster of Men, when by his Profuseness and Luxury he had wasted
the Imperial Treasures, fell to such Covetousness, that he imposed new Tributes
on his Subjects, injuriously seized upon many Rich men's Estates, and often put
the Owners to Death, robbed many Temples, and took away the Gold and Silver
Images. Theat. Vitae hum.

6. Cardinal Angelot was so basely covetous, that by a private way he used to
go into the Stable, and steal the Oats from his Horses; so that on a time the
Master of his Horse going into the Stable in the dark, and finding him there,
taking him for a Thief, beat him soundly. He was also so hard toward his
Servants, that his Chamberlain watching his Opportunity slew him. Pontanus,
lib. de Prin.

Anno Christi 1066. Reginherus, Bishop of Misnia, being at Gostaria, after
Dinner went into hi Chamber, where he had his Treasures (being an extreme
Covetous Man) and shut himself in, as if he would take a little sleep, but his
Servants thinking him long, first knocked at the Door, and afterward brake it
open, and found him dead, with his Neck broken, and his Body of an ugly color,
lying in a miserable manner upon his Money. Lamb. Scaffnaburgensts.

8. Nigh unto the City of Lunenburg in Germany there flowed plentifully a Salt
Spring, till such times as the Rich Men engrossing all the Profit to
themselves, would not suffer the Poor to make any Profit thereof: Whereupon
(God being offended at their Covetousness) dried up the Spring, so that it ran
not for a time; yet afterward, upon the readmission of the Poor to be sharers
in it, it ran again as before. Morison's Travels, Chap. 1. Part. 1. p. 5.

CHAP. CXI. Divine Judgments upon Anger, Revenge, etc.
AS all the Virtues and Graces of the Christian Religion have a tendency to
Comfort and Happiness, so there is no Sin but makes some Preparation for its
own Punishment: Amongst the rest, Anger and Revenge, and indeed all the
Passions, do so naturally put the Blood of the Sinner into a Fermentation, and
the Thoughts into such Disorder and Confusion, that the Man is in great danger
of being distempered both in Body and Mind too. Nature is disturbed, and the
Spirits in Mutiny; and by Observation we may often see the Passionate Man's
Sword sheathed in his own Bowels, and his Gun recoiling (by a just Providence)
upon his own Breast. See what follows.

1. Malachus, a Poet in Syracuse, had such Fits of immoderate Choler and Anger,
as took away the use of his Reason; yet was he then most able in the composure
of Verses, when he was thus made Frantic by his Passion. Zuring. Vol. 1. l. 1.
p. 90.

2. Lucius Sylla, burning with Anger at Putecli, because Granius, the Chief of
that Colony, delayed to send in for the Repairs of the Capitol, that Money
which was promised by the Decurions, by an overgreat concitation of the Mind,
and the impetuousness of an immoderate Voice, he was taken with a Convulsion in
the Breast, and so vomited up his Soul mixed with Blood and Threats, being at
that time entering upon the Sixtieth Year of his Age, yet not consumed by that,
but perishing by a Madness, that was nourished by the Miseries of Rome. Val.
Max. l. 9. c. 3. p. 254. Wieri opera, p. 795, 796. l. de Ira Lonicer. Theat. p.
370.

3. Charles the Sixth, King of France, being highly displeased with the Duke of
Britain, upon some sinister Suspicions, was so bent upon Revenge, that
unmindful of all other things, his Passion suffered him not to eat or sleep. He
would not hear the Duke's Ambassadors, that came to declare his Innocence: But
upon the Fifth of the Kalends of June, Anno 1392. he set forth with his Forces
out of a City of the Caenomans, contrary to the Advice of his Commander and
Physicians, about high Noon, in a hot soultry day, with a light Hat upon his
Head. He leaped upon his Horse, and bad them follow him that loved him: He had
scarce gone a Mile from the City, when his Mind was unseated, and he in a Fury
drew his Sword, slew some, and wounded others that attended him; till such
time, as wearied and spent with thus laying about him, he fell from his Horse,
he was taken up, and carried back in the Arms of Men, into the City for dead;
where after many days, when at first he neither knew himself, nor any about
him, he began by degree to recover; but his Mind was not so well restored, but
that ever and anon he had Symptoms of a Relapse, and at seveal intervals
bewrayed his Distemper, so that the Government of the Kingdom was committed to
his Uncle. Zuring. Vol. 1. l. 1. p. 16.

4. Being called in November, 1604. to the House of a certain Prefect, says
Platerus, to Couch a Cataract, that was grown in the Eye of his Wife, the
Prefect was informed, that his Maid had that Night lain with a Miller; causing
her therefore to be fetched home, and catching her by the Hair of the Head, he
threw her to the Ground, kicked her, and fell into so great a Passion, that
being presently seized with Difficulty of Breathing, and a Trembling, there was
more need to look after him than his Wife, Before any Medicine weas
administered, he was advised by a Surgeon to open a Vein, but to no purpose;
his want of Breath, Trembling, and Prostration of the Spirits continued, he
died within two days after. Plat. Obs. Med. l. 1. p. 50.

5. The Emperor Nerva, who was otherwise of a weak Stomach, and often cast up
his Meat which he had newly eaten; fell into a huge Passion with one whose Name
was Regulus, and while he was in a high Tone Thundering against him, was taken
with Sweats, fell into a Fever, and so died in the Sixty Eight Year of his Age.
Donat. Hist. Med. l. 3. c. 13. p. 188.

6. Victor Pisanus, the Venctian, Admiral, Famous for his Exploits,
understanding that his Vice Admiral through Cowardice had suffered Ten Ships of
the Genoess to escape out of the Sipontine Haven, fell into such a Passion as
put him immediately into a Fever, whereof he died. Zuring. Vol. 2. l. 7. p. 495.

7. The Sarmatian Ambassadors cast themselves at the Feet of the Emperor
Valentinian the First, imploring Peace; he observing the meanness of their
Apparel, demanded if all their Nation were such as they? Who replied, It was
their Custom to send to him such as were the most Noble, and best accoutred
among them: When he is a Rage cried out, It was his Misfortune, that while he
reigned, such a sordid Nation as theirs could not be content with their own
Limits; and then, as one struck with a Dart, he lost both his Voice and
Strength, and in a deadly Sweat fell down to the Earth: He was taken up, and
carried into his Chamber, where, seized with a violent Hick-cough, and gnashing
of Teeth, he died, December, Anno 375. in the Fifty fifth Year of his Age, and
the Twelfth of his Empire. Zuring. Vol. 2. l. 7. p. 495. Pezel. Mellific. Hist.
Tom. 2. p. 277.

8. Alexander, transported with Anger, slew his dear Friend Clitus, his
Foster-Brother, with his own Hands; thopugh when the Heat was over, he was
difficultly restrained from killing himself, for that fault whch his sudden
Fury had incited him to commit. Wieri opera, p. 823. Justin. Hist. l. 12. p.
139.

CHAP. CXII. Divine Judgments upon Murder.
AMongst the Jews God had wisely ordered it, That whosoever shed man's Blood
(in a private and malicious way) by man should his Blood be shed; and there was
no other means allowed for the expiating the guilt of Murder, and purging the
Land that was defiled therewith, but by the Blood of him that committed the
Fact: And therefore God Almighty, where Man's Eye is too short-sighted to
discover the sin, or his Hand too weak or partial to punish it, does oftentimes
take the Rod into his own Hand, and avenge, in a very Remarkable way, this
gross Sin: As may be seen in the following Instances.

1. Ambrose has a very strange Story, of a Man that was slain in the Night, at
Antioch, by a Soldier, in hope of Spoil; This Man's Dog would not go away from
his Master's dead Corpse, but lay howling by it till daylight. In the Morning
many came to see that sad sight, and among the rest, the Murderer came also,
that he might be the less suspected. The Dog no sooner saw this Soldier, but he
ran fiercely at him, and would never give over barking and baiting at him, till
he saw him apprehended, and carried to Prison, where he confessed the Fact, and
for the same was deservedly executed.

2. In September, Anno Christi 1618 there lived a Man at Perin in Cornwall, who
had been blessed with an ample Possession, and fruitful Issue; unhappy only in
a younger Son, who, taking Liberty from his Father's Bounty, joined with a Crew
like himself; who, weary of the Land, went Roving to Sea, and in a small Vessel,
Southward, made Prize of all whom they could Master; and so increased in
Wealth, Number, and Strength, that in the Streights they adventured upon a
Turks Man of War, where they got great Booty; but their Powder, by mischance,
taking fire, our Gallant, trusting to his skilful Swimming, got to Shore upon
the Isle of Rhodes, with the best of his Jewels about him: Where, after a
while, offering some of them to Sale to a Jew, he knew them to be the
Governor's of the Galleys, and therefore imprisoned him amongst other
Christians, whose miserable Slavery made them use their wits to recover their
former Liberty; and accordingly, watching their Opportunity, they slew some of
their Officers, and valiantly released themselves; after which, this Young Man
got aboard an English Ship, and came safe to London, where his former Misery,
and some Skill that he had gotten that way, preferred him to be Servant to a
Surgeon, who, after a while, sent him to the East Indies: There by his
Diligence and Industry he got Money, with which he returned home; and longing
to see his Native Country, Cornwall, in a small Ship from London he sailed
Westward; but e're he attained his Port, he was Cast away upon that Coast;
where, once more, his excellent Skill in Swimming brought him safe to Shore.
But then, having been Fifteen Years absent, he understood that his Father was
much decayed in his Estate, and had retired himself to live privately in a
place not far off, being indeed in Debt and Danger.

His Sister he finds married to a Mercer, a meaner Match than her Birth
promised: To her he at first appears as a poor Stranger, but after a while
privately reveals himself to here, showing her what Jewels and Gold he had
concealed in a Bow-case about him; and concluded, that the next day he should
appear to his Parents, yet to keep Disguised, till she and here Husband should
come thither, to make their Common Joy complete.

Being come to his Parents, his Humble Behavior, suitable to his poor Suit of
Clothes, melted the Old Couple into so much Compassion, as to give him shelter
from the Cold Season under their outward Roof; and by degrees, his stories of
his Travels and Sufferings, told with much Passion to the aged People, made him
their Guest so long by the Kitchen-fire, that the Husband bad them Good Night,
and went to Bed: And soon after, his true Stories, working Compassion in the
weaker Vessel, she wept, and so did he: But withal, he taking pity of her
Tears, comforted her with a Piece of Gold, which gave her assurance, that he
deserved a better Lodging, which she afforded him, and to which she brought
him; and being in Bed, he showed her his Wealth, which was girded about him,
which he told her was sufficient to relieve her Husband's Wants, and to spare
for himself; and so, being weary, he fell asleep.

The old Woman being tempted with the golden Bait that she had received, and
greedly thirsting after the Enjoyment of the rest, she went to her Husband, and
awaking him, presented him with this News, and her Contrivance what farther to
do: And though, with horrid Apprehensions, he often refused, yet her pewling
Eloquence ( Eve's Enchantments) moved him at last to consent, and to rise to be
Master of all that Wealth, by murdering the Owner thereof. Which accordingly
they did, and withal covered the Corpse with Clothes, till Opportunity served
for their carrying of it away.

Early the next Morning hastens the Sister to her Father's House, where, with
Signs of great Joy, she enquires for a Sailor that should lodge there the last
Night. The old Folk at first denied that they had seen any such, till she told
them that he was her Brother, and lost Brother, which she knew assuredly, by a
Scar upon his Arm, cut with a Sword in his Youth, and that they were resolved
to meet there the next Morning, and be merry.

The Father hearing this, hastily runs up into the Room, and finding the mark,
as his Daughter had told him, with horrid regret of this monstrous Murder of
his own Son, with the same Knife wherewith he killed him, he cut his own
Throat. The Mother, presently after, going up to consult with her Husband what
to do, in a strange manner beholding them both weltring in Blood, wild and
aghast, finding the Instrument at hand, readily rips up her own Belly, till the
Guts tumbled out.

The Daughter, wondering at their delay in returning, seeks about for them, whom
she found out too soon, and with the sad sight of this Bloody Scene, being
overcome with sudden horror and Amazement, for this Deluge of Destruction, she
sunk down and died; the fatal end of that Family. The Truth of these things was
presently known, and quickly flew to King James his Court, clad with these
Circumstances: But the Imprinted Relation conceals their Names, in favor of
some Neighbor of Repute, and kin to the Family. Sanderson's Hist. (...) King
James.

3. A certain Drunkard, whom I knew very well (says mine Author, a Godly
Minister) when he was in Drink, quarrelled with his Fellow Servants, and, after
a few words knock d him down with his Flail, and killed him at one blow. Yet,
when he came to his Trial, by the help of Friends; he made a shift to escape
the Halter, and came home again, and there he used to Swear, and Curse, and
Drink, at as high a rate as ever. But at last, when he was in the same Yard
where he committed the aforesaid Murder, he fell down dead in a moment: And I
was (says he) one of the first that saw him.

4. In the Year 940. Hatto, Archbishop of Mentz, assembled certain poor Beggars
together into a great Barn, not to relieve their wants, as he might, and ought;
but to rid them of their Lives, as he ought not, but did: For he set on Fire
the Barn wherein they were, and consumed them all alive, comparing them to Rats
and Mice, that devoured good Corn, but served to no other good Use. But God
that had regard and respect unto those poor wretches, took their Cause into his
Hand, to quit this proud Prelate with just Revenge for his Outrage committed
against them; sending toward him an Army of Rats and Mice, to lay Siege
against him with the Engines of their Teeth on all sides; which when this
cursed Wretch perceived, he removed into a Tower that stands in the midst of
the Rhine, not far from Bing, whither he presumed this Host of Rats could not
pursue him; but he was deceived: For they swam over the Rhine thick and
threefold, and got into his Tower with such strange Fury, that in a very short
space they had consumed him to nothing; in Memorial whereof, this Tower was
ever after called, The Tower of Rats. And this was the Tragedy of that Bloody
Arch-Butcher, that compared poor Christian Souls to brutish and base Creatures,
and therefore became himself a Prey unto them, as Popiel, King of Poland, did
after him; in whose strange Examples the Beams of God's Justice shine forth
after an extraordinary and wonderful manner, to the Terror and Fear of all Men;
when by the means of small Creatures they made room for his Vengeance, to make
entrance upon these execrable Creature-Murtherers, notwithstanding all Man's
Devices, and Impediments of Nature: For the Native Operation of the Elements
was restrained from hindering the passage of them, armed and inspired with an
invincible and supernatural Courage, to fear neither Fire, Water, nor Weapon,
till they had finished his Command that sent them. And thus in old time did
Frogs, Flies, Grasshoppers, and Lice, make War with Pharaoh, at the Command of
him that has all the World at his beck. Beard's Theater. p. 196. Munster's
Cosmogr. etc.

5. Anno 1346. Popiel, King of Poland, amongst many of his particular kinds of
Cursings and Swearings, whereof he was no niggard, used ordinarily this Oath,
If it be not true, would Rats might devour me, Prophesying thereby his own
Destruction; for he was devoured by the same means which he often wished for,
as the Sequal of his History will declare. The Father of this Popiel feeling
himself near Death, resigned the Government of his Kingdom to two of his
Brethren, Men exceedingly reverenced of all Men for the Valor and Virtue which
appeared in them. He being deceased, and Popiel being grown up to Ripe and
Lawful Years, when he saw himself at full Liberty, without all Bridle of
Government, to do what he listed, he began to give the full swinge to his
lawless and unruly desires, in such sort, that within few days he became so
shameless, that there was no Vice which appeared not in his Behavior, even to
the working of the Death of his own Uncles, for all their Faithful dealing
toward him, which he by Poison brought to pass. Which being done, he caused
himself forthwith to be crowned with Garlands of Flowers, and to be perfumed
with Precious Ointments: And to the end the better to Solemnize his Entry to
the Crown, commanded a Sumptuous and Pompous Banquet to be prepared, whereunto
all the Princes and Lords of his Kingdom were invited. Now, as they were about
to give the Onset upon the delicate Cheer, behold an Army of Rats sallying out
of the dead and putrefied Bodies of his Uncles, set upon him, his Wife and
Children, amidst their Dainties, to gnaw them with their sharp Teeth, insomuch
that his Guard with all their Weapons and Strength were not able to chase them
away, but being weary with Resisting their daily and mighty Assaults, gave over
the Battle: Wherefore Counsel was given to make great Coal Fires about them,
that the Rats by that means might be kept off, not knowing that no Policy or
Power of Man was able to withstand the unchangeable Decree of God; for, for all
their huge Fires, they ceased not to run through the midst of them, and to
Assault with their Teeth this cruel Murderer. Then they gave him Counsel, to
put himself, his Wife, and Children, into a Boat, and thrust it into the midst
of a Lake, thinking that by reason of the Waters, the Rats would not approach
unto them: But alas, in vain; for they swam thropugh the Water a main, and
gnawing the Boat, made such chinks in the sides thereof, that the Water began
to run in; which being perceived of the Boat-men, amazed them sore, and made
them make Post-hast to Shore, where he was no sooner arrived, but a fresh
Muster of Rats uniting their Forces with the former, encountered him so sore,
that they did him more mischief than all the rest. Whereupon all his Guard, and
others that were there present for his Defense, perceiving it to be a Judgment
of God's Vengeance upon him, abandoned and forsook him at once: Who seeing
himself destitute of Succor, and forsaken on all sides, flew into a high Tower
in Chouzitze, whither also they pursued him, and climbing even up to the
highest Room where he was, first eat up his Wife and Children (she being guilty
of his Uncles Death) and lastly, gnawed and devoured him to the very Bones.
Ibid.

6. Anno 1056. a certain Nobleman, abounding with Wealth, not far from Augusta
of the Vindilicians, brought up in his HOuse a Young Black-a-more; which
Villain, when his Master was from home, rose up in the Night, and slew not only
his Lady, but the whole Family, excepting one little Daughter of the
Nobleman's. The Nobleman returning home after two days, and finding his Gate
shut, rode nearer to the Walls of the House, wondering. Where the Black-a-more
upon the top of the House, with a fearful Countenance, spoke unto him these
words: O thou cruel Man, thou rememberest how unworthily thou beat'st me (not
long since) for no fault, the memory whereof I still retain in my mind, and
have revenged this wrong upon thine: behold here part of the Carcass of thy
Wife, whom I have slain, with thy whole Family, except this little Child, which
I have reserved; and will restore it, if thou will promise me my Life. The
Father being wonderfully disturbed, promised that which he desired: But the
devilish Moor answered, I know thou will not keep Promise with me, therefore
take thy Child unto thee; and threw her out of the Window, where she was
quashed in pieces; and then threw himself down headlong from the top of the
House, that he might avoid the Vengeance of his Master. This Story was related
unto Philip, Count Nassau, by the Secretary of the Count of Hainault.

7. Anno Christi 1586. One Walsh, B. B. of Ossory in Ireland (a Man of Honest
Life) together with his two Servants were stabbed to Death by one Dulland, an
Irish old Soldier, whilst he gravely reproved him for his foul Adulteries: And
the wicked Murderer escaped away, who had now committed Forty Five Murders
with his own Hand. But ere long Vengeance found him out, for he was by another
Bloody Fellow [Donald Spaniah] shortly after slain himse f, and his Head
presented to the Lord Deputy of Ireland. Camb. Clark's Mirror, Chap. 86. Ibid.

8. Anno Christi 1625. at Castleblanes, in the County of Monoghan, in the North
of Ireland, dwelt one Hugh Enratty, and Lord Blaynes Bailiff, who entertained a
lusty Young Man into his House, that was reported, and strongly suspected to
have committed a Murder in the Province of Leinster. About a quarter of a Year
after, the Bailiff went abroad about his Lord's Affairs, and when he was half a
Mile on his way, he returned home, not knowing well himself what moved him so
to do: Entering into his House, he found his Chamber Door fast barred on the
inside, and looking through the Wall, which was made of Wattles undaubed, he
beheld his Guest upon his Bed, and his Wife under him; at which sight Enratty
was so enraged, that taking up a great Stone, he flung it over the Wall, which
fell upon the Young Man's Head, and dashed his Skull in pieces. Presently
after, his former Murder came to light, and the Justice of God appeared in
punishing him for it, when he thought himself most secure. This I had from
Doctor Teate, upon his own knowledge. Clark's Mirror, Chap. 86. Ibid.

9. Some Clothiers coming from Colebrook on a Shrove-Tuesday in the Morning
through the Town of Branford, as they passed by the Marketplace, a certain Boy
throwing with a stick at a Cock, by chance hit one of them on the Foot; the Man
for the present finding no hurt from the stroke, passes on in his journey; but
before he came to London, it began to pain him: After he had disposed of his
Horse, he goes to a Cousin of his, a Box-maker in Friday-street, where pulling
off his Boots, he complained of a strange Pain in his Foot: Upon which, a
Surgeon was sent for, who told him, 'twas gangreen'd, and must be cut off.
The Man was unwilling of so severe a Cure, but would stay till Night: At Night
the Surgeon returns again, tells him, 'twas now got into his Thigh, or
higher, and that he was a dead Man. And accordingly he died that Night; but
before his Death, he confessed he had murdered a Man in Gloucestershire, and
told whom, and how, and where, etc. viz. That he was a Lady's Steward, who had
been keeping some Courts, and getting in some Moneys, and upon his return home,
this Person waylaid him, and murdered and robbed him; and upon Enquiry
afterward, it was found, that the Boy which threw this stick at the Cock,
which gave occasion to this Gangreen, was the Steward's Son whom he had
murdered: For the Family being reduced to Povery by the Death of the Father,
this Child was by some Friend recommended to a Place under a Tapster in
Branford. This Story Mr. John Lane of Horslydown-Lane, Southwark, does attest
to me upon the Credit of one Camping, a Carpenter in Coleman-street, who knew
that Box-maker in Friday-street: And I heard it lately reported from the Mouth
of a very worthy Gentelman in the East of Sussex.

10. William Writtle, condemned at Maidstone Assizes for Murder, mentioned in
the following Chapter, told a Minister, that after he had murdered Ann James,
going out of the Copice, the Devil appared to him in the likeness of a Man, and
bid him go and murder the Boy. And also how afterward he saw her perfectly
stand before him, which made him so full of Horror, that he had a Hell within
him. See the Narrative, entitled, News from Maidstone Assizes.

11. Mr. Francis Cartwright, clouded from his Youth with a stubborn and
headstrong Disobedience to his Parents, not bearing the Private and Public
Rebukes of his Minister, Mr. Will. Storr, of Market-Rason in Lincolnshire, was
at last so enraged against him, that he was resolved to be revenged upon him,
and drawing his Sword, with design only to give him some slight Wound, it
proved Mortal. He, clogged with guilt of Blood, went for his escape to Berwick,
and there was apprehended; but escaping thence, he went for Plymouth: By the
way he was questioned at Warwick, as suspected of Robbery; thence to St. Malo's
in France, and in the Passage was in great danger by the Winds and Seas, the
Mainmast being spent by the board. So coming on Shore in the Isle of Guernsey,
he passed to Rhodez, and so to Roan, where he lived in great misery and
perplexity six Months; thence to Rotterdam, and Delph in Holland, where Sir Fr.
Vere entertained him sometime as Gentleman of his Company: During his abode
here, he was continually solicited to Repentnace by a Reverend Divine, Mr.
Trigg, of Longledenham in Lincolnshire. His Pardon being procured in England by
his Father, he is sent for home, but no sooner Shipped, but the Seas swell, as
angry to bear his sins, and the Tempest-beaten Vessel is chased by a Dunkirk
Man of War: No sooner is he come home, but the Wife of the slain sueth out an
Appeal against him; and though a Ne Recipiatur was obtained for him, yet his
Pardon was question d at the Bench of Assize for Five Years together. His
Father dies: He makes Submission in the Convocation-House before the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and other Bishops and Clergy: Marries, comm ts another in his
own Defense, is Apprehended, Bailed, again Imprisoned; his Child is sick,
without hopes of Recovery, the Mother weeps, the Bell tolls, the Grave is
prepared, he in Irons led to see his Departure: The Child recovers, most of his
Estate is sold to satisfied Engagements; his Money put to Usury, most of it
lost. He goes to the Straights of Gibralter, but going and returning, is
pursued with fresh dangers at Sea, etc. To conclude, he now confessed to the
World, made his Public Recantation with his own Hand, and promised a serious
Course of Reformation. See the Life, Confession, and Hearty Repentance of ^ran.
Cartwright, Gent. written with his own Hand, 1621.

CHAP. CXIII. Murders strangely Discovered.
WHEN Cain murdered his Brother Abel, we do not read of any other Informer that
appeared against him but the voice of the Innocent Blood crying from Earth to
Heaven for Vengeance; and immediately God himself came down to make
Inquisition, and Arraign the Murderer. The Divine Character imprinted upon Man,
has set such a Price and Vatue upon him, that it is Treason against Heaven to
deface the Image and Superscription. Of all the sins, that God has forbidden
by his Sacred Laws, we find him soverer against none, than Blasphemy and
Murder; the one being a defiance, and flying in the Face of him that made w,
and a Contempt of the First Table; the other the highest breach of Charity, and
a trampling under Foot the Second Table of the Decalogue: And therefore no
wonder if Divine Providence be more jealous upon these Points, and more
ingeniously active in the Discovery.

1. A Soldier of King Pyrrhus being slain, a Dog which he had, could by no
means be enticed from the dead Body: But the King coming by, he fawned upon
him, as it were craving help at his hand; whereupon the King caused all his
Army to march by in Order, and when the Murderers came, the Dog flew fiercely
upon them, and then fawned upon the King. The Soldiers being hereupon examined,
confessed the Fact, and were hanged for their Labor. Plut. Clark's Mirror, c.
86.

2. Plutarch also relates a Story of one Bessus, who having murdered his
Father, was so pursued with a Guilty Conscience, that he thought the Swallows
in their chattering Language said one to another, Bessus has killed his
Father; whereupon not being able to conceal his Guilt, he confessed the Fact,
and received condign Punishment. Plutarch. de sera numinis vind.

3. Anno Christi 1551. at Paris, a Young Woman, as she was going to
Midnight-Mass, was brained with an Hammer, which was stolen from a Smith hard
by, which being known, the Smith was suspected, and so strictly examined by
Torture, that he was lamed, and died in misery: But about Twenty Years after,
the Murderer, arraigned and condemned for another Offense, confessed this
Murder, to the clearing of the Smith's Innocence, and God's Righteous
Judgments upon him. Pasquier. Clark's Mirror, c. 86.

4. Within these few Years the Lord Saint-John going his Circuit, there was a
Man Arraigned before him for Murder; and it was proved by many Witnesses, that
the Party murdered being laid in the Grave, till the coroner could come, when
the Body was again taken up, this Murderer being suspected, was sent for, and
when he came where the Body lay, she dead Corpse opened his Eyes, and fell into
a Sweat. This I had from a Godly Minister, to whom that worthy Judge related
it. Clark's Mirror, c. 86.

5. Luther tells a Story of a certain Almain, who in his Travel fell amongst
Thieves, and they about to cut his Throat, the poor Man espied a flight of
Crows, and said, O Crows, I take you for Witnesses and Revengers of my Death.
About two or three days after, these Thieves Drinking together at an Inn, a
company of Crows came and lighted on the top of the House; at this the Thieves
began to laugh, and say one to another, Look, yonder are they who must avenge
his Death, whom we lately slew: The Tapster over-hearing them, declares it to
the Magistrate, who caused them to be Apprehended, and upon their disagreeing
in Speeches, and contrary Answers, urged them so far, that they confessed the
Truth, and received their deserved Punishment. Beard's Theater. l. 2. c. 11.

6. A Murderer at Tubing betrayed his Murder by his own sighs, which were so
deep and incessant in grief, not of his Fact, but of his small Booty, that
being but asked the Question, he confessed the Crime, and underwent deserved
Punishment. Ibid.

7. Henry Renzovius, Lieutenant to the King of Denmark in the Dukedom of
Holsatia, in a Letter of his to David Chytreus, writes thus: A Traveller was
found murdered in the Highway, near to Itzehow in Denmark; and because the
Murderer was unknown, the Magistrates of the Place caused one of the Hands of
him that was slain to be cut off, and hung up by a string on the top of the
Room in the Town-Prison. About Ten Years after, the Murderer coming upon some
occasion into the Prison, the Hand that had been a long time dry, began to drop
Blood upon the Table that stood underneath it; which the Jailer beholding,
stayed the Fellow, and advertised the Magistrates of it; and examining him, the
Murderer giving Glory to God, confessed his Fact, and submitted himself to the
Rigor of the Law, which was inflicted to him, as he well deserved. Ibid.

8. At Tiguri, a certain Vagabond Rogue, in the Night, had killed his
Companion, that lay with him in a Barn; and having first removed the dead Corpse
somewhat out of sight, fled betimes in the Morning toward Eglisavium, a Town
under the Government of the Tigurines. But the Master of the Barn, having in
the Morning found the Signs of a Murder, soon after found also the dead Body.
In the mean time the Murderer was got far upon his way; yet by the Noise of
Crows and Jays, which followed and assaulted him, he was taken notice of by
some Reapers, then in the Field, who were somewhat terrified at the Novelty of
so unusual a thing. The Murderer for all this held on his way; and now might he
seem to be out of Danger, when there came such as were ordered to make Pursuit
after him; who enquired of the Reapers, if any Man had passed by that way? who
told them, they had seen none, besides only one Fellow, who as he passed, was
ever and anon molested with the Crows and Jays, that they thence did conjecture
he was some Villain, and that if they made have, they might undoubtedly take
him. The Wretch was soon after seized by them, and broken upon the Wheel. At
his Execution, I heard him acknowledge the Providence of God; a clear Instance
of which he had received in so unusal a Detection of himself. Wanley's Wonders,
c. c. 41. l. 1.

9. In the Second Year of King James his Reign, a strange Accident happened, to
the Terror of all Bloody Murderers; which was this: One Ann Waters, enticed by
a Lover of hers, consented to have her Husband strangled, and buried under the
Dunghill in a Cow house. Whereupon, the Man being missing by his Neighbors, and
the Wife making show of wondering what was become of him; it pleased God, that
one of the Inhabitants of the Town dreamed one Night, that his Neighbor Waters
was strangled, and buried under the Dunghill in the Cow-house; and upon
declaring of his Dream, Search being made by the Constable, the dead Body was
found, as he had dreamed: And thereupon the Wife was apprehended; and upon
Examination, confessing the Fact, was burnt. And now what hope can Murderers
have of being concealed, when they are subject to be discovered by any Man's
Dream? Baker's Chron. p. 614. Wanley's Wonders, ibid.

10. A Merchant of Lucca, traveling to Roan, in Normandy, was in the way
murdered by a French Man, his Servant, and thrown amongst the Vines. As the
Fact was doing, comes by a Blind Man, led by a Dog, (as it is usual in that
case) and hearing one groan, asked who it was? The Murderer answered, That it
was a Sick Man easing himself. The Blind Man thus deluded, the Villain, with
his Master's Money, and Bills of Exchange, sets up a Shop at Roan. In the mean
time, the Merchant was expected at Lucca; and when he came not, a Messenger was
dispatched to seek him; who, after much Enquiry, heard at an Inn, that Six
Months before, a Luquois Merchant lodged there, and was going toward Paris.
But the Messenger hearing nothing of him there, began to suspect that he was
murdered, and made his Complaint to the Parliament at Roan, who caused Enquiry
to be made, if any about that time had set up a new Shop; and finding that the
Man aforesaid had, they caused him to be Arrested. But he upon Examination
denied the Fact, till the dead Corpse was heard of: And the Blind Man also
hearing of this Enquiry, informed what he had heard about that Place, where the
Corpse was found, and what he was answered, saying withal, that he knew the
Voice from any others. Many Prisoners therefore were ordered to speak the same
Words to the Blind Man, together with the Murderer; but amongst them all, he
owned his Voice. Whereupon the Villain, possessed with abundance of Horror,
confessed the Act, and was deservedly executed. Wanley, ibid.

11. Anno 1611. Some of the English Ambassadors Retinue entered into a Quarrel
with some of the Jamoglans, of the next Seraglio. In this Tumult, one of the
Embassador's Men threw a Stone, and smote a Jamoglan on the Forehead, that he
died in few Hours. The Aga of the Seraglio complained hereof to the Grand
Vizier, who presently sent the Sub-Bassa of Galatia, to make Enquiry of the
Fact. The Ambassador went himself to the Seraglio, and sent for his Men which
had been in the Quarrel, and willed the Turks to kill the Man which had thrown
the Stone, who all with one shout ran upon one Simon Dibbins, a Man that was
newly come from Candia, where he had served the Venetians, and was now
entertained into the Embassador's Service, who interposed for him, but in vain.
The English offered great Sums for his Life; but the Turks would have Blood
for Blood. The Day of Execution being appointed, the Ambassador sent his
Chaplain to the Prison, to prepare him for Death; who examining him how he had
formerly lived, he confessed, that some few years before, he had in England
killed a Man, for whic he had fled to Candia, from whence he came to
Constantinople, where he was now to suffer for that which he did not. The just
Judgment of God thus pursuing him, he was hanged at the Embassador's Gate.
Knowle's Turkish Hist. p. 1311.

12. Smith, and Gurney, two Watermen of Gravesend, were, some Years since,
hired by a Grasier, to carry him down to Tilbury-Hope; for he intended to go to
a certain Fair in Essex, to buy Cattle. These Villains, perceiving he had
Money, conspired to take away his Life; and accordingly, as they went, one of
them cut his Throat, and the other taking his Money, threw him overboard. This
Murder was concealed diverse Years; but in the Summer, 1656. those Murderers, as
they were drinking together, fell out, and one of them in his Passion accused
the other of Murder, and he again accused him. Upon which, being Apprehended
and Examined, they confessed the Fact, were condemned at Maidstone Assizes, and
were both hanged in Chains at Gravesend.

13. Anno 1656. A Woman in Westphalia, being near the Time of her Travel, went
to the next Village to confess her self: In her Confession, she told the
Priest, she had newly found a Purse full of Money, and therefore desired him,
that he would speak of it publicly, that it might be restored to the right
Owner. The Priest told her it was sent to her from Heaven, that she should
reserve it to her self, and enjoy it. The Woman thus informed, kept the Purse
to her self. In her return home, she was to pass thorough a Grove; into which
she was no sooner come, but the Pains of Travail came upon her: In the mean
time, a Noble Person, who had lost the Purse, rode up to her, and demanded if
she had not found one. She beseeched him, that for the Love of God, he would
ride to the next Village for some Women, to assist her in her Labor, and that
she would restore him the Purse he sought after. The Nobleman rode as fast as
he could, to call some Women; in which time of his Absence, came the wicked
Priest, cuts off the Woman's Bead, and seizes upon the Purse. The Nobleman
returning with the Women, were Witnesses of this Tragical Spectacle; but who
had done it, was unknown. It was at a time, when the Snow lay thick upon the
Ground; and find some Footsteps, he pursued them till he overtook the Priest,
whom he seiz^d, and found his Purse upon him: He tied him therefore to the Tail
of his Horse, and so dragg^d him to the Magistrate, to be punished. His
Sentence was, to be thrown into a Cauldron of boiling Oil; which was
accordingly executed, on January 20. 1656. Lonicer's Theatr. p. 436.

14. A Lock-smith, young, and given to Luxury, killed both his Parents with a
^istol, out of a desire to enjoy their Money and Estate. Having committed this
horrible Murder, he w^^^ presently to a Cobbler, and there bought him a pair of
Shoes, leaving behind him his old and to^ ones, which the Cobler's Boy threw
under his Seat which he sat upon. Some Hour after, the Door of the House,
where the Slain were, was commanded by the Magistrate to be opened, where were
found the dead Bodies; which the Son so lamented, that no Man had the least
Suspicion of him, to be the Author of so great a Villainy. But it fell out, by
Accident, that the Cobbler had observed some Spots of Blood upon the Shoes left
with him; and it was observed, that the Son had more Money about him that he
used to have. The Magistrates, moved with these things, put the Man into
Prison, who soon confessed the Fact, and received the Punishment worthy of his
Crime. This was (by the Relation of Luther) at Regiment, in Borussia, Anno
1450. Lonicer's Theatr. p. 284.

15. In Mets, a City of Lorrain, the Executioner of the City, in the Night, and
Absence of the Master, got privity into the Cellar of a Merchant's House, where
he first slew the Maid, who was sent by her Mistress to fetch some Wine; in the
same manner he slew the Mistress, wh^, wondering at her Maid's Stay, came to see
what was the Reason: This done, he fell to Rifling Chests and Cabinets. The
Merchant (upon his Return) finding the horrible Murder, and Plunder of his
House, with a Soul full of Trouble and Grief, complains to the Senate; and when
there were diverse Discourses about the Murder, the Executioner had also put
himself in the Court with the Crowd, and murmured out ^u^l ^^ords as these:
That seeing there had been frequent Brawls betwixt the Merchant and his Wife,
there was no doubt but he was the Author of that Tragedy in his House; and,
said he, were he in mine Hands, I would soon extort as much from him. By these,
and the like Words, it came to pass, that the Merchant was cast into Prison,
and being in a most cruel manner tormented by his Executioner (though Innocent)
confessed himself the Murderer, and so was condemned to a horrible Death,
which he suffered accordingly. Now was the Executioner secure, and seemed to be
free of all Danger, till the wakeful Justice of God discovered his Villainy:
For the wanting Money, had pawned a Silver Bowl to a Jew, who finding upon it
the Coat of Arms of the Merchant newly executed, sent it to the Magistrate,
with notice that the Merchant's Coat of Arms was upon it. Whereupon the
Executioner was immediately cast into Prison, and examined by Torture how he
came by that Cup. He there confessed all as it had been done by him, and that
he was the only Manderer. Thus the Innocence of the Merchant was discovered,
and the Executioner had the due Punishment of his Wickedness.

16. Dr. Merry Causabon, in his Preface to the Relation of Dr. Dee's Actions
with Spirits, tells us this Story following out of his Father's Adversaria,
which he had from Bishop Andrews. viz. Kalend. August. This Day, the most
Reverend Prelate, the Lord Bishop of Ely, heard this strange Relation, which he
believed to be very true, having received it from the Author, an Eyewitness.
There is a Street in London, called Lombard Street; in which Street there is a
Parish, a Parish Church, wherein there was a Minister of very great Fidelity,
and noted Piety, A. C. 1563. at which time there was a great Plague in London.
This Minister of the Parish told (as unto others, so also) to the Lord Bishop
himself, that this thing befell him: He had a noted Friend in his Parish, a Man
esteemed by all, Honest and Pious. This Man being taken with the Plague, sent
for the Minister; who came to him in his Sickness, and did not depart from him
till he died; and then he returned home. Several Hours after he had been left
for Dead in his Chamber, his Wife entered into the same Chamber, to take a
Sheet, or some Linen, out of a Chest, to wind him up in, as the manner is.
Being entered, and intent upon her Business, she hears this Voice, Who is
there? She was affrighted, and would have gone out; but hearing the same Voice
again, Who is there? and finding it to be the Voice of her Husband, she goes to
him: What, says she, Husband! then you are not Dead! and yet we had left you,
and given you up for Dead! He answered, I was truly dead; but it seemed good to
God, that my Soul again should return to my Body. But you, Wife, quoth he, if
you have any Meat ready, give me some, for I am hungry. She said, that she had
some Mutton, a Pullet, and I know not what else, but all unboiled; but she
could get them ready presently. I cannot stay, quoth he, Have thou any Bread
and Cheese? When she had told him, that she had; and he asked for some to be
fetched, he eat it, his Wife looking on. Then sending for the Minister of the
Parish, and commanding all that were present to go out of the Chamber, he tells
him this: Quoth he, I was really Dead; but my Soul was commanded to return
again to its Body, that I might discover a Wickedness with my own Mouth, done
with my own Hands, of which never any one yet had any Suspicion; for I killed
my former Wife with my own Hands, with so much cunning, that the Matter was
never discovered to any one. And having declared the manner how he perpetrated
the Villain^, not long after he expired, and died then in good earnest. There
is no Necessity (adds my Author) that any Body should make of this Relation
an Article of his Faith; yet I thought it very probable, because believed by
such a Man.

17. About Fifteen or Sixteen Years ago, on the Lord's Day, a Stranger came to
the Parish Church of Woorvil, near Bridgnorth in Shropshire; where, after
Service ended, he declared publicly in the hearing of the Congregation, That
whereas about Twenty Years past, there had been in that Neighborhood a certain
Murder committed, and the Murderer had not been discovered, there was such a
one (naming the Person) at that time in Worcestershire, as I remember, near the
City of Worcester, on his Deathbed, who had sent him with all speed to make
this public Declaration: That he (the aforesaid Person) having first committed
a Robbery upon the Man, did afterward murder him; and now could not die till
he had made such Confession: And I think the Messenger added this withal, That
some Restitution or Satisfaction should be made to the surviving Friends of the
Party murdered, if any such were to be found. This I had from my
Brother-in-Law, Samuel Chaloner, now of Lemster in Herefordshire, who was at
Church at the same time, and both an Eye and Ear-witness.

18. Anno 1690. April the 14th. about Two in the Afternoon, William Barwick
having drilled his wife along, till he came to a certain Close, within sight of
Cawood-Castle, where he found the Convenience of a Pond, he threw he by force
into the Water; and when she was drowned, and drawn forth again by himself upon
the Bank of the Pond, he had the Cruelty to behold the Motion of the Infant,
yet warm in her womb. This done, he concealed the Body, as it may readily be
supposed, among the Bushes that usually encompass a Pond, and the next Night,
when it grew duskish, fetching a Hay-spade from a Rick that stood in the Close,
he made a Hole by the side of the Pond, and there slightly buried the Woman in
her Clothes. Having thus dispatched Two at once, and thinking himself secure,
because unseen, he went the same Day to his Brother-in-Law, one Thomas
Lofthouse of Rufforth, within Three Miles of York, who had married his drowned
Wife's Sister, and told him he ha carried his Wife to one Richard Harrison's
House, in Selby, who was his Uncle, and would take care of her. But Heaven
would not be so deluded, but raised up the Ghost of the murdered Woman, to make
his Discovery: And therefore it was, that upon the Easter-Tuesday following,
about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, the forementioned Lofthouse, having
occasion to water the Quickset-Hedge, not far from his House, as he was going
for the second Pailfull, an Apparition went before him, in the Shape of a
Woman, and soon after sat down upon a rising green Grass-plat, right
over against the Pond. He walked by her as he went to the Pond; and as he
returned with his Pail from the Pond, looking sideways to see whether she
continued in the same place, he found she did, and that she seemed to dandle
something in her Lap, that looked like a white Bag (as he thought) which he did
not observe before. So soon as he had emptied his Pail, he went into his Yard,
and stood still to try whether he could see her again, but she was vanished.

In his Information, he says, That the Woman seemed to be habited in a
brown-colour'd Petticoat, Wastcoat, and a white Hood, such a one as his Wife's
Sister usually wore; and that her Countenance looked extreme Pale and Wan, with
her Teeth in sight, but no Gums appearing; and that her Physiognomy was like to
that of his Wife's Sister, who was Wife to William Barwick. But notwithstanding
the ghastliness of this Apparition, it seems it made so little Impression in
Lofthouse's Mind, that he thought no more of it, neither did he speak to any
Body concerning it, till the same Night as he was at his Family Duty of Prayer,
that that Apparition returned again to his Thoughts, and discomposed his
Devotion; so that after he had made an end of his Prayers, he told the whole
Story of what he had seen to his Wife; who laying Circumstances together,
immediately inferred, that her Sister was either drowned, or otherwise
murdered, and desired her Husband to look after him the next Day, which was the
Wednesday in Easter-Week. Upon this, Lofthouse recollecting what Barwick had
told him, of his carrying his Wife to his Uncle at Selby, repairs to Harrison
beforementioned, but found all that Barwick had said to be false: For that
Harrison had neither heard of Barwick, nor his Wife; neither did he know any
thing of them. Which notable Circumstance, together with that other of the
Apparition, increased his Suspicion to that degree, that now concluding his
Wife's Sister was murdered, he went to the Lord Mayor of York, and having
obtained his Warrant, got Barwick apprehened; who was no sooner brought before
the Lord Mayor, but his own Conscience then accusing him, he acknowledged the
whole Matter, as it has been already related, as it appears by his Examination
and Confession herewith printed: To which are also annexed, the Informations of
Lofthouse, in like manner taken before the Lord Mayor of York, for a further
Testimony and Confirmation of what is here set down.

On the Sixteenth of September, 1690. the said William Barwick was brought to
his Trial before the Right Honorable Sir John Powel, Knight, one of the Judges
of the Northern Circuit, at the Assizes holden at York, where he was found
Guilty, and afterward hanged in Chains. See the Narrative.

19. Colonel Venables had a Soldier in his Army that came out of Ireland, and
as under Colonel Hill, who was then in London, and would attest this following,
viz. That this Soldier looked pale and sad, and pined, and the Cause was
unkown: At last he came to Colonel Hill, with his Confession, that he had been
a Servant 1. England (as I remember) to one that carried Stockings, and such
Ware, about to sell; an for his Money, he had murdered his Master, and buried
him in such a Place; and flying into Ireland, listed himself his Soldier, and
that of a long time, whenever he lay alone, somewhat like a headless Man stood
by his Bed, saying to him, [ Will thou yet Confess?] And in this case of Fear
he had continued, till lately it appeared to him, when he had a Bedfellow,
(which it never did before) and said as before [ Will thou yet Confess?] and
now seeing no hope of longer concealing it, he confessed. And as I remember,
(says my Author) his going to Hispaniola was his Punishment, instead of Death,
where Vengeance followed him. This he offered then to bring Colonel Hill to me
to attest. Mr. Baxter 's Histor. Disc. of Apparitions and Witches, etc. p. 58.

20. Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder was secretly acted, and strangely
discovered, and the Actors brought to condign Punishment, as is well known to
most of this Nation, that are now living. 1. Captain Bedloe deposed thus
concerning the Murder: The Papists, because Sir Edmundbury seemed to be an
Obstacle to them, and had taken the Information of Oats and Tongue about the
Plot, resolved and contrived to take away his Life. 2. Pursuant to which
Design, they hired, for 4000 Pound, Le Phaire, Welsh, Atkins, Pritchard, the
Deponent, and some Jesuits, to do the Fact. 3. Accordingly, the abovenamed
Persons trapann'd Sir Edmundbury into Somerset House, about 5 a Clock at Night,
on Saturday, October the 12th. 1678. 4. This Trapan was effected thus: The
Deponent was told by le Phaire, that He, Welsh, and Atkins, met Sir Edmundbury
near the King's-head Inn in the Strand, and decoyed him into Somerset House,
under Pretense of Apprehending some Plotters. 5. When they had him in the upper
great Court of Somerset House, they thrust him into a low Room, put a Pistol to
him, and threatened him if he made a noise, then stifled him between two
Pillows; and finding him still alive, strangled him with a long Cravat in the
Room where he lay. 6. On Monday following precisely, between Nine and Ten a
Clock at Night, the Body was shown to the Deponent by Le Phaire in the Room, or
the next to it, where the Duke of Albemarle lay in State, in the upper square
Court; there it was, by the help of a Dark-lanthorn, the Deponent saw the Body,
in the presence of Le Phaire, Welsh, Atkins, and two other Persons. Extracted
out of the Journals of the Lords and Council.

Mr. Prance adds, That pursuant to this Design, they hired Hill, Green, Kelley,
the Deponent, Gerald, and Berry, to do the Fact: Accordingly they trapann'd Sir
Edmundbury into Somerset House; Hill decoyed him down to the Watergate, under
pretense of parting a Fray; when they had him near the Rails, by the Queen's
Stables, Green strangled him with a twisted Handkerchief, wrung his Neck quite
round, punched him with his Knee, and dragged him into Dr. Godwin's Lodgings.
On the Monday Night following, the Body was shown, by he help of a
Dark-lanthorn, to the Deponent; and then, at Nine a Clock at Night, the dead
Body was carried out by certain Chair-men, to the corner of Clarenden-house,
and from thence in a Coach to Primrose-hill (says Bedloe;) into Covent Garden,
and so to Long-acre, and thence to Sohoe, (says Prance;) and from thence he was
conveyed a-stride on Horseback, before Hill, into the Fields, where they thrust
his Sword through his Body, and cast him into a Ditch. Out of the Lord's
Journal. As this Murder was committed for Reward, so it was discovered for
Reward too.

21. Anno 1675. March the 19th. William Writtle, of Chatham, was condemned at
Maidstone Assizes, to be hanged in Chains on Beacon-hill, for murdering of Ann
James, his Sweetheart, and her Son John, about Six Years old. The manner of
which Murder, and its Discovery, was thus: He tells her, That he had taken a
Malt-house near Canterbury, and had near Faulson, a small Living; under
Pretense of going to see them, he leads her, and her Son, into a Copice near
Beacon-hill; where he first murdered the woman, and taking what she had,
intends for Dover, and so for France; but the Child, who had been playing up
and down in the Copice, crying after him, he returned and cut his Throat, and
leaves him by his Mother, and now goes forward on his Journey, thinking all
safe. But mark the Providence of God: Quickly after, comes a Boy from Chatham,
to gather Sticks, and a Dog with him; the Boy being busy a gathering Sticks,
the Dog was busy a hunting up and down, and having found out these two dead
Corpses, never leaves howling till the Boy came to him; who no sooner saw this
dreadful Spectacle, but runs like one mad to the Town, and acquainted his
Neighbors; who hasting to the Place, and finding it as the Boy had related it
unto them, by her Clothes, and by her Son, knew the Persons; and now they want
to find out the Murderer: They knowing that Writtle was a Suitor to her, a
Hue-and-Cry was sent after him, and he was taken at Dover, and sent to Gaol.
See the Narrative.

22. Ann Cocketon, of the Parish of Stepney, was Indicted, in the Old Bailey,
for the Murder of her Male Bastard Child, on the 9th. of May, 1696. by throwing
it into a House of Office. The Evidence deposed, That she did think, that the
Prisoner was troubled with the Gripes, and did desire her to give her some
Water: And about Four in the Morning, the Prisoner did go down to the Vault
with the Close-stool-pan, and a while after came up again very weak, but did
not think of any thing that had happened; but going down the next Morning with
a China-Bowl, by accident she let it fall in, and looking after it, she espied
the Child there, and she took it, and washed it, and laid it in a Cellar. The
Midwife declared, that searching her, she found that she had lately been
delivered of a Child.

CHAP. CXIV. Divine Judgments upon Theft, Robbery, etc.
HE that has taken so much care for the Security of our Estates and
Possessions, as to make a Prohibition of Stealth one of the Commandments, bath
taken care likewise to annex a Penalty to the same Law; and has allowed us to
kill a Night-Thief, without imputing it to us at the Sin of Murder, Exodus 22.2.
And has himself likewise appeared an Avenger of the Crime, as in the case of
Achan, Ahab, etc. And besides, it may appear plain enough to any one, that
makes any careful Remarks upon Divine Providence, that Ill-got Goods seldom
prosper.

1. Draco, the Lawgiver of Athens, appointed Death to be the Punishment of
Theft. Solon mitigated that Rigor, and punished it with double Restitution.
The Locrians put out his Eyes that had stolen ought from his Neighbor. The
Hetrurians stoned them to Death. The Scythians abhorred them more than all
Creatures, because they had a Community of all Things, except their Cups. The
Vaccians used such Severity toward this kind of Men, that if one had but taken
a Handful of Corn, he was sure to die for it. Beard's Theatr. p. 294.

2. Marcus Fabius being Censor, condemned his own Son, Buteo, to Death, being
apprehended for Theft. Tiberius the Emperor, punished a Soldier after the same
manner, for stealing a Peacock. In sum, there was no Commonwealth wherein this
Sin was not highly detested, and sharply punished, except the Lacedoemonians,
where it was permitted and tolerated, for their Exercise of Warlike Discipline.
Ibid.

3. It was a rash and severe, yet as it proved, a just Deed of Tamberlain, that
mighty Tyrant and Conqueror of Asia, when a poor Woman complained to him of one
of his Soldiers, that had taken from her a little Milk, and a piece of Cheese,
without payment: He caused the Soldier's Belly to be ripped, to see whether she
had falsely accused him, or no; and finding the Milk in his Stomach, adjudged
him worthy of that Punishment, for stealing from so poor a Woman. Ibid.

4. Ibicus, the Poet, being set upon by Thieves, when he saw that they would
not only rob him of his Money, but of his Life also, he cried for Help and
Revenge, to the Cranes that flew over his Head. A while after, as these
murdering Thieves sat together in the Marketplace, the same Cranes appearing
unto them in the Air, they whispered one another in the Ear, and said, Yonder
fly Ibicus 's Revengers. Which, though secretly spoken, yet was overheard: So
that they being Examined, and found Guilty, were put to Death for their Pains.
The like Story Martin Luther reports, touching a Traveller; only differing in
this, That as Cranes detected the former, so Crows laid open the latter.

5. In Georgia, a Thief is acquitted, paying Sevenfold what he has stole; two
Parts to the Party robbed, one to the Judges, and four to the King. If he has
not wherewith to satisfy, he is sold; if the Product do not yet equal the
Sum, his Wife is sold; and if that will not do, his Children. Tavernier, l. 3.
c. 9.

6. The great Mogul will himself sit as Judge, in Matters of Consequence that
happen near him. They proceed in Trials, Secundum allegata and probata. They
punish Theft and Murder with Death, and what kind of Death the Judge pleases
to appoint: Some are hanged, beheaded, empailed and put on Stakes, torn in
pieces by wild Beasts, killed by Elephants, stung with Snakes. No Malefactors
lie above one Night in Prison; sometimes not at all, but are speedily brought
upon Trial, and so to Execution. See my Book of all Religions.

7. The Chinese punish Murder and Theft with Death. Sir Tho. Herb. Their
Justice is severe, their Prisons strong, and Executions quick.

8. The Japonese punish all manner of Theft with Death. Tavernier's Collect. p.
4.

9. A. C. 1659. At Brightling in Sussex, there was a stupendous and amazing
piece of Providence: November the 7th. in the Evening, a Fire kindled in a
Man's Milk-house; the 9th. Dust was thrown upon the Man and his Wife, as they
lay in Bed together; next Morning, things were thrown about, and the Fire
kindled again in the same Place, but put out by the Woman; then in the Eeves of
the House, and put out by a Neighbor; a Pot broken on the Table with a piece
of Brick; and as they were going to fill a Tub with Water, to set by them all
Night, the Fire was kindled again in the Milk-house, and suddenly the whole
House was on fire, but most of the Goods saved. The Fire was very white, and
did not singe their Hands when they pulled things out of it. The Household Stuff
was carried next Day to a Neighbor's House, and put in one end, the Family
being in the other end; there Dust was thrown upon the Man and his Wife in Bed:
At last, up rises the Man, and with another accompanying him, with a Candle
and Lanthorn in his Hand, went to Mr. Bennet, the Minister of the Town, and
entreated him to go down with him. Accordingly He and his Brother went, prayed
with them; and at first, Dust was thrown at them, but all quiet at Prayer:
Afterward the Minister reading Psalm. 91. the Man standing by him to hold the
Candle, somewhat presently beat out the Light; whereupon the Man said, Some
body else must hold the Candle. Presently a Knife was thrown at the Minister,
which fell behind him; his Brother said that he saw it come: Then a
Chopping-knife was thrown (it was supposed) at the Man's Wife. Whereupon the
Man said, These things are thrown at others for my sake. At length he fell down
upon his Knees, and confessed, That he had been an Hypocrite, and a Pilfering
Fellow; and that he had Robbed his Master, etc. and he was willing to separate
the Things which he had taken wrongfully from the rest; and did accordingly,
laying forth several things, which he said were none of his; naming the Persons
from whom he had taken them. And as a great Chest was carrying forth,
Trenchers, Platters, and other things were thrown about in so dreadful a
manner, that one not much noted for Religion, said, Pray you, let us go to
Prayer; and indeed that was their only Refuge, Praying, Reading, and Singing
Psalms: And though diverse things were thrown, as a Dish several times (which gave
Mr. Bennet once a smart Blow on the Cheek) the Man's Boots, a Chopping-knife
twice, Crabs out of a Tub standing in the midst of the Room, a Firebrand, a
Hammer, and a Bible; yet at Prayer all was quiet. In the Morning, after Mr.
Bennet and his Brother were come away, before they got home, they heard that
the House was on fire. Mr. Bennet was thereupon sent for again; in the mean
time they had carried away their Goods, pulled off the Thatch, and quenched the
Fire; yet it kindled again and again, till all th Man's Goods were carried out:
And when these People (whose House was burnt down to the Ground) together with
all their Goods, were removed into the Field, all was quiet in the second
House; but some things were thrown in the Field, and some noise heard among the
Household Stuff. Thus these poor Creatures were distressed; their House burnt
down, that to which they removed several times fired; and they with their Goods
forced to lie in the open Fields for several Days and Nights together, being
made a sad Spectacle to all sorts of People, that came far and near to see and
hear of the Business. Afterward a Fast Day was kept by four neighboring
Ministers, and Sermons preached on these Texts, Job 11.13. Amos 3.6. Luke 13.2,
3. Isa. 33.14, 15, 16. The Congregation was great, and the distressed Persons
diligently attentive: After which, they were not at all troubled any more in
that manner. See the Narrative written by Mr. Bennet, and published by Mr.
Clark in his Examples, Vol. II. p. 594, etc.

See more of the Darbyshire Woman, that cozened a Boy of some Money, in the
Chapter of Divine Judgments upon Cursing; and of John Duncalf, that stole a
Bible, in the Chapter of Lying and Slandering.

Humane Judgments are so often inflicted in these Cases, and our Prisons are so
loud with the Cries of poor guilty Malefactors, and the Gallows so conspicuous
in every Country, that it is less necessary to enquire for particular Instances
of Divine Vengeance.

CHAP. CXV. Remarkable Instances of Restitution.
We find in the old Mosaic Economy strict Laws for Restitution, Exodus 22.1.
Lev. 6.2, etc. Prove. 6.31. Scripture Precedents, 1 Samuel 12.2, 3. Nehem. 6.11,
12, 13. Luke 19.8. In short, these four Reasons are urged by a late Author, for
the Necessity of it. God does strictly require it; be severely punishes the
Neglect of it; accepts of no Service, till it be performed; nor is there any
true Repentance, or Salvation, without it.

1. The Turkish Religion requires it: Their Law is, If any Man has any
Ill-gotten Goods in his Possession, he must make speedy Satisfaction; and if
not able, he must give a Bill under his Hand, to restore it so soon as he is
able. Smythy's Treatise of Restitution, p. 10.

Selymus, a Turkish Emperor, lying upon his Deathbed, tormented in Mind;
Pyrrhus, one of his Basha's, advised him, for the quieting of his Thoughts, to
bestow the Wealth which he had wrongfully taken from the Persian Merchants,
upon a Hospital for the Poor: But that would not satisfy his guilty
Conscience; and therefore he required, that the Money should be returned to the
Merchants themselves, saying, They are without the Obedience of God, that do
not Repent and Restore. Ibid.

2. A Person in London having stole a Child, and conveyed him beyond the Seas,
was so mightily disquieted in his Mind, that he wrote to Mr. Smythy, Curate at
St. Giles's Cripplegate, earnestly desiring him, in his next Preparatory Sermon
for the Sacrament, to resolve two Questions: 1. Whether one that has stolen a
Child, and conveyed him beyond Sea, could by any means be a worthy Communicant?
2. If he might, what was necessary in order to it? The Questions were answered:
But there was no more possible to be done in that case, the Child being not to
be found, and the Parents (I suppose) dead; but to give the Money received for
the Child, to the Poor: Which was done accordingly. Ibid.

3. A younger Brother, being covetous of an Estate, sold his eldest Brother,
and conveyed him beyond the Seas: Afterward the Remorse of his Conscience was
so great, that he could not rest, till he had used all possible Means for the
Regaining of him. Merchants engaged their Factors to enquire for him. He had
run away from his Master, herded with a wild savage sort of Brutish People, who
lived in Woods and Forests, with a Gun or Bow to get their Living; was sent
back to the Possession of his Inheritance, but not capable of enjoying it,
being for the most part raging Mad; and in his Intervals, nothing would
satisfy him, but to return again to that wild foraging course of Life. Ibid.

4. Mr. Buroughs, in his Sermon on that Text, Psalm. 17.14. has these Words:
These Hands of mine had once that given to them, to be a means to convey, to
restore that which was taken wrongfully 50 Years before: The Wrong was 50 Years
ago; and after 50 Years, the Conscience of the Man troubles him, and he comes
to bring, to restore that wrong, and desires it may be conveyed to such a place
where he had done the wrong. Burroughs's Gospel-Conversation, p. 357.

5. Mr. Samuel Fairclough at Thirteen Years of Age, hearing his Godfather, Mr.
Samuel Ward, of Haveril, Preaching upon Zacheus his Restitution, and often
repeating Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur oblatum; was so touched
with remorse for the robbing of one Goodman Jude's Orchard (together with
another Schoolboy, one John Trigg, afterward a Famous Physician in London;)
that after a restless Night, on Monday Morning he goes to Trigg, tells him he
was going to Goodman Jude's to carry him Twelve Pence for his Three pennyworth
of Pears, of which he had wronged him. Trigg fearing a Whipping from his
Master, answered, Thou talkest like a Fool, Sam, God will forgive us ten times
sooner than Old Jude will forgive us once. But Sam was of another Mind, goes to
Jude's House, confesses the Injury, offers the Money; Jude Pardons him, but
would take no Money. This grieved him more; upon which he goes to his Spiritual
Father, Mr. Ward, opens to him the whole state of his Soul; who in great
tenderness poured Wine and Oil into his Wounds. See his Life.

See the Story of the Fire at Brightling, in the last Chapter; as also of the
Staffordshire- man that stole a Bible, in the Chapter of Cursing, etc.

6. Rich. Rogers, of Middle near Salop, had a Bible stolen out of his Seat in
the Church, and a while after, his Daughter one Morning found another thrown by
the House Door, which he made public Proclamation of at Church, and no body
owned or claimed it. From his own Mouth.

7. Mr. Mackerness, in the Narrative which himself has published of his own
Life, confesses his stealing a Duck near Oxford, and eating it; and with great
trouble of Spirit professes himself willing to make fourfold Restitution, if
he knew to whom.

CHAP. CXVI. Divine Judgments upon Sacrilege, Simony.
SAcrilege is the Diversion of Holy and Ecclesiastic things to Profane and
Secular use: As Simeon and Levi, so Theft and Sacrilege be evil Brethren (
says Sir H. Spelman) Theft robs our Neighbor, Sacrilege, God. God himself
has told us, That Lands and Houses may be sanctified to the Lord; but things
devoted, are most Holy to the Lord, Lev. 27.28. and not redeemable. And the
Charters of our Foundations of Monasteries and Abbeys, were generally in these
words, Concessi Deo and Ecclesiae, Offero Deo; confirmavi Deo and Ecclesiae,
etc. Cook Magn. Chart. fol. 2.1.6. etc. Simony is the Purchasing of what is
Sacred and Spiritual with things of Secular Nature and Consideration. Both
which sins God has appeared plainly against; as may be made appear to any one
that is acquainted with the History of the Church. Uzzah died because be did
but touch the Ark to save it. He that prosaned the Sabbath, was stoned: Corah
and his Company, who meddled with the things of the Priesthood, wire swallowed
up quick. Ananias died, Simon Magus was accursed.

1. When Heliodorus was present in the Temple with his Soldiers, ready to seize
upon the Treasury, by the Prayers of the People of Jerusalem, the Lord of all
Spirits and power showed so great a Vision, that he fell suddenly into an
extreme fear and trembling: For there appeared unto him an Horse with a
terrible Man sitting upon him, most richly trapped, which came fiercely and
smote at him with his fore-feet. Moreover, there appeared two Young Men,
notable in Strength, excellent in Beauty, and comely in Apparel, which stood by
him on either side, and scourged him with many stripes; so that Heliodorus,
that came in with so great a company of Soldiers and Attendants, was stricken
dumb, and carried out in a Litter upon means shoulders; for his strength was so
abated, that he could not help himself, but lay destitute of all hopes of
Recovery, so heavy was the Hand of God upon him, until by the Prayers of Onias,
the High Priest, he was restored; then he confessed, that he which dwelt in
Heaven, had his Eyes on that Place, and defended it from all those that came to
hurt and spoil it. Josephus.

2. Sir Henry Spelman instanceth in these Examples following:

1. William the Conqueror fires St. Peter's Church in York, rifles the
Monasteries, destroyed Thirty Six Mother-Churches in Hampshire, to make his
New-Forest, takes all their Plate, Treasure, Chalices, etc. Afterward, Robert
his own Son rebels, beats his Father, and wounds both his Person and Honor.
Richard, his beloved Son, is killed in his Father's New-Forest, by the goring
of a Stag, as Speed says; by ill Air, as Cambden. After which, he burns the
City of Manuts, and Church of St. Mary's, with two Anchorites; upon which his
Horse gives him a fall, breaks his Belly, his Body is forsaken by his Nobles
and Servants, but by the Courtesy of a Country Gentleman brought (after three
days) to Caen in Normandy; but there a Fire happening, an Interruption is made
again, and afterward Burial denied by one that claimed the Ground: At last, a
Composition being made, he is Interred, but the Town being afterward taken by
an Enemy, his Bones are dug up, and scattered as Chaff before the Wind.

2. His Son Henry Hunting in the New-Forest, is Struck through the Jaws with
the bough of a Tree.

3. His Grandchild William (second Son to Robert) Earl of Flanders, in a War
against his Uncle Henry the First, received a small Wound in his Hand, and died
of it.

4. Robert of Normandy, the Conqueror's Eldest Son, is disinherited by his
Father, imprisoned by his Brother Henry the First for 26 Years, has both his
Eyes put out, and is starved in Cardaff Gaol.

5. William Rufus stores his Treasury by the Sale of Chalices and
Church-Jewels, and is afterward killed by Sir Walter Tyrrel, shooting at a
Deer in New-Forest, in the same place where a Church stood: His Funeral was
interrupted, as his Fathers, his Corpse brought by a ^i^^y lean Beast to
Winchester, the Cart breaks by the way, he is buried unlamented, and his Bones
after taken up, and laid in a Coffin with Canutus his Bones, etc.

6. Hugh, Earl of Shrewsbury 11th. kennell'd his Dogs in the Church of S.
Frydame, where in the Morning they were found mad, and himself afterward
fighting with the Enemy, was shot dead in the Eye.

7. King John rifled the Abbeys of Peterborough and Croyland, and carrying his
Sacrilegious Wealth to Lincoln, the Earth swallows up Carts, Carriages, Horses,
and all his Church-Spoil, and all the Church-spoilers; the King passing the
Washes in another place, receives the News, together with his own Sickness,
whereof he died.

8. William Marshal, Earl of Pembroke, in the Irish War takes from the Bishop
of Furnes two Manors belonging to his Church, is Excommunicated, dies, and is
buried in the Temple-Church at London: The Bishop sues to the King to return
the Lands, the King requires the Bishop to Absolve the Earl: Both King and
Bishop go to the Earl's Grave, the Bishop is obstinate, the Earl's Son is
obstinate too; the Bishop tells the King, Sir, what I have said, stands
immutable, the Punishment of Malefactors is from the Lord; and the Curse
written in the Psalms, will fall heavy upon Earl William; in the next
Generation shall his Name be forgot, and his Sons shall not share the Blessing
of Increase and Multiply, and some of them shall die miserable Deaths, and the
Inheritance of all be dispersed and scattered; and all this, my Lord, O King,
you shall see even in your Days. With what Spirit soever the Bishop spoke it,
in the space of Twenty Five Years all the Earl's five Sons inherited
successively, all die Childless, particularly, one in Prison, and another by a
fall from his Horse.

9. Cardinal Woolsey, while free from Sacrilege, was the Catalogue of Humane
Blessings; but when by the King and Pope's leave he had dissolved Forty small
Monasteries, to Erect two Colleges, the one in Oxford, the other in Ipswich;
the King seizes upon his Palace at Westminster, takes the Great Seal, Wealth,
and Liberty from him; his College at Ipswich destroyed before it was built,
that at Oxford receives a new Name, himself is arrested of High Treason, and to
prevent a Public and Ignominious Death, Poisons himself.

10. The Cardinal, in dissolving his Forty Monasteries, had made use of five
Men, besides Cromwell; whereof two fought a Duel, in which one was slain, and
the other hanged for Murder; a third drowns himself in a Well, a fourth (a Rich
Man too) lives to beg his Bread from door to door; the fifth, a Bishop, was
cruelly murdered in Ireland by Tho. Fitz-Garret, Son to the Earl of Kildare.
Pope Clement the Seventh, that gave consent to this Dissolution, is forced out
of his Palace, besieged at his Castle, constrained there to eat Asses Flesh,
and at last dies of a miserable Disease. Cromwell, Cardinal Woolsey's Servant
and Successor, whilst sitting at the Council Table, is suddenly Apprehended,
sent to the Tower, and thence to the Place of Execution.

11. King Henry the Eighth, who engrossed Sacrilege, and entailed it to
Posterity, is afflicted with the Rebellion of his Subjects in Suffolk, Lincoln,
Somerset, Yorkshire, the North, Ireland, etc. with a great Dearth; falls from
one sin to another (in the case of his Wives) the three last die Childless, the
Children of the two first are declared Illegitimate: And though he entailed the
Crown upon his Children, and they all successively wore it, yet they all die
Childless; and his Family is extinct, and not to be mentioned but with his
Crimes.

12. Charles Brandon was an Active Man, and aiding to Henry the Eighth in the
Dissolution of Monasteries, and received great Rewards out of his
Church-Spoils; and though he had four Wives, yet by the fifth of Edw. 6. the
Name, Title, and Family of Brandon was extinct.

13. The Duke of Norfolk had by the Statute of Hen. 8. c. 13. the Monastery of
Sibaton in Suffolk, and the Lord Cobham the Chantry of Cobham in Kent; since
which time my Author remarks how heavy the Hand of Justice has fallen upon
those two Families.

14. The Duke of Somerset had in the First Year of Edward the Sixth, procured
the Dissolution of some Chantries, Free-Chapels, and Hospitals; defaceth part
of St. Paul's Church, converts the Charnel-House, and a Chapel by it, into
Dwelling-Houses; destroys the Steeple, and part of the Church of St. John's of
Jerusalem, and with the Stone begins to build his House in the Strand; but the
consecrated Stone becomes unsuccessful, so as the Builder does not finish his
House, nor his Son Inherit it. Afterward the Duke was Indicted of Felony,
found Guilty, and suffered by a Law that was but the year before passed by
himself. Sir Hen. Spelman, De non Temerand. Eccl. Epist. to the Reader, p.
28-38.

CHAP. CXVII. Divine Judgments upon Treachery.
TReachery had ever an ill Name, and not undeservedly; for it discovers the
falseness of a Man's Heart, and represents him to the World, as a Man to fit to
be trusted: For who dares lean with any confidence upon a broken Reed? And
accordingly, though it meets often with fine Promises, yet is often served in
self as it serves others, with poor and miserable Performances. Every one is
ready to retort upon the traitor in the words of the Emperor, A^no proditionem,
odi proditorem, I love the Treachery, but hate the Traitor.

1. Sir Robert Carre, afterward Earl of Somerset, a great Favorite of King
James, admitted Sir Thomas Overbury into his Favor, and put him in Trust with
his most Secret Employments; in which he behaved himself so discreetly and
honestly, that afterward, when the Earl of Somerset, falling in Love with the
Lady Frances Howard, late Wife of the Earl of Essex, but then divorced, or
intended to be divorced, consulted with Sir Thomas about it; and Sir Thomas
freely dissuading him from the Match, with words reflecting much on the
Countess's Reputation; and doing this upon a Principle of unfeigned Love, the
Earl, with the Advice of the Countess, resolved upon Revenge, and contrived the
murdering of Sir Thomas afterward in the Tower; but after a mighty Celebration
of the Wedding, the Murder was discovered, the Instruments hanged, the Earl and
Countess both convicted, their Estate seized, only their Lives by the King's
favor were reprieved. Select Lives of England 's Worthies, p. 286, 287.
Detect. of the Court and State in the Four last Reigns, p. 39, 40, etc.

2. Nicholas Keretschen, Governor of Gyula in Transylvania, betrayed the same
unto the Turks for a great Sum of Money; but when he expected the Reward, he
was, by the Command of Solomon the Great Turk, thrust into an Hogshead stuck
full of Nails with the points inward, with this Inscription upon it: Here,
receive the Reward of thy Treason; if thou be not faithful to thy Master,
neither will thou be so to me. And so he was rolled up and down till he died.
Turk. Hist. p. 824.

3. Banister, Servant to the Duke of Buckingham, in the Reign of Richard the
Third, upon the Promise of a Thousand Pounds, basely betrayed his Lord and
Master, from whom he had formerly received great Favors; but after this base
Treachery, he never had the Reward promised; and beside, had these Judgments
befell him: His Eldest Son fell Mad, and so died in a Swine-stye: His second Son
became deformed in his Limbs, and fell Lame: His third Son was drowned in a
small Puddle of Water: His Eldest Daughter was suddenly struck with a Leprosy;
and himself, in his Old Age, was arraigned, found guilty of Murder, and
escaped Hanging very narrowly. Speed. Chron. p. 97.

4. One Mr. Roscadden going on Pilgrimage, according to the Blindness and
Superstition of those Times, his Wife had in his absence, one, if not more
Children: Whereupon, at his return, one John Tregoss advised and persuaded him
to settle his Estate upon some Friend, for the Use and Benefit of his Wife and
Children, lest after his Death, the Heir at Common Law should turn his Wife and
Children out of Doors.

Mr. Roscadden entertained and approved the Motion, and entreated him to accept
of the Trust, which Request the said John Tregoss readily embraced: But instead
of a Deed in Trust, he made it Absolute to himself and his Heirs for ever. And
accordingly, so soon as Mr. Roscadden was dead, he entered upon all his Lands,
and turned his Children out of Doors, who for some time were fain to lie in a
Hog-stye, and every Morning went forth to the Dunghill, and there upon their
Knees imprecated and prayed that the Vengeance of God might fall upon this
Tregoss and his Posterity, for this so perfidious and merciless dealing.

And after this, God's severe, but righteous Judgments fell upon Tregss's
Family: For his Son Walter one day riding upon a Horse in a fair way, the Horse
threw him, and broke his Neck; and some of his Issue came to untimely ends: And
it is observed that a Curse has remained upon the Estate ever since: Mr.
Thomas Tregoss, Minister, was so sensible of it, that it cost him many fervent
Prayers to God for the removal of that dreadful Curse, as himself assured a
Bosom Friend. See his Life.

5. Solomon, the Turkish Emperor (contrary to his Promise) commanded the
Traitors of Buda to be put to Death.

6. The same Solomon promised his Daughter for a Reward to him that would
betray the Island Rhodes, but when this Christian Traitor challenged his
Promise, with a large Portion for Matrimony, the Emperor brought his Daughter
in very costly attired, with a Vides me stetisse promissis, You see I have
stood to my Promise, but withal commanded him to be flayed, and put on a Bed of
Salt, or his Daughter would not be a fit Match, except for a Musselman, whose
Skin was circumeised, and clean from Baptism. Camerarius.

CHAP. CXVIII. Divine Judgments upon Unfaithful Husbands.
GOD that has Ordained the Nuptial Knot for a Band of Union, intended it not
only to tie the Hand^, but the Hearts of the married couple together also; and
therefore cannot be supposed to wink at the Fault of Unkindness and
Unfaithfulness in either Party: But especially he expects, that the Man should
excel in Prudence and Patience, and give a good Example, as well as Arguments
and Instructions, to his Wife.

1. Anno Christi, 1652. There was living in the Isle of Thanet, in Kent, one
Adam Sprackling, Esquire, in the Parish of St. Lawrence, who about Twenty Years
before had married Katharine, the Daughter of Sir Robert Leukner, of Kent: This
Sprackling had a fair Estate, but was exceeding Proud and Profane; he
frequented Taverns, and Alehouses, where he used to Rant, and Roar, and Game,
and Swear exceedingly, and upon small Occasions, to Quaarel, and draw his
Weapon, etc. He regarded not the Sabbath, nor the public Worship of God: By
which dissolute Courses, and God's Judgment upon him, he exhausted his Estate,
and brought others into Bond for him, whom he left to Imprisonment and Ruin;
and had at last Executions out against him, and Bailiffs waiting to Arrest him:
Whereupon he was forced to keep home, and make his House his Prison, so that he
could not domineer abroad, as formerly. This filled him full of Rage, and made
him extreme Hasty and Choleric, so that his Wife was constrained to lock up
her self from him, being a Woman of many excellent Parts and Virtues. But upon
Saturday Night, December the 11th. 1652. this Sprackling (as it seems) resolved
to do her a Mischief; and being in his Kitchen, had one Lamming, a Neighbor of
his, with him, and sent for one Knowles a Seaman, to hinm; but it being Ten a
Clock at Night, he desired to be excused, being in Bed: Then did he send for
one Martin, a poor old Man, and his Tenant, who, though in Bed, durst not but
arise, and come to him; and when he came, Lamming went his ways; so that there
remained only this Sprackling, and his Wife, and Martin, and one Ewel, his Man:
Then did Sprackling command Martin to bind Ewel's Legs; which the one did, and
the other suffered, thinking that it had been only a ranting Humor of their
Master. Then began he to rage against his Wife, who sat quietly by; though she
gave him none but loving and sweet Speeches, yet did he draw his Dagger, and
struck her over the Face with it, hurting her Jaw, which she bore patiently,
saying little to him; but he still continued to rage against her; and when at
last, the Gentlewoman being weary, and in great fear, rose up, and went to the
Door, her Husband followed he rwith a Chopping-knife in his Hand, with which he
struck at her Wrist, and cut the Bone in sunder, so that her Hand hung down
only by the Sinews and Skin. No help was near; Ewel was bound, and Martin being
old and weak, and fearing his own Life, durst not interpose, only he prayed his
Mistress to stay and be quiet, hoping all would be well, and so getting a
Napkin, bound up her Hand with it. After this, toward Morning, Sprackling
still raging and railing at his Wife, dashed her on the Forehead with the Iron
Cleever; whereupon she fell down bleeding, but recovering her self on her
Knees, she cried and prayed unto God, for the Pardon of her own Sins, and her
Husbands: But as sh was thus praying, her bloody Husband chopp'd her Head in
the midst, into the very Brains, so that she fell down and died immediately.
Then did he kill six Dogs, four of which he threw by his Wife; and then chopped
her twice into the Leg, compelling Martin to wash Ewal's Face with her Blood;
himself also dipping Linen in her Blood, washed Martin's Face, and he bloodied
his own Face with it also. For all which being apprehended, and carried to
Sandwich Gaol, at the Sessions following, which was April the 22d. 1653. he was
arraigned, condemned, and hanged on the 27th. Day, dying very desperately, and
not suffering any to come near him, neither godly Ministers, nor Gentlemen, who
desired to speak with him after his Condemnation. This is more largely published
in Print, by one that lived near the Place and was present at this Sprackling's
Trial.

2. King Henry the VIII. puts away Queen Katharine by Divorce, after Twenty
Years enjoyment of her; and being desirous of Sons, marries the Lady Ann
Bullen; and after she had brought him a Daughter (the Lady Elizabeth) and a Son
born dead, beheads her: His next Wife dies in Childbed; some say, she was
ripp'd open by the King's Order: He is divorced from his next Queen, Ann of
Cleve: His next, the Lady Katharine Howard, is beheaded for Treason: His last
Wife was the Lady Katharine Parr. His Three last are Childless;and the Children
of the Two first, declared Illegitimate: And though afterward all his Three
Children swayed the Scepter successively, yet they all died Childless: And as
for himself, his Name and Memory has a Stench with it to this Day. It were
easy to add more Examples on this Subject.

CHAP. CXIX. Divine Judgments upon Unfaithful Wives.
GOD has not imposed upon Wives the Duty of Subjection and Obedience in vain;
but takes notice whether they observe it or not, and accordingly executes his
Judgments upon them that make no Conscience thereof: And indeed, the Sin it
self leads naturally to its own Punishment in part, by provoking the Husband to
Displeasure, teaching the Children to Disobey, and precuring Shame and Contempt
in the World, as well as the Wrath of God, and the Disfavour of his Providence.

1. Cicero put away his Wife Terentia, because she had made but small account
of him in the Time of the Wars which were betwixt Caesar and Pompey: So that
when he went from Rome to Pompey, she provided no fit Accommodations for his
Journey; and when he came back again into Italy, she never showed any spark of
Love or Good Will toward him: Though he stayed long at Brundusium, she never
went to see him; and when his Daughter took that long Journey from Rome to
Brundusium, to visit him, she neither provided Company to conduct her, nor gave
her Money or other Necessaries for the way; yea, she so handled the matter,
that when Cicero came to Rome, he found nothing in his House but bare Walls,
and yet was greatly in Debt by her. Plut. in Vita ejus.

2. Alboynus, King of the Lombards, having overcome in War, Cunemundus, King of
the Jepidi, and having slain him, made a Drinking-Cup of his Skull, yet took
his Daughter Rosamund to Wife. Now it fell out, that Alboynus being one day
drunk, forced his Wife to drink out of her Father's Skull; which she so much
stomached, that she promised one Helmichil^^ her self to Wife, and Lombardy for
a Dowry, if he would kill her Husband the King; which he assented to, and
performed: But they were afterward so hated for it, that they were forced to
fly to the Court of the Exarch of Ravenna, who seeing Rosamund's Beauty, and
the Mass of Money and Jewels which they brought with them, persuaded her to
kill Helmichilde, and to take him for her Husband; which accordingly she
promised to do: And when her Husband Helmichilde, coming out of the Bath,
called for Beer, she gave him a strong Poison; but when he had drunk half of it
(suspecting the Matter) he forced her to drink off the rest, and so both died
together. Heil. Geog. p. 150.

3. Joan Queen of Naples, was insatiable for her Lust, which cause her to hang
her first Husband (which was Andrew, Second Son to the King of Hungry) at her
Window, for Insufficiency: Her second Husband was Lewis of Tarentum, who did
with over-straining himself to satisfy her Appetite: Her third Husband, James
of Tarracon, a gallant Gentleman, she beheaded, for lying with another Woman:
Her fourth Husband was Otho Duke of Brunswick; in whose time, the King of
Hungary drove her out of her Kingdom; and having taken her, hung her out of the
same Window where she had hanged her first Husband. Ibid, p. 162.

4. An ancient Gentleman of good Account, marrying a beautiful young
Gentlewoman, but having no Issue, he took into his House a young Gentleman, a
Neighbor's Son, and completely qualified, purposing to make him a Sharer in
his Estate. This Gentleman grows familiar with his Wife, which gave so much
occasion of Suspicion, and caused such a Rumor in the Country, that his Father
requires him to return home again. He does so; but at parting, promises
Marriage to the Gentlewoman, in case of her old Husband's Decease; and she to
him, both with Oaths. The old Gentleman's Maid meeting with this young Gallant,
over a Glass of Wine, tells him in private, how much his Company was missed at
her Master's House, and his Return desired: But withal, though she knew the
Familiarities between him and her Mistress, yet it was all feigned; for another
enjoyed both her Heart and Body, (naming the Person.) The Gentleman is
startled, but Incredulous. After some time, the old Gentleman sends for him
again. He goes in the Night, but very privily, (having before by Letter
desired, that the Garden Door might be left open for him) and tells the old
Gentleman the Reason of his Absence: But before he went back, he goes softly to
the Gentlewoman's Bedchamber Door (who often lay by her self,) and hears the
Whispers of two distinct Voices. Upon which, in a sudden Passion, he resolves
to break in upon them, and run them through with a Sword; but relenting with
Tenderness, he departs softly to his own home, grows Melancholy, and
Distempered; but recovering, he resolved to Travel. The old Man sends for him,
to take an unwilling Farewell. At the Importunity of his Father, he goes. After
Dinner, the Wife singles him for a Farewell, weeping in his Bosom, and
beseeching him to have a care of his Safety, but especially of his Vow and
Promise. Instead of Reply, he gave her a Letter, which he desired her to peruse
in his Absence. She opens the Letter, and reads there all the Story of her Lust
laid open, particularly and pathetically. This struck her to the Heart; she
fell presently into Frenzy, and Despairing, soon after died. Which News came
to the Gentleman before he reached Gravesend. The old Man afterward enriched
him with a great part of his Land, which he enjoys (says my Author) to this
Day. Wonders of the Female World, p. 125. out of Heywood.

CHAP. CXX. Divine Judgments upon Undutiful Children.
A Wife Son makes a glad Father, but a foolish Son is the heaviness of his
Mother, says Solomon, Prove. 10.1. And in another Place, the disobedient Child
is threatened with a Punishment to be inflicted on him by the Ravens of the
Valley, and the young Eagles, Prove. 30.17. as it were to signify, that such a
one is in a fair way to an untimely and disgraceful Death, like to perish, and
lie unburied in the open Air, for Birds of Prey to feed upon; and it is certain,
many such Instances there are of Children, who forsake the Counsels of their
Parents, and never return to the Paths of Virtue, but go on till their Sin
brings them to some miserable End.

1. Freeman Sondes, Esquire; Son of Sir George Sondes, of Lees-Court, in Shelwich
in Kent, being commanded by his Father, to comply with the Will of his elder
Brother, in a small Matter, relating to their Clothes; and in an obstinate
manner disobeying, so that his Father was provoked to use some threatening
Expressions, (as that he should for the future depend much upon his Brother.)
Freeman hereupon, in great discontent, when his elder Brother was fast asleep,
gave him a deadly Blow on the right side of his Head, with the back of a
Cleaver, taken out of the Kitchen the Sunday Night before he did the Fact. He,
after the Blow, said, he would have given all the World to recall it, and made
a stop of the rest, to see how deep he had wounded him; and finding it to be a
mortal Wound (having broken the Skull) his Brother stretching himself on his
Bed, and struggling for Life, and he gathering from thence, that he was in
great torment, discovered then, even in that Storm of Temptation, so much of a
relenting Spirit, that to put him out of his pain, he did reiterate his Blows
with a Dagger which he had about him. When he had thus imbrued his Hands in his
Brother's Blood, he threw the Cleaver out of a Window into the Garden, and came
with great confusion and disturbance in his Face into his Father's Bedchamber,
adjoining to his Brother's, with the Dagger in his Pocket; and undrawing the
Curtains, shook his Father by the Shoulder, who, being thus awakened out of his
Sleep, received from his Mouth this Heartbreaking Message, Father, I have
killed my Brother. He being asTonished at it, made this Reply with much horror,
What say thou! Have thou, Wretch! killed thy Brother? Then you had best kill
me too. The Son replied, No, Sir, I have done enough. (I am sure it was too
much.) The Father, Sir George, upon this said, Why then you must look to be
hanged. Which Doom was accordingly passed upon him, at the next Assizes held at
Maidstone, Anno 1655. See the Narrative of his Life and Death, by R. Boreman.

2. Anno Christi, 1641. There was in Juchi, near Cambray, an unnatural Son,
that in a fury threw his Mother out of Doors, thrice in one Day; telling her,
That he had rather see his House on fire, and burned to Ashes, than that she
should remain in it one Day longer. And accordingly, the very same Day his
House was fired, and wholly burned down, with all that was in it, none knowing
how, or by what means the Fire came. Enguer de Monast. v. 2.

3. Manlius relates a Story of an old Man, crooked with Age, and almost pined
with Hunger, who having a Rich and Wealthy Son, went to him only for some Food
for his Belly, and Clothes for his Back. But this proud young Man thinking that
it would be a Dishonor to him, to be born of such Parents, drove him away,
denying not only to give him sustenance, but disclaiming him from being his
Father, giving him bitter and reproachful Speeches; which made the poor old Man
to go away with an heavy Heart, and Tears flowing from his Eyes: Which the Lord
beholding, struck his unnatural Son with Madness, of which he could never be
cured till his Death.

4. The same Author relates another Story, of another Man, that kept his Father
in his old Age, but used him very churlishly, as if he had been his Slave,
thinking every thing too good for him; and on a time, coming in, found a good
Dish set on the Table for his Father, which he took away, and set courser Meat
in the room: But a while after, sending his Servant to fetch out that Dish for
himself, he found the Meat turned into Snakes, and the Sauce into Serpents; one
of which leaping up, caught this unnatural Son by the Lip, from which it could
never be pulled to his Dying-day; so that he could never feed himself, but he
must feed the Serpent also.

5. Adolf, Son of Arnold, Duke of Guelders, repining at his Father's long Life;
one Night, as he was going to Bed, came upon him suddenly, and took him
Prisoner; and bare-legged as he was, made him go on foot, in a cold Season,
five German Leagues, and then shut him up a close Prisoner, for six Months, in
a dark Dungeon. But the Lord suffered not such Disobedience to go unpunished:
For shortly after, the Son was apprehended, and long imprisoned; and after his
Release, was slain in a Fight against the French. History of the Netherlands.

6. Henry Jones, of Monmouth in Wales, for an unnatural Murder of his Mother, a
Widow, Mrs. Grace Jones, out of a greedy, desire to enjoy her Estate, was at
the Assizes held at Monmouth, condemned to be pressed to Death; his Sister to
be burnt, (as consenting with him) and his Boy hanged, A. C. 1671. See the
Narrative.

7. A Malster, near Cocks-Hill in Essex, having made over all his Estate to his
Son, was afterward turned out of Doors, without so much as a Bed to lie on:
But the Son, soon after slighted by his Sweetheart, hanged himself, 1674.

Sir P. Pett being on January the 24th. 1695. in the Company of the Honorable
Sir Edward Lutwyche, who was formerly Recorder of Chester, and afterward one of
the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, he related to him, That while he was
Recorder of Chester, a Father there, who had two Sons, demising some Land to
his elder Son, by his Will, and ordering in his Will, That for want of Heirs to
the elder Son, the Land should come to the younger Son; and further enjoining
it to the elder Son, in the Will, that he should not cut off the Entail; it so
happened, that notwithstanding the Father's Injunction, the elder Brother did,
in process of time, cut off the Entail: And the younger Brother fearing that
the elder would so do, while they both walked amicably together, in a Field in
Cheshire, the younger Brother using several Expostulations with the elder, did
entreat him that he would observe the Injunction laid upon him in his deceased
Father's Will, and not cut off the Entail. Whereupon the elder Brother thus
replied to him, Brother, if ever I do it, may that Bull, or some other, gore me
to Death, (pointing to a Bull, then grazing in the Field.) Yet this
notwithstanding, the elder Brother shortly after did cut off the Entail; and
afterward walking in the same Field, was there by a Bull gored to Death. This
Remarkable Providence, as Sir Edward averrs, happened within these Twenty
Years. This Account was sent me by Sir Peter Pett, now living in London.

CHAP. CXXI. Divine Judgments upon Careless Parents.
IT is a strange thing to me, that Parents should look upon themselves as bound
in Conscience to provide an Estate and temporal Livelihood for their Children,
and yet at Liberty, in respect of their Good Manners, and future Happiness; as
if they were obliged to do no more for them, than for their Dogs and Horses.
Socrates might well stand and wonder to see Men take such pains to cut and
carve Stones in the Likeness of Men, and let their Children go rude and
unpolished out of their Hands in the Likeness of Bruits. Old Eli, though a good
Man, yet because he was too soft a Parent, destroyed his Sons, and broke his
own Neck.

1. Sir George Sondes, mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, is strongly
suspected for his too much Indulgence to his Son Freeman, that committed that
foul Murder, as may be collected from Sir George's Answer in print, upon
occasion of a Charge made against him by some neighboring Ministers. See his
own Words, p. 15. Now, says he, for the Education of my Children, having
buried many other, and having now only two Sons remaining, I confess, I was
more fond and indulgent, and gave more way to them than otherwise I should have
done. And presently after, speaking of them both, he says, To that foolish
Sports of Cocking they were addicted; but the youngest most, as also to
Carding, and he would play somewhat deep at those Games: I often child him, but
could never break him of it. He was in his Behavior pleasing and courteous to
none, but cross-grained to all, and as much to his Father as to any; which I
hoped, that Years and Discretion might have made him leave in time. Afterward
speaking concerning the Allowance which he made them, he says, I ever gave
them Money, not only when, but commonly before they asked, and more than they
desired. Afterward, concerning his Son's undutiful Carriage, in his Letter to
him in the Prison, he writes thus: Your Stubbornness appeared in the least
trivial Things; as in riding abroad to my Park, and Town, (things you liked in
themselves) yet because I desired it of you, you refused it, saying, That if
your Father had not asked you to go, you would have done it; and this you did
the Thursday and Saturday before the foul Fact. Hundreds more you know there
are; as your perpetual running to Lingsted against my Mind, and staying out
till Ten or Twelve at Night; and this you would do three or four times every
Week, making me wait those late Hours for you, both for Supper, and Bed: And
when I told you of the Danger of riding so late, the Amends that followed, was,
that the next Day you would do the same again, or worse, etc. And again: For
Money to spend, you had always equal with your Brother, and as much as I
thought you could any ways need, or desire; you never asked any Sum that ever
was denied you; you knew where my Spunding-Money was, and went to it, and took
what you pleased, and I never checked you for it. Ten Pounds I offered you at a
time, and that lately, and you would have none of it; you had Money enough you
said: And so you had, to your great Hurt, etc. Oh, Freeman! thou know thy
Father loved thee but too well, and that he could deny thee nothing! From thy
Cradle, to his Day, I know not that I ever struck thee, saving that once, when
through thy unsufferable Sauciness, I pulled off thy Hat, and gave thee a
little pat on the Head. But what good did it? You presently took it up, and put
it on again, cocking it, and in scorn sat in your Chair by me, in a
discontented posture, and so continued for four or five Hours, not speaking one
Word, etc. See the Printed Narrative by it self, or Mr. Clark 's Abbreviation
of it.

2. A certain Woman in Flanders, contrary to the Will of her Husband, used to
supply her two Sons with Money, to maintain their Riot; yea, to furnish them,
she would rob her Husband: But presently after her Husband's Death, God plagued
her for this her foolish Indulgence. for from Rioting these Youngsters fell to
Robbing, for the which one of them was execured by the Sword, and the other by
the Halter, the Mother looking on, as a Witness of their Destruction. Lud.
Vives.

3. A Young Man in our own Nation, as he was going to the Gallows, desired to
speak with his Mother in her Ear; but when she came, instead of whispering, he
bit off her Ear with his Teeth, exclaiming upon her, as the cause of his Death,
because she did not chastise him in his Youth for his faults, but by her
fondness so emboldened him in his Vices, as brought him to this woeful end.
Lucretius the Roman, was served by his Son in the same manner, who having been
often redeemed from the Cross by his Father, at last at the Cross bit off his
Father's Nose.

4. Austine, upon a terrible and dreadful Accident, called his People together
to a Sermon, wherein he relates this doleful Story: Our Noble Citizen (says
he) Cyrillus, a Man mighty amongst us, both in work, and word, and much
beloved, had, as you know, one only Son, and because but one, he loved him
immeasurably, and above God: And so being drunk with immoderate doting, he
neglected to Correct him, and gave him Liberty to do whatsoever he lift. Now,
this very day (says he) this same Fellow, thus long suffered in his dissolute
and riotous courses, has in his drunken Humor wickedly offered Violence to
his Mother, great with Child, would have violated his Sister, has killed his
Father, and wounded two of his Sisters to Death. Ad frat. in Eremo. Ser. 33. if
he was the Author of that Treatise.

CHAP. CXXII. Divine Judgments upon Gluttony.
SOlomon requires us to put a Knife to our Throat, when we are at such Tables,
where Dainties are set before us, if we be Persons given to Appetite: And our
Savior has forbid us the surfeiting of our selves. And it is certain, Gluttony
is a fault, that not only has a Natural tendency to the desTruction of our
Health, the obating of our Estates, and the enfeebling of our Spirits, but
provokes the Indignation of Heaven: As we may see in the sin of Sodom, which
was Pride and fullness of Bread, and Idleness; in the case of Job 's Sons, and
the Feast of Belshazzar; and the Examples following.

1. One Albidinus, a Young Man of a most debauched course of Life, when he had
consumed all his Lands, Goods, and Jewels, and exhausted all his Estate, even
to one House, he with his own hands set that on fire; and despairing of any
future Fortune, left the City, and betaking himself to the Solitude of the
Woods and Groves, he in a short space after hanged himself. Dr. Thomas Tailor,
C. 7. N. 100.

2. Lucullus, a Noble Roman, in his Praetorship, governed Africa two several
times; he moreover overthrew and defeated the whole Forces of King Mithridates,
and rescued his Colleague, Cotta, who was besieged in Chalcedon, and was very
Fortunate in all his Expeditions; but after, his Greatness growing an Eyesore
to the Commonweal, he retired himself from all Public Offices or Employments,
to his own Private Fields, where he builded Sumptuously, sparing for no Charge
to compass any variety that could be heard of; and had in his House he made, a
very rich Library, and plentifully furnished with Books of all sorts. And when
he had in all things accommodated his House, suiting with his own wishes and
desires, forgetting all Martial Discipline before exercised, he wholly betook
himself to Riotous Comessations, and Gluttonous Feasts; having gotten so much
Spoil and Treasure in the Wars, that it was the greatest part of his study, how
profusely to spend it in Peace. Pompey and Cicero one Night stealing upon him
with a self-invitation to Supper, he caused on the sudden a Feast to be made
ready, the cost whereof amounted to Fifty Thousand Pieces of Silver; the state
of the Place, the plenty of Meat, and change and variety of Dishes, the costly
Sauces, the fineness and neatness of the Services, driving the Guests into
extraordinary Admiration. Briefly, having given himself wholly to a Sensual
Life, his high feeding, and deep quaffing, brought him to such a Weakness, that
he grew Apoplectick in all his Senses; and as one insufficient to govern either
himself or his Estate, he was committed to the keeping of M. Lucullus his near
Kinsman, dying soon after. Ibid.

3. Caesar, the Son of Pope Alexander, was one of those who much doted on his
Belly, and wholly devoted himelf to all kind of Intemperance, who in daily
Breakfasts, Dinners, Afternoon-sittings, Suppers, and new Banquets, spent Five
Hundred Crowns, not reckoning Feasts, and Extraordinary Inventions. For
Parasites, Buffoons, and Jesters, he allowed Yearly Two Thousand Suits of
Clothes from his Wardrobe. He maintained also a continual Army of Eight
Thousand Soldiers about him; and all this he exhausted from his Father's
Coffers. Ibid.

4. Demadas now being old, and always a Glutton, is like a spent Sacrifice,
nothing is left but his Belly, and his Tongue, all the Man besides is gone,
said Antipater of him. Dr. Jer. Tailor.

5. Hugucchio a Captain, lost two Towns, because he would not break his Meal.
Mr. Hales of Eaton, out of Paulus Jovius.

6. When Philoxenus the Epicure had fallen desperately sick upon glutting
himself on a delicate and costly Fish, perceiving he was to die, calls for the
remainder of his Fish, and eats it up, and dies a true Martyr to his Belly. Mr.
Hales.

7. A certain Rich Citizen's Son, to please all his five Senses at once,
allowed to the delight of every several Sense 100 l. For which end he bespake a
curious fair Room richly hanged, and furnished with the most exquisite Pictures
to please his Eye. Secondly, the choicest Music to content his Ear: All the
Aromaticks, and sweet Perfumes, for his Smelling; all the Candies, Preserves,
and Junkets for his Taste; a Beautiful Strumpet to Lodge with him in a soft
Bed, and the finest Linen that could be bought to accommodate his Touch; all
which he enjoyed at one time. He spent 30000 l. in three Years, and swore after
all, that if he had three times more than ever he had, he would spend it all to
live one Week like a God, though he were sure to be damned in Hell the next day
after. But by the Just Hand of God he was punished with extreme Poverty, and
was cast off by all his former Acquaintance, so that he died in misery. Theat.
of Judgm. Clark 's Examp. Vol. I. c. 61.

8. Apicius, that Luxurious roman, the Expenses of whose Kitchen amounted to
more than 2000000 of Sesterces of Gold; having eaten up his Estate, and fearing
Poverty, Poisoned himself. Idem ex Seneca. Yet at the same time he had 10000000
of Sesterces left.

9. Augustinus Chiessius, a Banker at Rome, at the Christening of his Son,
entertained Pope Leo X. upon the River Tibris, and all the Foreign Ambassadors,
and City-Nobles, with Curious Fare, dish'd out in costly Plate; and on the
change of every Service, all the Meats, Plate and all, were cast into the
River, and new brought in for supply. And all the fruits of this was, that he
was admired by none but Fools, and his Name had hardly been mentioned at this
day, but to tell the World, that he was the Author of this ridiculous Action.
Mr. Hales of Eaton.

CHAP. CXXIII. Divine Judgments upon Drunkenness.
DRunkenness is a Sin that is prohibited by the Laws of God and Man, and upon
good reason; because it tends to the ruin of a Man's Health, the diminution of
his Estate, the mispending of his precious hours, the Powerty of his Family,
the hindrance of his Piety and Charity, the obstruction of Business, the
acceleration of Old Age; and in fine, the dishonor of God, and the destruction
of the Soul. And therefore no wonder, if we often find the Divine Vengeance
follow close upon the heels of this sin; as may be seen in the subsequent
Stories.

1. John Manlius, in his Common Places, p. 244. tells us of three abominable
Drunkards, who drank so long, till one of them fell down stark dead; and yet
the other two, nothing terrified with such a dreadful Example of Divine
Vengeance, went on to drink, and poured the dead Man's part into him as he lay
by them.

2. Marcus Antonius wrote, or rather spewed out a Book concerning his own
abilities to bear strong Drink,

3. Darius boasted of the same Faculty in his very Epitaph.

4. Alexander the Great drank himself to Death, and killed One and Forty more
with excessive Drinking, to get that Crown of One Hundred and Eighty Pounds
weight, which he had provided for him that drank most.

5. Eccius, called by Erasmus, Jeccius, for his Tippling; being Non-pluss'd at
Ratisbone by Melancthon in a Public Disputation, and over-drinking himself
that Night at the Bishop of Mundina's Lodgings (who had store of the best
Italian Wines) fell into a Fever, whereof he died. Jo. Man. loc. com. p. 89.

6. Anno Christi 1556. In the Town of St. Gallus in Switzerland, there was one
Peter Besler, who was Born at Rotmund, but was now Servant to a Citizen, whose
Habitation was near unto St. Gallus. This dissolute Young Man was much given to
the Beastly sin of Drunkenness; and upon Trinity Sunday, which was May 21st.
he, together with some of his Companions, went to the Town of Sangall, there to
be merry: And when they had drank freely, this Young Man began to rail at, and
to quarrel with his Companions; and using many Blasphemies against God, he
added this Execration also: If I serve my Master any longer, I give my Body and
Soul to the Devil. When he had staid there all Night, in the Morning awaking,
he began to think what words he had uttered the Night before; yet having no
other means of Subsistence, he resolved to return to his Master's Service. But
going out of the City, when he was now not far from his Master's House, a Man
met him, clad in black, and fearful to behold, who said to him, Go to (Good
Fellow) I am now ready to take that which is my Right, and which thou gave me
yesterday: Which when he had said, taking the Fellow by the Hand (who was
amazed with Horror, and altogether astonished) he threw him to the Ground, and
so vanished. Not long after, this miserable Young Man, being found by some of
the Neighbors, had his Hands and Feet drawn together; and being brought to a
Lodging, he had the use of all his Limbs taken from him, and so continued till
he died miserably. Stephen Bateman, Professor of Divinity. Ibid.

7. Anno Christi 1578. February 10th in the Country of Scwaben, about Eight
Persons that were Citizens, and Citizens Sons (whose Names my Author sets
down) met together at a Tavern, whereof the Master's Name was Anthony Huge, on
a Sabbath Day Morning, where they drank themselves Drunk, and then began to
Blaspheme God, and scoff at the Host, who advised them to leave Drinking, and
to go to Church to hear the Word Preached; at which they not only continued to
mock, but went on in their Drinking; when suddenly the Devil came in among them
in the Habit of a Cavalier, who drinking to them, set their Mouths on such a
fire, that these Drunkards not only became amazed thereat, but also after a
miserable manner were all strangled to Death. Ibid.

8. At Kesgrave near Ipswich, three Serving-men having been Drinking hard, when
they we about to go away, the Hostess by her Importunity would needs persuade
them to drink the three Outs first, viz. Wit out of the Head, Money out of the
Purse, and Ale out of the Barrel; but as she came to them with the Pot in her
hand, God suddenly struck her sick and speechless, her Tongue also swelling in
her Head, so that in great extremity she died three days after. Beard's Theat.

9. Two Servants of a Brewer in Ipswich drank themselves Drunk for the Rump of
a Turkey, and afterward as they were struggling for it, they fell backwards
into a Cauldron of scalding Liquor, whereof one died presently, and the other
lingering, died with great pain. Clark's Examp.

10. A Man coming home drunk, would needs go to swim in the Mill-Pond: But is
Wife and Servant, knowing that he could not swim, dissuaded him, and once by
entreaty got him out; but afterward, going in again, he was drowned. Ibid.

11. At the Plough in Barnwel, near Cambridge, a lusty Young Man, with two of
his Neighbors, and one Woman in their Company, agreed to drink up a Barrel of
strong Beer, which accordingly they did; but within Twenty Four hours three of
them died, and the fourth hardly escaped, after great Sickness. Ibid.

12. A Butcher in Haslingfield having heard his Minister inveigh against
Drunkenness, in his Cups at the Alehouse fell a justing and scoffing at the
Minister's Sermon: But as he was drinking, God's Hand fell upon him, for the
Drink stopping in his Throat, choked him, that he died presently. Ibid.

13. At Bungey in Norfolk three Drunkards coming out of an Alehouse in the
Night, swore, that they thought it was not darker in Hell: But as they went
home, one of them fell over a Bridge, and was drowned: A second fell from his
Horse: The third sleeping on the Ground by the Riverside, was frozen to death.

14. A Bailiff of Hedley, upon a Lord's Day being Drunk at Melford, got upon
his Horse to ride through the streets, saying, That his Horse would carry him
to the Devil; and presently his Horse cast him, and brake his Neck. Ibid.

15. Some drinking in an Alehouse at Harwich in the Night, over against the
Mayor's House [Mr. Russel] who sent to them to depart, but they refused;
whereupon he went himself, and took one of them by the Hand, as if he would
lead him to Prison; who drawing his Knife, ran from him, and three days after,
was found drowned in the Sea, with his Knife in his Hand. Ibid.

16. At a Tavern in Breadstreet, certain Gentlemen drinking Healths to the Lord
on whom they had dependence, one of them with an Oath drinks off a Pottle of
Sack to his Lord: After which, he could neither rise up, nor speak, but falling
into a sleep, died within two hours after. Ibid.

These Five following Examples ( says Mr. Beard) were reported unto me by a
worthy Minister, and written with his own hand, Mr. George Nelson, Preacher of
the Word of God in Godmanchester.

17. Anno Christi 1629. There was one Thomas Wilson, a notorious Blasphemer and
Drunkard, upon a small occasion being angry with his Wife, not daring to
proffer Violence to her, drew his Knife, and stabbed himself.

18. The same Year, one John Bone of Ely, a Gentleman's Coachman, being
exceedingly given to Swearing, and Drunkenness, drinking himself Drunk on a
Sabbath in Sermon-time, fell from his Coach-box, and was killed by his Horses.

19. Anno Christi 1621, One Richard Bourne of Ely, who used to Travel on he
Sabbath Days, seldom or never coming to Church; as he went to the Market at St.
Ives, being drunk, God's Judgment overtook him; for going up the River in his
Boat, he fell over into the Water, and was drowned.

20. Anno Christi 1618. One Thomas Alred of Godmanchester, being a common
Drunkard, was entreated by a Neighbor to unpitch a Load of Hay; and being at
that time Drunk, the Pitch-fork slipped out of his hand, which he stooping to
take up again, fell from the Cart with his Head downwards, and the Fork
standing with the Tines upward, he fell directly upon them, which striking to
his Heart, killed him immediately.

21. Anno Christi 1628. John Vintner of Godmanchester, a known Drunkard, and
Scoffer at Religion, fell from the top of a Pear Tree, and brake his Neck: All
these are attested by sundry Godly Ministers, and recorded both by Dr. Beard,
and Mr. Clark.

22. Anno Christi 1551.-in Bohemia, five Drunkards were Quaffing, and
Blaspheming the Name of God: And the Picture of the Devil being painted upon
the Wall, they drank Healths to him, who the Night after paid them their Wages:
For they were found dead, with their Necks broken, and quashed to pieces, as if
a Wheel had gone over them, the Blood running out of their Mouths, Nostrils,
and Ears, in a lamentable manner. Clark out of Fincelius.

23. I find this Story in Philip Lonicerus, p. 486. A certain Man, says he,
that gave himself to the study of Godliness, was daily assaulted with the
Temptation of the Devil, who persuaded him, if he would be quiet, to choose one
of these three Sins; either to make himself Drunk, or to commit Adultery with
his Neighbor's Wife, or to kill his Neighbor himself. The poor Man thinking
Drunkenness the least sin, chose that; but being enraged with Wine, he was
easily drawn to the committal of the other two; for the Wine inflaming him with
Lust, he feared not to vitiate his Neighbor's Wife, nor yet to kill her
Husband, coming in the mean while, and seeking to be revenged of him. So giving
himself to Drunkenness, he involves himself in all other Wickedness.

24. A Knight, notoriously given to Drink, carrying sometimes Pails of Drink
into the open Fields, to make People drunk withal, being upon a time drinking
with Company, a Woman comes in, delivering him a Ring, with this Poesy, Drink
and die; saying to him, This is for you; which he took and wore; and within a
Week after came to his end by Drinking. Reported by sundry Persons, and
justified by a Minister dwelling within a Mile of the Place.

25. In De^gy Hundred, near Mauldon, about the beginning of His Majesty's
Reign, there fell out an extraordinary Judgment upon five or six that plotted a
Solemn Drinking at one of their Houses; laid in Beer for that purpose, drunk
Healths in a strange manner, and died thereof within a few Weeks, some sooner,
and some later. Witnessed to me by some that were with one of them on his
Deathbed to demand a Debt; and oftentimes spoken of by Mr. Heydon, late
Preacher of Mauldon, in the hearing of many: The particular Circumstances were
exceeding Remarkable, but having not sufficient Proof for the Particulars, I
will not report them. Ibid.

26. Mr. Baxter tells us this Story for a certain Truth. There is now in London
(says he) an Understanding, Sober, Pious Man, often one of my Hearers, who has
an Elder Brother, a Gentleman of considerable Rank, who having formerly seemed
pious, of late Years does often fall into the sin of Drunkenness. He often Lodges
long together here, in this his Brother's House; and whenever he is drunken,
and has slept himself sober, something knocks at his Bed's-head, as if one
knocked on the Wainscot; when they remove his Bed, it follows him: Besides
loud noises in other Parts where he is, that all the House hears. They have
often watched and kept his hands, lest he should do it himself. His Brother has
often told me, and brought his Wife (a discreet Woman) to attest it; who averreth
moreover, that she watching him, has seen his Shoes under the Bed taken up,
and nothing visible touch them. They brought to me the Man himself, and when we
asked him, how he dared to sin again, after such, a Warning, he had no Excuse.
But being a Person of Quality, for some special Reason of Worldly Interest, I
must not name him. Hist. Disc. of Apparitions and Witches, p. 60.

27. Mr. William Rogers, an Apothecary of Crancbrook in Kent, exceeding much
given to Drinking, and Sabbath-breaking, though a Young Man, of a sweet and
pleasing Temper, was often admonished and persuaded by Mr. Robert Abbot,
Minister of the Place, to come to Church; but had often promised and failed:
But one Lord's Day in the Morning, when he said he was ready to come, he was
taken sick, and betook him to his Bed; but it proving only an Ague, next
Morning he betook him to his old course again. Next Week the Messenger of Death
came in earnest, Mr. Abbot addressed himself to him in his Chamber, with these
words, Oh! how often have you deceived God, your own Soul, and me! and what is
now to be done? I fear you will die, and then what will become of you? His
Sickness prevailed, and there was too great a Fire kindled in his Breast to be
smothered; it burned in his own Soul, and it lightened from his Heart and Lips
into the Ears and Hearts of those about him. One while he cries out of his
sins, saying, I have been a fearful Drunkard, pouring in one Draught after
another, till one Draught could not keep down another: I now would be glad, if
I could take the least of God's Creatures which I have abused. I have neglected
my Patients, which have put their Lives in my hands, and how many Souls have I
thus murdered? I have wilfully neglected God's House, Service, and Worship; and
though I purposed to go, God strikes me thus, before the day of my Promise comes,
because I am unworthy to come among God's People again. Another while he falls
to wishing; Oh! that I might burn a long time in that Fire (pointing to the
Fire before him) so I might not burn in Hell! Oh! that God would grant me but
one Year, or a Month, that the World might see with what an heart I have
promised to God my Amendment! Oh! that God would try me a little! but I am
unworthy. Another while to his Companions -- Be warned by me to forsake your
wicked ways, lest you go to Hell, as I must do. Calls his young Servant, tells
him, that he had been a wicked Master to him; But be warned by me, says he;
you have a Friend, that has an Iron Furnace, which burns hot a long time; but
if you give your self to my sins, you shall be burned in the Furnace of Hell,
an hotter Furnace, Millions of Millions of Ages. The Minister propounding to
him the Gospel-Promises of the largest size, he cried, "It is too late, I must
be burned in Hell! He pressed him with Tears not to cast away that Soul, for
which Christ died, etc. He answered, He had cast off Christ, and therefore must
go to Hell. In short, at last, in idleness of Thoughts and Talk, he ended his
miserable Life. See the Narrative, published by Mr. Abbot the Minister; Or, A
Pamphlet called, A Warning-piece to Drunkards, p. 31, 32.

28. Nathanael Butler was first addicted to Drunkenness, Gaming, Purloining,
and Fornication, before he committed that Murder upon his Friend, John Knight,
in Milk-street, London, 1657. for which he was afterward condemned to the
Gallows, and executed.

29. Tho. Savage used to spend the Sabbath at an Alehouse, or a Base House,
and was that very Morning made Drunk by his Harlot with burnt Brandy, when
persuaded to Murder his Fellow Servants, for which he was executed at Ratcliff,
1668.

CHAP. CXXIV. Divine Judgments upon Uncleanness, Inordinate Love, etc.
BIshop Latimer is said to have presented King Henry the VIII. a new Testament,
wrapped up in a Napkin, for a New Year's Gift, with this Poesy about it,
Fornicators and Adulterers God will judge. 'Twas boldly done; and the
Admonition, though very biting and pungent, yet had the Word of God for its Basis
and Foundation. For to touch a little upon the History of this Sin.

1. Eli's Sons, 1 Samuel 2. David, 2 Samuel 11. The two Women, 1 King. 3.16. may go
for Scriptural Examples, all faulty this way, and all punished; yea Solomon
himself, no doubt, paid dear for his Polygamy and Concubinage; not to except
Jacob among the Patriarch's, who was most crossed in his Children of any, as I
have noted before in this Book.

2. Henry the VIII. and our late King Charles the II. may be worthy of the
Reader's Remark.

3. A. C. 1544. Henry Duke of Brunswick had for his Wife the Sister of Vlrick
Duke of Wirtemberg, who had for one of her Wairing-Maids one Eve Trottin, with
whose Beauty the Duke was so desperately smitten, that after some
Solicitations, he had several Children by her: But after some time, unknown to
his Wife and her Friends, he shut her up in his Castle of Stauffeburg, and
appoints two Women to lay a wooden Image representing her in her Bed, giving
out that Eve was sick; at last this Image was laid up in a Coffin, and it was
pretended, that Eve was dead. The Counterfeit Corpse was carried forth to be
buried with all the usual Pomp and Ceremonies of a Funeral, Prayers and
Sacrifices: The Duchess and her Maids, and other Companies of Virgins, were
present at the Solemnity, all in mourning Apparel. In the mean time, Eve was
kept in the Castle, and the Duke had seven Children by her afterward. But at
last the Imposture was brought to light, to the perpetual Shame and Ignominy of
the Duke, with what ill Consequences more, I cannot inform my self. Sleidan's
Commentar. l. 15.

4. Childeric King of France, was so odious for his Adulteries, that his Nobles
conspired against him, and drove him out of the Kingdom. Clark's Exampl. Vol.
I. c. 2.

5. Sir Robert Carr (made afterward Viscount Rochester) a Minion of King James
the I. and one of the Privy Council, falling in Love with the Countess of
Essex, (who being married with Robert Earl of Essex, both at Twelve Years of
Age, had lived above Ten Years without any carnal Knowledge one of another) to
make way for a Marriage with the same Countess, procures the Commitment of Sir
Tho. Overbury to the Tower, because he discouraged Rochester, from the said
Match, and at last his Death. Upon which followed a Divorce between the
Countess, and the Earl her Husband, a Creation of Rochester Earl of Somerset, a
Consummation of the Marriage between Rochester and the Countess of Essex, a
Celebration of the Wedding, with the presence of the King, Queen, Prince, and a
great Confluence of Bishops, and Nobles, a gallant Masque of Lords, and
afterward another Masque of the Princes Gentlemen, which out-did this; a Treat
afterward at Merchant's-Hall, where the Mayor and Aldermen in their Gowns
entertained the Bride and Bridegroom, with the Attendance of the Duke of Lenox,
the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord-Chamberlain, the Earls of Worcester, Pembrook,
and Montgomery, with a numerous Train of the Nobility and Gentry; where at the
Entry, they were accosted with a Gratualtory Speech, and Music, and afterward
the Feast served up by the choicest Citizens; and after Supper, with a Wassail,
two pleasant Masks, a Play, and Dancing: And after all, the Bride and
Bridegroom invited to a noble Banquet, with all the noble Train; and at Three
in the Morning returned to White Hall: And before this Surfeit of Pleasure was
well digested, the Gentlemen of Grey's- Inn invited them to a Masque. But
before the end of the Year, (who would think it? for this was in the
Christmas-Holidays, and lasted till a few Days after) all this Joy was turned
into Sharp and Sour: For afterward, the Murder of Sir Thomas Overbury was
discovered; some of the chief Instruments employed to Poison him, were hanged;
the Earl of Somerset, and his Countess, imprisoned; their Persons convicted,
and Estate seized, except only four Thousand Pound per Annum allowed him for
Life; only by the King's Favor, after some time he was set at Liberty; but
never more returned into Favor at Court. Detection of the Court and State of
England, during the Four last Reigns, p. 39, 40, etc.

6. In the Reign of Charles the V. a young Gentleman of noble Parentage, in the
Court of that Emperor, for deflowering a young Gentlewoman whom he greatly
loved, was committed to Prison; where expecting nothing but the Rigor of the
Law, he took on with such Grief of Mind, that the next Morning his Face
appeared very wan, his Beard drivelled, his Hair turned perfectly gray, and all
his fresh and youthful Vigor was quite vanished; which coming to the Emperor's
Ears, he sent for him, and for the strangeness of the thing, pardoned him,
accounting the great Fear he had undergone, and the Effects of it, a sufficient
Punishment. Doom, warning to the Judgment, p. 346. out of Levin. Lemn.

7. In Germany, a Gentleman of note finding his Wife in Bed with another Man,
slew first the Adulterer, and then his own Wife. Luth. Coll.

8. A nobleman of Thuringia being taken in Adultery, the Husband of the
Adultress bound him Hand and Foot, cast him into Prison, kept him fasting, only
causing daily hot Dishes of Meat to be set before him, to tantalize him with
the Smell. In this Torture the Letcher continued till he gnawed off the Flesh
from his own Shoulders, and on the 11th. Day he died Clark out of Luther.

9. Mary of Arragon, Wife to the Emperor Otho the III. carried a young
Fornicator along with her, in Woman's Habit; but he being discovered, was burnt
to Death. Afterward soliciting the Count of Mutina, and not able to draw him
to her Lure, she accused him to the Emperor, of attempting a Rape upon her, for
which he was beheaded: But the Emperor at last finding out his Wife's
Wickedness, caused her to be burnt at a Stake. Clark's Examp. Vol. I. chap. 2.

10. Luther tells us of a Great Man in his Country, so besotted with the Sin of
Whoredom, that he was not ashamed to say, That if he might live for ever here,
and be carried from one Whore-house to another, there to satisfy his Lusts, he
would never desire any other Heaven. This vile Fellow afterward breathed out
his wretched Soul betwixt two notorious Harlots. Ibid.

11. Venery was the Destruction of Alexander the Great: Of Otho the Emperor,
(called for his good Parts otherwise, Miraculum Mundi:) Of Pope Sixtus the IV.
who died of a wicked Wast: Of Peope Paul the IV. of whom it passed for a
Proverb, Eum per eandem partem animam profudisse, per quam acceperat. Ibid. So
true it is which Solomon says, many strong Men have been slain by her.

12. It Is notoriously known how far this Sin prevailed in England amongst the
Lazy Monks and Nuns; what Skulls of Infants were found near their Religious
Houses, before the Dissolution of them in Henry the VIII's Days: And much about
the same time, viz. at the beginning of the Reformation (as I have read in a
Letter, writ by the Pope's Notary, to a Gentleman in Germany) there was a
Nunnery visited in the outer Skirts of Italy, and Thirteen of the Nuns found
with Child at the same time, all by the Confessor; for which Cause, by order of
the Pope, it was put down.

13. Thomas Savage frequenting the House of Hannah Blay, a noted Bawdy House,
spending upon her such Money as he could get, to satisfy his own Lust, and her
craving Appetite, is tempted first to stealing, and purloining from his Master,
and at last to the murdering of a Maid, his Fellow Servants: For which he was
afterward brought to the Gallows. See the Printed Narrative.

14. Mr. Robert Foulks, of Stanton-Lacy, first an Adulterer, and then a
Murderer of his Bastard Child, ended his Days very ignominiously at Tiburn,
though penitently. See the Narrative; or the Abbreviation in the Complete History
of Dying Penitents.

15. John Allerton, Bishop of Waterford in Ireland, for unnatural Concupiscence
came to a very disgraceful End, being Arraigned and Executed at Dublin.

It were endless to enumerate all the sad Examples of Divine Judgment, that
might be brought under this Head.

CHAP. CXXV. Divine Judgments upon Voluptuousness and Luxury.
THE Love of sensual Pleasure is to this Day a Blot upon the Memory of
Epicurus, though he were but a Heathen Philosopher: How much more Disgraceful is
it for Christians, whose Profession it is to deny themselves, and take up the
Cross, and be mortified to the World, and crucify the Flesh, which the
Affections and Lusts! And the Reason why God has laid such a Restrain upon our
Appetites, is because Voluptuousness is a Thief of our Time, and Affections: It
steals the Heart from God, and so debaucheth the Mind of Man, that it cannot
relish spiritual Delights, and the Sweets of a Holy and Devout Life; and
therefore no wonder, if God Almighly does so resent this Alienation of the Mind
from him, that he punish it often with some Remarkable Judgments, to show his
Detestation of it, and to Detert others from it.

1. Charles the II. King of Spain, having wasted his Spirits with
Voluptuousness and Luxury, in his old Age fell into a Lethargy; and therefore,
to comfort his benumbed Joints, he was by the Advice of his Physicians, sowed
up in a Sheet steeped in Aqua-vitae. The Surgeon having made an end of
sowing the Sheet, wanted a Knife to cut off the Thread; whereupon he took the
Wax-Tapor that stood by, to burn it off: But the Flame running by the Thread,
caught hold of the Sheet in an instant, which (according to the nature of
Aqua-vitae) burned so violently, that the old King ended his Days in the Flame.
Clark's Mirr. Vol. I. p. 492.

2. Petrus Crinitus, a great Clerk in the Days of our Grandfathers, thought it
fit, forsooth, when he was old, to do as Socrates did, under color of Free
Teaching, to converse with Youths in the Streets, in the Tennis-Courts, in the
Taverns, and Compotations: But this Error cost him dear; for being on a time at
a youthful Meeting, one of his petulant Convivators poured a Cup of cold Water
on his Head. Which Affront he took so hainously, that he went home and died.
Mr. Jo. Hales of Eaton.

3. A. C. 1470. George Nevil, Brother to the Great Earl of Warwick, at his
Instalment into his Archbishopric of York, made a Feast for the Nobility,
Gentry, and Clergy, wherein he spent 300 Quarters of Wheat, 330 Tuns of Ale,
104 Tuns of Wine, one Pipe of spiced Wine, 80 fat Oxen, 6 wild Bulls, 1004
Wethers, 300 Hogs, 300 Calves, 3000 Geese, 3000 Capons, 300 Pigs, 100 Peacocks,
200 Cranes, 200 Kids, 2000 Chickens, 4000 Pigeons, 4000 Rabbits, 204 Bitterns,
4000 Ducks, 400 Hernsews, 200 Pheasants, 500 Partridges, 4000 Woodcocks, 400
Piovers, 100 Curlews, 100 Quails, 1000 Egrets, 200 Rees, above 400 Bucks, Does,
and Roe-bucks, 1506 hot Venison-Pasties, 4000 cold Venison-Pasties, 1000 Dishes
of Gelly parted, 4000 cold Custards, 2000 hot Custards, 300 Pikes, 300 Breams,
8 Seals, 4 Propoises, and 400 Tarts. At this Feast, the Earl of Warwick was
Steward, the Earl of Bedford Treasurer, the Lord Hastings Comptroller, with
many more noble Officers: Servitors 1000, Cooks 62, Kitchiners 515. Fuller's
Hist. of the Church.

But Seven Years after, the King seized on all the Estate of this Archbishop,
and sent him over Prisoner to Callis in France, where vinctus jacuit in summa
inopia, he was kept bound in extreme Poverty. Ibid. l. 4. cent. 15. p. 193.

4. Cleopatra's Luxury, in dissolving a Pearl which she took from her Ear, in
Vinegar, to the Value of Fifty Thousand Pound, and drinking it off at one
Draught, out of Vainglory, is well known; and yet she was afterward,
notwithstanding all her Bravery, taken Prisoner, and deprived of her Royal
State, and the other Pearl cut in twain, and hung at both the Ears of the
Statue of Venus, in the Pantheon, in Rome. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 9. Fulg. Ex. l.
9, etc.

5. Heliogabalus filled his Fish Ponds with Rose Water, supplied his Lamps with
the precious Balsam that distilled from the Trees in Arabia, wore upon his
Shoes Pearls and Precious Stones engraven, strewed his Dining Room with
Saffron, and his Portico's with Dust of Gold; he never wore the same Garments
twice, and yet they were of the richest silk, or Cloth of Gold; near the Sea he
would eat no Fish, in the Midland no Flesh; his whole Meals were made often of
the Tongues of Singing-Birds, Peacocks, or the Brains of costly Creatures; he
gathered in Rome 10000 weight of Spiders, to show the Greatness of his City;
his Bed was covered with Gold and Silver; his Statue, whilst he was living, was
worshipped for a God; he set up a Senate of Women, gave great Estates to wicked
Bawds, Panders, Jesters, etc. But at last, being generally despised, he was
slain by his Soldiers, in the Fourth Year of his Reign; his own Body, and his
Mother's dragged along the Streets, and cast into the common Laystall. Imp.
Hist. Sabell. Ex. l. 8. c. 7. Time's Storehouse, l. 10. c. 12.

6. Vitellius, another Roman Emperor, had 20000 Dishes of Fish, and 7000 Fowl,
at one Supper; and yet commended his own Temperance, in a set Oration, before
the Senate and People of Rome. In the time that he reigned, which had need to
be but short, he wasted Nine Hundred Millions of Sesterces; i. e. says
Budaeus, 2500000 Crowns; or as another, 31250 l. Sterling. For after he had
reigned but Eight Months, and a few Days, he was slain in the midst of the
City. Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 5. c. 13. Tacit. Hist. l. 2.

7. Mahomet the Great (Sultan) at the taking of C. P. had one Helana, a very
beautiful Person, presented to him; with whom he was so taken, that he spent
all his Time with her, and seemed quite to have emasculated his Spirit. Upon
which, his Janisaries and Captains began to murmur, and threatened to Depose
him, and put one of his Sons on the Throne. One of his Courtiers, with great
Submission, admonished him of it. Whereupon he goes presently to his Paragon,
spent the whole Night with her, appointed a Feast next Day, sets his Curtezan
at Table, dressed in the most Princely Robes. After Dinner, having charged all
his Nobles to appear together, he brings her before them in his Left Hand, and
immediately with his Faulchion, at one Blow struck off her Head; saying, Now
judge by this, whether your Emperor be not able to bridle his Affections.
Knowles 's Turk. Hist.

8. The Romans were so given to Pleasure and Luxury in their Apparel, Food,
Ornaments, Attendance, and Retinue, etc. before the Decle^^^on of their
Grandeur, that Juvenal spends several Satyrs in exposing them to the Laughter
and Reproach of the World: So effeminate were they, that they had a Distinction
in their Rings, and had some of massy Gold to wear in the Winter, others more
light for Summer-wear. Lucullus had 5000 Cloaks. Incredible Sums were expended
upon Entertainments.

9. The Monks, before the Reformation, and the Judgments that followed in
Germany, were grown to that height of Luxury, that several Pens were exercised
in public Reflections and Censures upon them. Among the rest, an Author whom I
have now by me, and who styles himself, Frater de Viridi Valle, in Prussia,
complains pathetically of the Pride of their Habit; their Silk Gowns, and
Cloaks, trailing behind them on the Ground, their Pearls and Jewels in their
Shoes; and for a pleasant Jest, (I suppose) tells a Story of one Monk, who
through extreme Poverty, was not able to purchase a Cloak with so long a Tail,
at last got a Mat upon his Back, and went about strutting with that, and
looking on a time behind him, to see how finely it trailed after him, espied
the Devil sitting upon the hinder end of it, who laughed in his Face, and cried
out, saying, Aha! plus velles, si plus posses.

10. Zaleucus, the Lawgiver of Locris, made a Law, That no Woman should be
attended with more than one Maid in the Streets, but when she was drunk; nor
walk out in the City by Night, but when she was going to commit Adultery; nor
wear Gold or Embroidered Apparel, but when she designed to set up for a common
Strumpet; nor that Men should wear Rings or Tissues, but when they went a
Whoring, Heyl. Geogr. p. 158. This proved an effectual Restraint upon their
Luxury that way.

CHAP. CXXVI. Divine Judgments upon Pride, Ambition, etc.
HOW vain an Attempt it is for Men to lift up themselves, and aspire above the
Limits of their own Orb, in despite of Him that rules in the Heavens, and has
prescribed, for wise Reasons, the Rules of Humility to us Men, threatening to
resist the Proud, and give Grace to the Humble, may appear evidently from these
following Examples.

1. Colonel James Turner, executed at Lime-street, London, 1663. being a Man of
a high Spirit, and not having an Estate answerable thereto, wherewith to keep
up that State and Grandeur wherein he had formerly lived, fearing nothing so
much as to strike sail, and to submit to the Inconveniences of a poor and
private Life, fell into many Errors, especially Swearing and Robbing, was at
last condemned to the Gallows, where he made a serious Confession, begging
earnestly of God for Mercy, and desiring for his Comfort, the Doctor to read to
him those Verses of the Second of the Hebrews, being the 14, 15, 16, 17, and
18th. Verses. Next did he give Forty Shillings to the Minister, to be given to
the Poor of that Parish, and Eighteen Shillings and Six Pence more for his
Wife, to be delivered to his young Son's School master. See the Relation, p. 25.

2. Sigismund, King of Hungary, having raised a mighty great Army against the
Turks, and hearing that his Enemies approached, in great Pride said to his
Soldiers, What need we fear the Turks, who need not fear the falling of the
Heavens, who with our Spears and Halberds are able to hold them up, if they
should fall? But thus relying upon the Arm of Flesh, his great Army was
presently routed, and himself hardly escaped in a little Boat over the Danube,
leaving most of his Army to the Slaughter and Captivity of the Turks. Clark's
Mirror, p. 180.

3. Dr. Pendleton, in Queen Mary's Reign, discoursing with Mr. Sanders about
the Persecution threatened, whom he found fearful; What Man (said the Doctor) I
have much more reason to fear than you, as having a fat and big Body? yet will
I see the utmost drop of this Grease of mine melted away, and the last Gobbet
of this Flesh consumed to Ashes, before I will forsake Jesus Christ, and his
Truth. Yet Sanders suffered, and proud Pendleton turned Papist. Act. and Monum.

4. Cardinal Wolsey, born at Ipswich, of a very men Parentage, but an ambitious
and aspiring Mind, Bachelor of Arts of Magdalen-College at Fifteen, afterward
Schoolmaster to the Marquis of Dorset's Family, then Secretary to Bishop Fox,
Chaplain and Deputy to the old Treasurer of Callis, Ambassador to Maximilian
the Emperor, advanced to all State-Businels, and most Church-Preferments; the
Dearny of Lincoln, the King's Almonership, a House near Bridewel, Durham,
Winchester, Bath, Worcester, Hereford, Tourney, Lincoln, St. Albans, and York,
being in his Possession, and all other Promotions in his Gift; at length
Archbishop of Canterbury, Legate-de-latere to the Pope, and Chancellor to the
King; employed in two Embassies of State to Charles the V. in Flanders: Kept in
this Capacity 500 Servants, 9 or 10 of them Lords, 15 Knights, and 40 Esquires;
and wanted nothing now to accomplish his Honors, but to be elected Pope; for
the Attainment whereof, whilst he was with great Industry and Policy striving
to make his Interest, he tumbled down from the top of this huge Precipice, to
his own great Amazement, breathing out his Soul in Words to this purpose, when
he was Arrested by the King's Order, in his way to London; If I had served the
God of Heaven, as faithfully as I did my Master on Earth, he had not forsaken
me in my old Age. Lloy 's Worthies, p. 17, 18, 19.

5. Simon Thurway, born in Cornwall, bred in our English Universities, until he
went over to Paris, where he became so Eminent a Logician, that all his
Auditors were his Admirers; most firm his Memory, most fluent his Expression,
and he was knowing in all things, save himself; for he profanely advanced
Aristotle above Moses, and himself above both. But his Pride had a great and
sudden Fall, losing at the same instant both Language and Memory, he became
completely (...), without Reason and Speech both. Polydor Virgil says of him,
Juvene nihil acutius, seen nihil obtusius. Others add, that he made an
inarticulate sound, like unto lowing. This great Judgment befell him about the
Year of our Lord, 1201. Pol. Virg. Hist. Ang. l. 15. p. 284. Delrius Disq. Mag.
p. 245. Baker's Chron. p. 110. Fuller, etc.

6. The Duke of Buckingham, that great Favorite, sent a Noble Gentleman to
Bacon, then Attorney General, with this Message, That he knew him to be a Man
of excellent Parts, and (as the Times were) fit to serve his Master in the
Keeper's Place; but he also knew him to be a Man of a base ungrateful
Disposition, and an arrant Knave, apt in his Prosperity to ruin any that had
raised him from Adversity: Yet for all this, he did so much study his Master's
Service, that he had obtained the Seals for him; but with this Assurance,
Should he ever Requite him as he had done some others, he would cast him down
as much below Scorn, as he had now raised him high above any Honor he could
ever have expected. Bacon patiently heard, and replied, I am glad my noble Lord
deals so friendly and freely with me: But, says he, can my Lord know these
Abilities in me; and can he think, when I have attained the highest Preferment
my Profession is capable of, I shall so much fail in my judgment, as to lose
those Abilities, and by my Miscarriage to so noble a Patron, cast my self
headlong to the very bottom of Contempt and Scorn? Surely my Lord cannot think
so meanly of me. Now Bacon was invested in his Office; and within ten Days
after the King goes into Scotland: Bacon begins instantly to believe himself to
be King, lies in the King's lodgings, gives Audience in the great
Banqueting House, makes all other Counselor attend his Motions with the same
state the King used to come out with to give Audience to Foreign Ambassadors;
when any other Counselors sat with him about the King's Affairs, he would (if
they sat near him) bid them know their distance. Upon which, Secretary Winhood
went away, and would never sit more; but dispatched one to the King, to desire
him to make have back, for his Seat was already usurped. If Buckingham had sent
him any Letter, he would not open or read it in public, though it was said, it
required speedy Dispatch, nor would vouchsafe him any Answer. In this Posture
he lived, until he heard the King was returning, and began to believe the Play
was almost at an end; and then he re-invested himself in his old Rags of
Baseness, which were so tattered and poor, at the King's coming to Windsor,
that he attended two Days at Buckingham's Chamber, being not admitted to any
better place, than the Room where Trencher-scrapers and Lacqueys attended;
there sitting on an old Wooden Chest, with his Purse and Seal lying by him on
that Chest. After two Days he had Admittance; and at fiest entrance he fell
down flat on his Face at the Duke's Foot, kissing it, and vowing never to rise,
till he had his Pardon. Upon which he was reconciled; yet so, as from that
time, to be so very a Slave to the Duke and his Family, that he durst not deny
the Command of the least meanest of the Kindred, nor oppose any thing, Court of
King James, by A. W. p. 131. 132.

7. Pride of Hair was punished, says Dr. Bolton, at first with an Ugly
Intanglement, sometime in the form of a great Snake, sometime of many little
ones, full of Nastiness, Vermin, and noisome Smell; and that which is most to
be admired, and never Age saw before, pricked with a Needle, they yielded
bloody Drops. This first began in Poland, afterward entered into Germany; and
all that then cut off this horrible snaky Hair, either lost their Eyes, or the
Humor falling down upon other Parts, tortured them extremely. Methinks, says
our Author, Our monstrous Fashionists, Maies and Females; the one for
nourishing their horrid Bushes of Vaity, the other for cutting their Hair,
should fear and tremble, etc. Bolton's Preparation to Death.

8. Mr. John Mackerness, born at Brickstock-Park in Northamptonshire, in a
Narrative published by his own Hand, A. D. 1676. confesses, That God had ^orely
handled him by Melancholy and Fretfulness, and such Fluctuation of Thoughts and
Temptations, that he was not far from being mad or possessed; which he
especially imputed to his Pride and Discontent, as the Cause, and begs the
Prayers of others for himself.

CHAP. CXXVII. Divine Judgments upon Boasting.
AS th^se Sticks that send forth most Smoke, offered the least Heat; so the
greatest Boasters are the least Doers, (says Mr. Spencer;) according to our
English Proverb, Great Boast and small Roast. Erasmus, in his Adagies, tells us
of a young Man, and Traveller, that being returned home, began to praise
himself in all Company; and amongst other excellent Feats, boasted, that in the
Isle of Rhodes he out-jump'd all the Men that were there, as all the Rhodians
could hear him Witness. Whereupon a stander-by said, (...), (...), Suppose this
to be Rhodes, and jump here; and then he could do just nothing. Alas! What are
Words without Deeds, but Vanity and a Lie?

1. When Alcibiades (then but young) was boasting himself of his Riches and
Lands, Socrates took him into a Room, and showed him the Map of the World: Now,
said he, where is the County of Attica? When Alcibiades had pointed to it; Lay
me then, said he, your Finger upon your own Lands there. When the other told
him they were not there described: And what, said Socrates, do you boast your
self of that which is not a part of the Earth? He that has most, has nothing
to boast of; and great Boasts (for the most part) as they betray great Folly,
so they end in as great Derision. Wanley's Wonders of the little World, p. 433.

2. Oromazes had an enchanted Egg, in which this Impostor boasted, that he had
enclosed all the Happiness in the World; but when it was broken, there was
found nothing in it but Wind. Causin's Holy Court, Tom. 2. p. 465.

3. Mr. John Carter, Vicar of Bramford in Suffolk, an excellent Scholar, and a
modest Person, being at Dinner at Ipswich, in one of the Magistrates Houses,
where diverse other Ministers were also at the Table, one amongst the rest (who
was old enough, and had learned enough to have taught him more Humility) was
very full of Talk, bragged much of his Parts and Skill, etc. and made a
Challenge, saying, Here are many Learned Men; if any of you will propound any
Question in Divinity or Philosophy, I will dispute with him, resolve his
Doubts, and satisfy him fully. All at the Table (except himself) were silent
for a while: Then Mr. Carter, when he saw that no other would speak to him,
calling him by his Name; I will, said he, go no further than my Trencher to
puzzle you; here is a Soal: Now tell me the Reason, why this Fish that has
always lived in the salt Water, should come out fresh? To this the forward
Gentleman could say nothing, and so was laughed at, and shamed out of his
Vanity. Clark's Lives of Ten Eminent Divines, p. 12.

4. Eunomius the Heretic, boasted, That he knew the Nature of God; at which
time notwithstanding, St. Basil puzzled him in 21 Questions about the Body of
an Ant. Full. Hol. Stat. l. 2. c. 4. p. 57. Wanley's Wonders of the little
World, p. 433.

5. Paracelsus boasted, that he could make a Man immortal, and yet himself died
at 47 Years of Age. Full. Hol. Stat. l. 2. c. 3. p. 54.

6. Pompey the Great (at such times as the News of Caesar's passing Rubicon,
came to Rome) boasting, That if he should but once stamp with is Foot upon the
Earth of Italy, forthwith armed Troops of Horse and Foot would leap out thence;
yet was he put to a shameful Flight, by that Enemy he so much despised. Clark's
Mirr. c. 102. 471.

7. See the Story of Sigismund, King of Hungary, in the preceding Chapter, on
Pride, Ambition, etc.

8. Abel, by Bribes bestowed in the Court of Rome, from the Archdeacon of St.
Andrews, got himself to be preferred Bishop there, and was Consecrated by Pope
Innocent the IV. At his Return he carried himself with great Insolence. They
write of him, That in a vainglorious Humor one day, he did with a little
Chalk, draw this Line upon the Gate of the Church, Haec mihi sunt tria, Lex,
Canon, Philosophia.

Bragging of his Knowledge and Skill in those Professions; and that going to
Church the next day, he found another Line drawn under the former, which said,
To levant absque tria, Fraus, Favor, Vanasophia.

This did so gall him, that taking his Bed, he died within a few Days, having
sat Bishop only ten Months, and two Days. This was about Anno 1238. Bish.
Spots. Hist. of the Churck of Scotland, l. 2. p. 44.

CHAP. CXXVIII. Divine Judgments upon Curiosity.
TO be wise unto Sobriety, is an excellent Rule prescribed us by the Apostle;
and the Reason is obvious enough, to any Man of competent Sense and Brains: For
Adam, by an affectation of knowing more than was necessary, came to know more
than was comfortable; and an insatiate Desire of Wisdom, is certainly a Symptom
of the Hereditary Disease derived to us from him. God has set us Bounds to all
our Disquisitions; and if we do not keep within compass, we forfeit our
Faculties, and expose our selves to all the Dangers that are out of ken.
Whatever we do, let us do prudently, and have a regard to some good End: For
whatsoever is more than this, is more than is needful, or safe, or honorable.

1. There is (says Mr. Baxter) now in London, a Youth, the Son of a very Godly
Conforming Minister, who reading a Book of that called Conjuration, coming to
the Word; and Actions which that Book said would cause the Devil to appear, was
presently very desirous to try, and desirous that the Apparition might be
accordingly. He came (says he) to me in terror, having before opened his Case
to a Parish-Minister, and affirmed to me, That the Devil had appeared to him,
and solicited him with a Knife to cut his Throat; and told him, he must do it
suddenly, for he would stay no longer. I told him how safe he was, if he truly
repented, and begged Pardon through Christ, and would resolvedly renew his
Baptismal Covenant, and renounce the Devil, and live as truly devoted to God,
and our Redeemer. I have heard from him no more, but must not name him.
Historical Discourse of Apparitions and Witches, p. 62.

2. Dr. John Dee, an excellent Scholar, and Mathematician, of the University of
Oxford, who published many Treatises for the Benefit of his Country, (at least
Eight in number) being afterward earnestly desirous of more Knowledge, and
making it his serious Prayer to God, to make him wiser than the rest of
Mankind, was, by the Divine Judgment, given over to strong Delusions, and sadly
imposed upon by the Apparition of Evil Spirits, under the Disguise of Good
Angel^, who promised to help him to the Philosopher's Stone, who never left
him, till they had dreined him of what Wealth he had; so that at last he died
very poor, and every way miserable, at Mortlack, near London. All Men may take
warning by this Example, how they put themselves out of the Protection of
Almighty God, either by presumptuous unlawful Wishes, and Desires, or by
seeking not unto Devils only directly, (which Dr. Dee certainly never did, but
abhorred the very Thought of it in his Heart) but unto them that have next
relation unto Devils, as Witches, Wizzards, Conjurers, Astrologers, (that take
upon them to foretell humane Events,) Fortune Tellers, and the like; yea, and
all Books of that subject, which, I doubt, were a great Occasion of Dr. Dee's
Delusion. (I might have added amongst the Miseries that befell this Doctor, That
he was Banished out of England, out of the Emperor or Germany's Territories by
the Interposition of the Pope, Robbed of his Houshold-Plate by his own Sons,
etc.) Dr. Mer. Casaubon 's Relat. of Dr. Dee 's Actions with Spirits, Preface.

3. Edward Kelly, Dr. Dee's Skryer, a Necromancer of Lancashire, by clambering
over a Wall in his own House in Prague (which bears his Name to this day, and
sometimes was an old Sanctuary) he fell down from the Battlements, broke his
Legs, and bruised his Body, of which hurts within a while after, he departed
this World. Ibid.

4. There was within the Memory of our Fathers (says Camerarius) John Faustus,
of Cundligen, a German, who had learned the Black Art at Cracovia in Poland.
This wicked Wretch is reported to have led about with him an Evil Spirit, in
the likeness of a Dog; and being at Wittenburg, an Order was sent from the
Emperor to seize him, but by his Magical Delusions he made his escape; and
afterward, being at a Dinner at Norimberg, he was secretly sensible by an
extraordinary Sweat which came upon him, that he was beset; whereupon he
suddenly paid his Reckoning, and went away, but was hardly out of the City
Walls, ere the Sergeants and other Officers came to Apprehend him: Yet Divine
Vengeance followed him, for coming into an Inn, in a Village of the Dukedom of
Wittenburg, he sat very sad, and when his Host demanding the cause thereof, he
answered, that he would not have him affrighted, if he heard great noise, and
shaking of the House that Night; which happened according to his own
Prediction, for in the Morning he was found dead by his Bedside, with his Neck
wrung behind him, and the House wherein he lay was beaten down to the Ground.
Wanly Hist. Man.

5. An Officer, who was a Papist, belonging to a Court of Justice, came out of
Curiosity to Mr. Perreaud's House, and hearing that the Devil foretold future
things there, and some Secrets, he would needs Question him about many matters;
but Mr. Perreaud desired him to forbear, representing to him both the sin and
danger of it. The Lawyer rejected his Counsel with scorn, bidding him Teach his
own Flock, and let him have the Government of himself; and so proceeded to
propound several Questions to the Devil, as about absent Friends, private
Business, News, and State Affairs; unto all which the Devil answered him; and
then added, Now, Sir, I have told you all that you have desired of me, I must
tell you next, what you demanded not, That at this very time you are
propounding these Questions to the Devil, such a Man (whom he named) is doing
your Business with your Wife. And then he further discovered many secret and
foul Practices of the Lawyer, which showed his dishonesty: Neither was this
all; for in conclusion, the Devil told him, Now, Sir, let me Correct you, for
being so bold as to Question with the Devil; you should have taken the
Ministers safe Counsel. Then upon a sudden the whole Company saw the Lawyer
drawn by the Arm into the midst of the Room, where the Devil whirled him about,
and gave him many turns with great swiftness, touching the Ground only with his
Toe, and then threw him down upon the Floor with great violence; and being
taken up, and carried to his House, he lay sick and distracted a long time
after. See the Narrative of the Devil of Mascon.

CHAP. CXXIX. Divine Judgments upon Gaming.
SPorting and Gaming is not simply and absolutely unlawful, but rather a whet
to cut Studies and Lawful Employments; as eating, drinking, and sleeping
moderately and seasonably, rather refreshes our Spirits, and makes us more fit
and brisk for Care and Business. But the immoderate use, or abuse of them is of
evil Report, and tends to the dissipation of the Powers of the Soul, the
effeminating of the Mind, the loss of Time, and all the ill Effects and
Consequences of an Idle and Licentious Life. And therefore no wonder, if God
Almighty do often Punish those Persons with some visible Tokens of his
Displeasure, who give up themselves immoderately, and without any check to such
Courses. In short, where Games are not used with these Cautions, soberly,
seasonably, ingenuously, inoffensively, prudently, and religiously, they are
naught and daugerous; and there are but very few People, that are careful thus
to govern themselves, when they are engaged in Play. Voluptates, ut mel, summo
digito degustandae, non plena manu sumendae, Dionys. Soph. apud Philostr.

1. In a Town of Campania a certain Jew playing at Dice with a Christian, lost
a great Sum of Money unto him; with which great Loss being enraged, and almost
beside himself, as commonly Men in that case are affected, he belched out most
bitter Curses against Christ Jesus, and his Mother the Blessed Virgin; in the
midst whereof the Lord deprived him of his Life and Sense, and struck him dead
in the place. As for his Companion the Christian, indeed he escaped sudden
Death, howbeit, he was robbed of his Wits and Understanding, and survived not
very long after. Discip. de tempor. Ser. 12.

2. Anno 1533. Near to Belissana, a City in Helvetia, there were three Profane
Wretches that played at Dice upon the Lord's Day without the Walls of the City,
one of which, called Vlrich Schraeterus, having lost much Money, offended God
with many cursed speeches: At last, presaging to himself Good Luck, he burst
forth into these terms: If Fortune deceive me now, I will thrust my Dagger into
the very Body of God as far as I can. Now Fortune failed him as before,
wherefore forthwith he drew his Dagger, and taking it by the Point, threw it
against Heaven with all his strength: Behold, the Dagger vanish away, and five
drops of Blood distilled upon the Table before them, and without all delay, the
Devil came in place, and carried away the Blasphemous Wretch with such force
and noise, that the whole City was amazed and astonished thereat. The other two
(half beside themselves with Fear) strove to wipe away the drops of Blood out
of the Table; but the more they wiped it, the more clearly it appeared. The
Rumor of this Accident flew into the City, and caused the People to flock
thick and threefold unto the Place, where they found the other two Gamesters
washing the Blood off from the Board, whom (by the Decree of the Senate) they
bound with Chains, and carried toward the Prison; but as they passed with them
through a Gate of the City, one of them was stricken suddenly dead in the midst
of them, with such a number of Lice and Worms creeping out of him, that it was
both wonderful and loathsome to behold. The third, they themselves (without any
further Inquisition or Trial) to avert the Indignation which seemed to hang
over their Heads, put incontinently to Death. The Table they took and preserved
it for a Monument, to Witness unto Posterity, both what an accursed Pastime
Dicing is, and also what great Inconveniences and Mischiefs grow thereby. Jo.
Fincel. Andr. Musc. in Diabol. Blasph. Mand. 4. Breach of Sab. l. 1. c. 35.
Mand. 3. l. 1. c. 31. Beard's Theat. c. 43.

3. In the Year 1550. There lived in Alsatia one Adam Steckman, who got his
Living by dressing Vines: This Man having received his Wages, lost it all at
Dice; whereupon he grew so distempered in Mind, wanting wherewithal to maintain
his Family, that in his Wife's Absence he cut his three Children's Throats, and
would have hanged himself, but that his Wife coming in, and seeing this pitiful
Tragedy, gave a great outcry, and fell down dead; whereupon the Neighbors
coming in, apprehended the Man, who by the Law was adjudged to a cruel Death.
Fincel. l. 2.

4. The Turks, though they often Game, yet it is always for nothing. M. de Theo.

5. The Chinese delight excessively in all sorts of Game, and when they have
lost, are not, though they stake Wives and Children, whom they willingly part
with, till they can Redeem them. Sir Tho. Herb.

6. At D^rmstadt, Anno 1403. at the Twenty Third Tournament that was held in
Germany, the Gentlemen of Franconia, and those of Hesse drew so much Blood one
of another, that there remained dead upon the place Seventeen of the former,
and Nine of the latter. Dr. Brown 's Travels, p. 175.

7. Concerning the Olympic Games of Greece, (at which they met from all Parts
of the Country) and the Pastimes of Rome, see Godwin's Antiqu. and
Galtruchius's History of the Heathen Gods, with Mar. D' Assigny's Notes.

8. It is a Capital Crime among the Japonese to Play for Money. Tavernier's
Collect. etc. p. 4.

9. Mr. Roger Ascham, Schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth, and her Secretary for
the Latin Tongue, being too much addicted to Dicing, and Cock-fighting, lived
and died a poor Man. Camb. Eliz.

10. Tertullian tells of a Christian Woman, who going to the Theater, was
possessed by a Devil; who at his casting out, being asked, how he durst set
upon a Christian? Answered, I found her on mine own Ground. Dr. Cave 's
Primitive Christian.

11. The Great King, S. Lewis, hearing that the Count of Anjou his Brother, and
Monsieur Gautier of Nemours, were at Play, arose sick out of his Bed, and went
staggering to their Chambers, and taking the Tables, Dice, and part of the
Money, cast them all out of the Window into the Sea, and was much moved at
them. Sir Fran. Sale 's Introd. etc.

12. Mr. Bruen of Stapleford, being convinced that he and his Family had
immoderately used Gaming in his House, and being troubled at the mispence of
time upon such Vanities, when the Maid was hearting the Oven, one day with
great Resolution he fetched his Cards, Dice, Table, etc. and put them in the
Oven, and burnt them. In his Life.

Here it will not be amiss to take notice of the several Laws, Canons, and
Constitutions made to restrain the immoderate use of Gaming.

I. Civil Constitutions of the Roman Empire.
I. Since it has been Anciently allowed to Soldiers, when not employed, to
play at Dice, the Emperor complains, that all do play at that time, and spend
their Patrimony in Playing, and therein utter Blasphemies against God;
therefore he Decrees, That it shall be Lawful for no body to Play, or to be a
Spectator of those that do. C. de Relig. sumpt. funer. Martyr. in Ind. c. 14.

Nay, these Games were forbid to be used, either in Public or Private. Dan. de
alea, c. 7.

They were amerced fourfold for the Money lost in them. Ascon. in Divin. 2.
Cic. And denied Relief, if wronged. Pandect. 11. tit. 5.

2. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are forbid to play at Tables, or to look upon
them that do play; if they did otherwise, they were to be thrust into a
Monastery for three Years. Justinian, in authent. Collat. 9. tit. 15. and in
God. l. 1. tit. 6. leg. 18.

3. In our own Nation, all Dicing is generally forbidden, 1 Rich. 2. Dicers
punished with six days Imprisonment, 21 Hen. 4. With sitting in the Stocks, 11
Hen. 7. Keepers of Dice-play, with three Years Imprisonment, Players, with two,
17 Edw. 4.

4. In the State of Geneva, the very making of Dice is condemned. Babington on
the Eighth Commandment.

II. Ecclesiastical Canons.
1. The Canons of the Apostles (so called) deprive every Clergyman, given to
Dice or Drunkenness, unless he reform, Can. 42, 43. Accordingly a certain Clerk
in the Decretal is found deposed for being a Dicer, and an Usurer. De excess.
Prelat. c. Inter Disect. Decr. l. 5. t. 31. c. 11.

2. A General Council at Rome under Innocent III. forbids Clergymen either
Dice or Hucklebones, either to play with, or to be present, etc. De vit. and
honest. Cler. c. Clerici. Decret. l. 3. t. 1. c. 13.

3. Another General Council at C P. under the Emperor Justinian, prohibits all
in general, as well Laymen as Clerks, to Play ever after at Dice, under pain
of Excommunication. Synod. Constantinop. 6. c. 50.

4. A Spanish Council held at Eliberis, suspends every Christian Man from the
Lord's Table, that shall Play at Dice, or at Tables, for a Twelve month. Conc.
Elib. c. 79.

5. Two French Synods, one at Rochel, the other at Nimaux, condemn and prohibit
the use of these Games in general. Babington on Command. 8.

13. The Lord Fitz-Girald, a little before his Death, which was Anno 1580,
wrote a Penitential Sonnet concerning his former Gaming, which is to be seen in
a Pamphlet, called, The Nicker nicked.

CHAP. CXXX. Divine Judgments upon Discontentedness, Ill Nature, etc.
FRowardness and Discontent are certainly Diagnosticks of an ill Nature, and
Prognostics of an unhappy Life: It Is hardly possible, where these Qualities
are Natural and predominant, quite to Conquer them: For which Reason, Bishop
Jos. Hall prefers Good Nature before Grace, in the Election of a Wife; because,
says he, it will be a hard Task, where the Nature is peevish and froward, for
Grace to make an entire conquest, whilst Life losteth.

1. Mr. John Mackerness, Born in Northamptonshire, gives us under his own Hand,
this ill Account of himself: That he was an uncleanly Child, every Night almost
till the Eighth or Ninth year of his Age, defiling his Bed; negligent of Sports
and Games; not respected by other Companions, but often thrust out of their
Society; abiding at Northampton-School with much regret and discontent; never
returning back from his Friends to School but with great sorrow and crying,
wishing that his Eyes were out, rather than to learn his Book there: When
there, out of Sullenness refusing all Victuals but Bread and Butter, telling
his Guardian, that he wanted Victuals (when indeed he voluntarily pinched his
own Belly, to bring an Odium upon the House) which occasioned his remove to
Daintry; from whence he returned to his Guardian, without taking leave of his
master. He was sent afterward to London; put to a Merchant, but within three
Weeks an Ague seized him, and made him so peevish, that he resolved not to
stay. He was sent for down, and put to Wadham College in Oxford, Anno 1669. but
being always of a troubled and tumultuous Spirit, and that Temper improved with
Discontent, Slothfulness, and Pride, he scorned the Company he was sorted with,
and those that were his Seniors scorned him; so that he was fain to walk by
himself, and lead a solitary Life. He grew unsettled, began to think meanly of
both the Ministry, and the study of Physic; had a desire to be a Lawyer,
promising himself thereby great Riches, and brave things in abundance: His
Guardian not giving way to it, he makes a Journey to London, having Sold all
his Goods in the College, to enter himself at the Inns of Court; his Tutor once
dissuaded him, but the second time he went privately; but not speeding, he
returns privately to the College: Next, he would be a Clerk to an Uncle of his,
but his Guardian not approving of that, that Design was broken off. At the
University he learnt to Drink, please himself with Women's Company, abuse
Scripture in Jests, once stole a Duck; when Bachelor of Arts, he bought a
Horse, took Money in his Pocket, resolved to Travel into diverse Parts of
England, but knew not whither; steering his Course toward Nottingham, he was
by an Acquaintance recommended to a Doctor's House in the Country, about Twenty
Miles distant from Oxford, where he stayed, and spent his Time in Gluttony:
After a quarter of a Year, he would to Oxford again with great eagerness, hires
a Horse for the purpose, but not having gone two Miles, he fears the badness of
the Ways, and foulness of Weather, and returns with design to stay at his
former Quarters; but turning again on a sudden, resolves for Oxford again;
where, his Companion being dead, he lived more privately, and studied more
closely, which got him some Repute, and that making him proud, he began to be
glutted with Books, and returned into the Country, and thence to Oxford again;
and falling upon Hobbs his Book, examined his Principles, and so proceeded to
the study of other Points of Divinity, grew Proud of his Parts, began to think
of Practicing Law, Physic, and Divinity together! -- Till at last being tossed
with thousands of Thoughts, going out of Oxford three times, with a purpose to
come thither no more; before he took his Degree of Master of Arts, being
returned to Oxford out of the Country, and told of a Man that are any manner of
raw Flesh, and that continually without ceasing Night or Day, he was struck so
deeply, that he could not forbear Tears; his Company that told him, leaving him
about Nine of the Clock, he goes to his Study, and stays a while to Pray; but
in the midst of his Prayer had a sense that God had forsaken him, which made
him cry out louder than usually, Lord, forgive me, Lord, forgive me; a cool
Numbness came over his Sinews, and his Hands were clenched one Finger n
another, so that he could hardly sever them: Upon which he calls his Bedfellow
to bear him Company, burns some Papers, wherein he had writ some Notions that
had been the occasion of his Spiritual Pride and Discontent; falls into a
violent heat of Blood, and Sweating, so that he verily thought he should die
before Morning. And thus toiling his Brain with variety of Conceits and
Fancies, his Anguish was unexpressible, his Conscience clogged, Scriptures did
but increase his Doubts, he looked upon fine Clothes, and Men of Repute, as
Reprobates, condemned all but the Poor; condemns the way he was in, as too
broad for Salvation: The disquiet of his Mind caused a great Pain in his Head;
his Brains were disordered: looked about every Morning to know if he were
distracted; consults the Physician; Physic does no good. Next, he would go
Preach in the Country, And gather the People together, to examine the Progress
and Benefit made of Christ's Commands, to repeat the Lord's Prayer, remember
his Death in the Sacrament, and make Provision for the Poor, and study to do
all good possible. But when he came, he was ashamed to make any such Proposal.
Upon a plentiful Meal he became strangely distempered, his Head violently
pained, his Teeth fixed as in the Falling Sickness, his Hands knit so fast
together, that he could hardly dissever them; he fell low in the sight of all
Men: Removed to Astrop, provided Oils for his Head, used Diversions, as Riding,
Bowling, Hunting, fine Clothes, etc. but found no Relief; was troubled with
Blasphemous Thoughts, a coolness came upon his Head, and took away his Senses.
One Night (after some lavish Mirth, and obscene Discourses used in the Day)
awaking in a strange kind of Discontent, he gaped three or four times, and
conceived some unclean Spirit had entered every time of his gaping, into him,
and that he should be shortly tormented, which accordingly happened; for he was
no sooner fallen into a slumber, but he perceived an Obduction of his Senses,
and was most grievously tormented in his Soul (beyond all the sharpest pains of
the Body.) Upon Prayer he was relieved, but afterward cast down more than
before. At the writing hereof, November the last, 1675. or 1676. he felt his
Pains again in his sleep, and continued still to think, that some Evil Spirit
infested him. And hereupon he resolved to make this full and public Confession
to the World, concluding thus -- Lord, be merciful, be pitiful unto me, for I
am even nothing before thee, etc. Heartily begging the prayers of all good
Christians for him, praying and entreating them again and again, that they
would not fail to remember him in their Public Assemblies, and Private Duties.
At last, he tells us, that before this Desertion he had prayed very earnestly,
and vehemently, that God would deliver him from the World, being froward and
dissatisfied with his Condition, troubled in his Thoughts, and weary of the
World; whereas he should have prayed for Submission and Patience. See the
Narrative Printed by himself at London, 1676.

2. Mary Cook, executed for the Murder of her own only Child, 1670. declared,
that the occasion was a great Discontent which she had conceived in her Mind,
grounded upon an apprehension of exceeding unkindnesses of Relations to her,
though she had never been undutiful to them; alleging, her Relations slighted
her, she was weary of Life, and afraid the Child should come to want, when she
was gone. See the Narrative.

3. One Tho. Holt of Coventry, a Musician, having Nineteen Children, and a
Competent Estate, but not a contented Mind, fearing Poverty, made a Contract
with the Devil, and on Feb. 16th. 1641. after a very Tempestuous day, and
mighty Wind, which blew down several Houses, and Reeks of Corn and Hay, was
himself by one in Humane shape, at Night, after he had called to his Wife for
Pen, Ink, and Paper to make his last Will, killed in his Bed, (whilst his Wife,
almost at her Wits end, was calling her Neighbors) and there found by them in
a wretched manner, with his Neck broken, to their great astonishment; after his
Death they opened a Chest, which he would never suffer his Wife, or any Child
to look in, whilst living, wherein they found Gold up to the top, as they
thought; but upon touching of it, it fell at to dust. This was attested and
published by one Lawrence Southern of Coventry, Anno 1642. And though it may seem
incredible to a Reader of ordinary size, yet compared with many other
Relations, as that of Young Sandy, mentioned before, who received Money from
the Devil, and lost it again before Morning, etc. it is not so very strange.

CHAP. CXXXI. Divine Judgments upon Idleness and Evil Company.
I Put Idleness and ill Society together, because they are near akin one to
the other; and both of them give an occasion to vitiousness: The one betrays us
more immediately to the Snare of the Devil, and the other by the Mediation of
his Agents exposes us with a greater violence, and a stronger Torrent, than
the Corruption of our own single Natures. In Idleness our own Hearts are in
danger of being too hard for us, but in ill Company, they meet with their
Seconds to abet them: And when several vitiated Natures meet together, like so
many dry sticks, they are easily enkindled with a little Fire, and blown up
into a great Flame, and therefore seldom do any good Effects or Consequences
follow upon such precedent Causes.

1. The Egytians made a Law, that he that could not show by what means he
maintained himself, should be put to Death. Plut. Laert. in vita Periandri.

2. St. Augustine tells us of Alipius, his dear Friend, who went to Rome to
study the Law; where there were usually those Gladiatory Pastimes, wherein Men
killed one another in sport. Alipius could not be persuaded by his Companions
to see those Sports: They often desired him, but by no means would he go. At last
(says St. Augustine) by a famillar Violence they drew him to go. Well (says
he) I will go, but I will be absent whilst I am there, I will not look on it.
He went, but when he came there amongst others, he shut his Eyes, and would not
see any of those Sports, till at length there was a Man wounded, at which the
People shouted: He heard the shout, and would see what was the matter; he
looked about, and seeing the wounded Man, he desired to see a little more. Thus
(says St. Augustine) he grew at last not to be the same Man as he was when he
came thither: For after that time he desired to see it a second and third time;
and at last he came to be, not only a Companion of those that went thither, but
would be a Guide to them, and one of the forwardest, till it pleased God, by a
mighty hand, to deliver him from this Vanity. Let those amongst us, that
adventure to go to the Meetings of Heretics, out of Curiosity to see and hear,
learn Wisdom by these Examples, Vid. August. Confess. and Clark's Examples, etc.

3. Mat. Hunniades, King of Hungary, when one brought him a Wooden Coat of
Mail, wherein was not one Ring wanting; a Work of Fifteen Years, commanded him
to Prison for Fifteen Years more, to expiate for so much Time and Parts
misspent. Author of Education of Young Gentlemen.

4. Few or no Beggars are found in China; for a young Beggar has the Whip. The
whole Country is well Husbanded, and though the People are generally great
spenders, yet they first get it by their hard Labor. Idle Persons are much
abhorred in this Country, and such as will not Labor, must not eat amongst
them; for there are none that will give Alms to the Poor. If any be Blind, they
are put to Grind in Horse-Mills: If Lame, Impotent, Bedridden, etc. the next of
their Kin is forced to maintain them: if they be not able, the King has
Hospitals in every City, wherein they are sufficiently provided for. Sir Tho.
Herb. Travels. P. Pil. 15.3.

5. The Lacedaemonians brought up their Children in Labor from their Infancy,
whereby it grew into a Proverb, That only the Lacedaemonian Women brought forth
Men. Alex.

6. The Cretans brought up also their Sons from their Childhood in daily and
difficult Labors, lest when they grew Old, they should think it was not
unseemly to waste themselves in Idleness. Idem.

7. The Gymnosophists, to reclaim their Scholars from Idleness, Enacted a Law,
that Young Men should neither eat nor drink, any day, before they had given an
Account to the Elder, what Work they had done that Morning. Idem.

8. Amasis made a Law, that the Egyptian Youth should no day eat and Food, till
they had run One Hundred and Eighty Furlongs: Judging them unfit either to eat
or drink, till by honest Labor they had deserved it. Diod. Sic.

9. The Aethiopians anciently accustomed their Youth daily to fling great
Stones, or Darts, that thereby they might understand, that Man was born to
Labor, not to Idleness. Alex. ab Alex.

10. In the City of Casan in Parthia, an Idle Person is not suffered to live
amongst them.

11. Sir Philip Sidney, as one writes, in the extreme Agony of his Wounds (so
terrible the sense of Death is, adds my Author) requested the dearest Friend he
had living, to burn his Arcadia. Will. Winstanley's Worthies, p. 219.

12. I have read formerly, that Mr. Abraham Cowley, on his Deathbed, made it
his Request, that this Poems, called, The Mistress, might undergo the same
Fate, be burnt. Mr. Herbert on his Deathbed commended his Poems to the Press.

13. And I knew a Neighbour-Minister of mine, Mr. Walter Adams, Nephew to
Alderman Will. Adams, and in part his Heir, who, when he lay a dying, caused
all his Sermon Notes to be burnt before his Face. What his Reason was, I know
not; but after his Uncle's Death, he left off Preaching, and with his two
Brothers, Coheirs with him, came down to spend the remainder of their Lives
together in a pleasant and easy way of Living; which they did, and dispatched
it in a short time.

CHAP. CXXXII. Divine Judgments upon Litigiousness.
STrife and Contention are so contrary to the Rules of Charity and Peace
prescribed us by our Christian Religion, that no better fruits can be expected
from them, than as the Apostle says, Confusion and every evil work. And the
end proposed by the litigious Man, is always pretended to be good, and
sometimes appears very plausible, viz. the recovering of what is his Right, or
maintaining what is Just and Lawful; yet it will certainly be found at long
run, that we had better in many cases recede from our own Rights, for Peace
sake, than enter into Contention about them. I have ever found, says Bishop
Hall, that to strive with my Superiors, is furious; with my Equals, doubtful;
with my Inferiors, sordid and base.

1. Epiphanius tells a sad Story of two Bishops, Milesius, and Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, both Professors, and fellow sufferers for the Christian Faith.
These two Men being condemned, and sent to Work in the Metal-Mines, for a small
Difference fell into so great a Schism, that they drew a Partition Wall between
each other in the Mine, and would not hold Communion each with other in the
Service of Christ, for which they both were Sufferers: Which Dissension of
theirs caused such a Rent in the Church, that it did more hurt than open
Persecution from the Enemy. Clark's Mirr. Vol. 1. c. 31. p. 108.

2. Empedocles was of such a contentious Disposition, that every Day he would
quarrel with some Body or other, and prosecute his Contentions with much
Violence. As he lived in the Fire of Contention, so his End was to be burnt in
the Fire of Mount Aetna.

3. Pope Hildebrande attaining to his Papacy by unlawful Means, set the whole
Christian World into a Combustion. As he rose out of his Seat, to Excommunicate
the Emperor Henry the IV. it (being newly made of great Timber) rent, and
shivered in pieces: Afterward he hired one to knock the Emperor on the Head as
he was at Prayers; and enquiring of the Host for an Answer against the Emperor,
because it would not speak, he threw it into the Fire, and burnt it. And after
many such outrageous Villainies, he was Deposed and Banished: After which he
wandered as a Vagabond, without Comfort, without Help, without Hope, in a
pitiful estate, yet pitied of no Man; traveling under the unsupportable
Burden of a restless Conscience, and at last died for Grief. Simps. Clark's
Mirr. p. 68.

4. About the Year 1623. there fell out a hot Contention between Dr. Bugs,
Minister in Coventry, and Master Gardener, Minister of Anstey, but Lecturer in
Coventry; against which the Lord was pleased to witness from Heaven his Dislike
hereof, by this Remarkable Judgment: The People being assembled together, to
hear the Lecture, upon a Wednesday Morning, in in St. Michael's Church, in the
same City, there fell out a terrible Tempest of Thunder and Lightning, whilst
the Minister was in his Sermon, at which time the Lightning fell upon the
Steeple of the Church, making a crack and a hole in it, and thence descended
into the Belfry with a Flame of Fire about the bigness of a Sheet, which being
a pretty way distant from the Pews, where the People fate, at first amazed the
Beholders; but not staying there, it moved slowly toward the People, which so
astonished them, that some swooned, others were exceedingly distracted, not
knowing which way to fly. Hereupon the Mayor spoke to the Minister to give over
his Sermon, and to go to Prayer; which accordingly he did, and when the Fire
came very near unto the Place where the People were, it pleased God that it
wheeled about on the one hand, and so went out of the Church. I presume there
are many living, that were Eyewitnesses hereof.

5. A Gentleman of my Acquaintance formerly, and I suppose, still living, and
therefore shall be nameless, in familiar Discourse with me, upon occasion of
some differences between him and others, bespoke me thus: Sir, I will deal
freely with you, and make you my Confessor; perhaps I ought, in point of Duty,
so to do: When I consider with my self, how first of all, all the Gentlemen of
the Country have of late joined their Heads together against me, and sued me
at Law, and put me out of Commission for the Peace, and protested never to
enter my Doors, as long as I live; when all my Tenants have joined their Heads
and Purses together, and engaged me now for several Years, in a long and
tedious Lawsuit, yea those very Persons with whom I never exchanged three
Words in my Life, are my avowed Adversaries; when my own Family and Relations,
my Wife, Children, and all, are unfaithful to me; Good Lord, think I, what a
wicked Wretch am I! thus to provoke all the World against me! It Is a Wonder,
the Earth does not open under my Feet, and swallow me up. But when I consider,
what the Reason is of all this Enmity and Ill Will, and find upon sober
deliberation with my self, that I am Plaintiff in no Cause, but only defend my
own Rights, I take comfort in my own Innocence; and, I thank God, I can eat as
well, drink as well, and sleep as well, as any Man in England; only this, I
will not lose a Penny of my Right, for never a Man in England, not the Great
Man himself. -- His Wife has sent for me some time to pray with her, being
overwhelmed with Melancholy; one of his Servants broke his Neck; one of his
Sons was married to a Countess of Ireland, (the Estate encumbred and most of it
lost by Law, whilst he and his Countess were at Daggers-drawing in the
Country;) the other Son, who had a Parsonage of 5 or 600 Pound per Annum, died
in Gaol; a third succeeded him in Gaol, and died likewise; of two Daughters,
one died a Virgin, the other grew Distracted: The old Gentleman sold his
Manor, with all the other Appendants to it, as the perpetual Advowson to the
Parsonage, etc. only reserving to himself a Farm of about 80 or 100 Pound per
Annum.

CHAP. CXXXIII. Divine Judgments upon Carnal Confidence.
THE Sacred Scripture has pronounced those Accursed, who put their Trust in
Man, or in an Arm of Flesh, or a Bow of Steel; and has given us several
Examples of such, who have been remarkably punished for their carnal
Confidence, as the Builders of Babal, the proud Pharaoh, Sennacherib,
Belshazzar, etc. And who that believes the Divine Providence, can believe
otherwise, but that God must needs take it ill, to see his Creatures, that
depend upon him for every bit of Bread they eat, and are not able to stand a
moment upon their Legs without him, grow bold in confidence of their own
Faculties, as if they were a kind of Demigods upon Earth, Absolute and
Sovereign, without any dependence upon Heaven.

1. Arimazes having garrisoned a very strong and steep Rock in the Sogdian
Country, with Thirty Thousand Men, sent to Alexander the Great, who demanded
it, to know whether he could flee or not? But the next Day he was taken,
together with his strong Hold, and nailed to a Cross. God delights to confute
Men in their Confidences, that they that are his way run to the Rock of Ages,
Isa. 26.4. to that Arx roboris, of his Holy Name, which alone is impregnable
and inexpugnable.

2. The Spaniards, in 1588. called their Navy the Invincible Armado; but it
proved otherwise: and that upon St. James's Day^, whom they count their Patron,
and Tutelary Saint. Trapp.

3. The Lord Mordant (afterward Earl of Peterborough) being a Papist, and
desirous to draw his Lady to the same Religion, he was willing that there
should be a Meeting of two Eminent Parsons of each Party, to dispute what might
be in Controversy between them. The Lady made choice of our Lord Primate, and
prevailed with him, though newly recovered from a long Sickness, and scarce
able to take such a Journey. The Jesuit, chosen by the Earl, went under the
Name of Beaumond, but his true Name was Rookwood, (Brother to Ambrose Rookwood,
one of the Gunpowder Traitors.) The Place of Meeting was at Drayton in
Northamptonshire, where there was a great Library; so that no Books of the
Ancient Fathers were wanting, upon occasion, for their View. The Points to be
disputed on, were concerning Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints,
Worshipping of Images, and the Visibility of the Church. Three Days they were
in this Disputation; three Hours in the Forenoon, and two in the Afrernoon,
each Day; and the Conclusion was this, after the third Day's Meeting: The Lord
Primate having been hitherto Opponent, now the Tables were to be turned, and
the Jesuit, according to his desire, was to oppose, and the Lord Primate to
answer. But when the time came the Jesuit was expected, instead of coming he
sent his Excuse to the Lord Mordant, which was, That all the Arguments which he
had framed in his Head, and premeditated, so that he thought he had them as
perfect as his Paternoster, were now slipped from him, and he could not possibly
recover them again; and that he believed it was a just Judgment of God upon him
for undertaking of himself, to dispute with a Man of that Eminency and
Learning, without a License from his Superiors. The Lord Mordant seeing his
Tergiversation, upon some further Discourse with the Lord Primate, was
converted, and became a Protestant, and so continued to his Death. One
Challoner, a Secular Priest, afterward writing a Book against this Beaumond,
by way of Scorn, bids him beware of coming any more to Drayton, lest he should
meet with another Usher, to foil him again, to the Dishonor of his Profession,
and himself. See his Life.

4. A little before the late horrid Conspiracy against the Life of our present
Sovereign King William the III. in an exempt Chapel, within three Miles of
Norwich, one preached on those Words, Jer. 24.10. and near the time of the
intended Assassination, on Jer. 46.10. For this is the day of the Lord God of
Hosts, a day of Vengeance, that he may avenge himself on his Adversaries; and
the Sword shall devour, and it shall be satisfied, and made drunk with their
Blood: for the Lord God of Hosts has a Sacrifice in the North Country, by the
River Euphrates. One Mr. Trinder also, a noted Justice of Peace, in Middlesex,
in the Reign of King James, to his Nephew in the Earl of Arran's Regiment, in a
Letter, dated at Paris, Feb. 1695. writes thus, viz. Sir, Notwithstanding your
great Confidence in your Hero, and your great Ingratitude to your Friend, your
Repentance shall not be too late, if the Effects of it appear within a Month
after the Receipt of this Advertisement, from your Friend, J. T. Another great
French Man, in a Letter to a Friend, concluded, That the whole English Nation
would be a miserable Field of Blood, etc. And the Courtiers of France and (some
of them) bragged, That King James was not gone to invade, but to take
possession of his Kingdom. Nay, the D. of B. was so confident of Success in
this Business, that he told the French King, he scrupled not within three
Months, but he should be sent over by King James, to give him Thanks, in way of
Embassy, for all his Kindness to him, since he left his Kingdoms. A Declaration
was drawn up, printed, and dispersed, on purpose to cajole the People of
England into false Hopes of a Relaxation of Taxes, perpetual Parliaments, and
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, etc. Transport Ships were ready,
and Soldiers, to the number of 20000, to embark at Callis, Bullen, Dunkirk,
etc. And the French King caused to be delivered 100000 Lewis' d'ores to the
late King, desiring him to hasten his Departure, for that all things were in
readiness; and so took his leave of him, wishing him a prosperous undertaking;
promising, as soon as he posted himself in England, he would supply him with
more Troops. The Pope's Nuncio likewise pronounced a solemn Benediction upon
the Enterprise; and the Jesuits had begged Chelsea-College for themselves; the
Image of St. Victor was bestowed upon the Army, as an auspicious Omen. And yet
after these Preparations, and great Confidences, when they thought all
cocksure, the Descent was hindered by the Winds, the Counsels took air in
England, and by Divine Providence, the Authors of the Conspiracy discovered,
and several of them brought to condign Punishment. The Impartial History of the
Plots and Conspiracies against King William, p. 30, 31, etc.

CHAP. CXXXIV. Divine Judgments upon Bribery and Injustice.
SHould any one (says Bishop Latimer, in a Sermon preached at Court) ask me,
which was the readiest way to Hell? I would answer, First, be Covetous;
secondly, take Bribes; thirdly, pervert Judgment and Justice; (There Is the
Mother, and her two Daughters:) I will add fourthly, a Tyburn- Tippet, Hangum
Twinum for him. If (says he to his Majesty) I were King, and any of my Judges
should thus suffer themselves to be corrupted, and pervert Justice, though he
were my Lord Chief Justice himself, as God shall judge me, I would make?
Quondams of every Man of them. (If not in these Words, yet to this purpose.)
Sure I am, God Almighty does ring very sharp Peals of his Wrath and Vengeance,
by the Prophets, in the Ears of his People Israel for this very Sin; and there
is no doubt, but he is as severely angry with it in all Ages, even to this Day.

1. A. C. 1289. A. 16. Edw. I. upon the general Accounts made of the ill
Administration of Justice in the King's Absence, these Penalties were inflicted
upon the chief Officer, whose manifest Corruptions, the Hatred of the People to
Men of that Profession (who are apt to abuse their Science and Authority)
procured in Parliament to be thus punished.

Sir Ralph Hengham, Chief Justice of the King's Bench, was Fined 7000 Marks.
Sir John Loveton, Justice of the Lower Bench 3000 Sir William Brompton,
Justice, 6000 Sir Solomon Rochester 4000 All Itenerant Justices. Sir Richard
Boyland 4000 All Itenerant Justices. Sir Tho. Sadington 2000 All Itenerant
Justices. Sir Walter Hopton 2000 All Itenerant Justices. Sir W. Sakam 3000
Robert Lithbury, Master of the Rolls, 1000 Roger Leicester 1000 Henry Bray,
Escheator, and Judge for the Jews 1000 Sir Adam Stratton, Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, was Fined 34000 Marks.

See the Relation of that memorable Parliament, begun An. Regni 10. Richard II.
p. 36, 37.

2. Sir Francis Bacon, Baron Verulam, and Viscount St. Albans, that Atlas of
Learning, suffered for but his Connivance at the Bribery, and Corruption of his
Servants, and was by the Parliament put out of the Office of Lord Chancellor.
Ibid.

3. Judge Morgan, who gave the Sentence of Death upon the Lady Jane Gray,
presently after fell and; and in all his distracted Fits cried out continually,
Take away the Lady Jane, Take away the Lady Jane from me; and in this extreme
Distemper ended his Life. Fox's Martyrol.

4. June 24. 1678. Mr. Daniel Bachelor, Minister, told me of a Citizen of
London, -- to whom he was sent for in his Sickness, when God had let loose
Conscience upon him. The Man repeated over all the Commandments, and confessed
the Sins be was guilty of against each Command; such as Incest, and Adultery,
lived in many Years. The Chastity of his Servant he solicited, but was
repulsed. But his Master-Sin was Perjury; taking false Oaths, and hiring Met (
Knights of the Post, as they are called) frequently to do so. The Devil led him
into that Sin first, as he said, thus: He wanted Proof for a Debt, that was a
just Debt; and hired one of those, who procured his Debt that was just, in this
unjust way: By this he contracted Hardness of Heart, and plunged himself in
Villainies of that nature. There were above an Hundred Actions against him when
he died. He fell sick on a Friday; lay about ten Days under the horrid gnawings
of the Worm that dies not, upon his Bed; not in Distraction, but Desperation,
crying out once in his presence, I am damned for ever, and added, most fearful
to hear, Amen, Amen, Amen; and had an Expression so blasphemous of the Holy and
Ever-blessed God, that for Horror, I shall draw a Veil over it. Yet some have
Robbed hard by the Gallows: And this poor Wretch, thus hung up in Chains by the
Lord, did not awaken sufficiently one of his Knights of the Post, that came to
see him, while the Minister, my Friend, was present: O take heed, said he, by
my Example; now I smart for what I have done, and put you upon doing. The Man
in Health told him he was melancholic, and was not moved. He had a Charge to
relate this woeful Death of his to his Sister, with whom he had been
incestuously Wicked. She gave a seemingly courteous Reception to him, and
seemed sensible of it. The Minister, my Friend, when he had done his Errand,
coming down from her Chamber, at the Door of which he had left his Galosho's,
missing them, went up again, and overheard her say, to a Companion of hers
there, The Fool thought I had been in earnest. The Man, though he had unjustly
ravished Thousands out of Men, died miserably poor. This Relation was sent me
by the Reverend Mr. Singleton, now living in Hoxdon-Square near the City of
London, and is printed in the same Words I received it.

5. It may not be altogether impertinent, to take notice here, what King
Charles the I. applied to himself on the Scaffold, that for one unjust
Sentence, which he had suffered to pass, (meaning the Earl of Strafford) God
had suffered the like unjust Judgment to be passed on him. ^ee his Speech on
the Scaffold.

6. Sir P. P. in Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln, says, That in the famous
Marriage-Cause between Mrs. Isabella Jones, and Sir Robert Carr, in the Arches;
where Sir Robert Carr was claimed by her, for her Husband; though, for want of
full Proof of the Marriage, Sir Giles Sweit, the Dean of the Arches, pronounced
Sentence against the Marriage, yet condemning Sir Robert Carr in 1500 Pound
Costs to Mrs. Jones: Which the Judge did, because he was in Conscience
convinced, that Sir Robert Carr, and Mrs. Jones, were really married. To this,
Sir Peter Pett, in the aforesaid Letter adds: I can, says he, at any time
acquaint you with the Circumstances of that Cause, and give you an Account of
the Remarkable Judgments of God inflicted on the Persons, who tampered with the
Witness in that Cause, whereby the Marriage failed of Sentence. Remains of Dr.
Barlow, Bishop of Lincoln, p. 368.

7. The Emperor of Muscovy sent for a Judge, who had taken a Bribe, viz. a
Goose with its Belly full of Gold; commanded him and the other Judges, to
appear before him, not discovering the least Displeasure: They all appeared
cheerful; he commanded the Hangman to be brought in, and asked him, if he knew
how to cut up a Goose? Answer being made, very well. Then, said the Emperor,
take away that Judge, and cut him up after the same manner; which was forthwith
done accordingly. Smythy's Treatise of Restitution, p. 19. who says, he had the
Relation from a Minister, whose Brother was an Eyewitness.

CHAP. CXXXV. Divine Judgments upon Lying and Slandering.
OUR Tongues are the Indexes of our Mind, to signify the Thoughts and Meanings
thereof to the World; if the one agree not to the other, the Motions are false,
and the Wheels out of order. What is a Cl^^k good for, if it does not tell the
true Hour of the Day? Liars are shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, and deserve
but little Favor upon Earth, and some times meet with just Punishments, Prove.
19.5.

1. Alexander the Great having read a History out of Aristobulus, wherein the
Author had intermingled certain counterfeit Praises, flung the Book into the
River, saying, the said Writer deserved to be flung there himself. Coguet's
Polit. Disc. p. 130.

2. The Emperor Trajan, surnamed the Good Prince, took away from the Son of
Cabalus, the Kingdom of Dacia; that is, Transylvania, and Valachia; only
because he caught him in a Lie; and told him, That Rome, the Mother of Truth,
could not permit a Liar to possess a Kingdom. Ibid.

3. Cyrus told the King of Armenia, That a Lie was not capable of Pardon. Ibid.

4. Monstrelet writes, That Popiel King of Poland, who had ever in his Mouth
these Words, If it be not true, I would the Rats might cat me; that he was so
assailed by Rats in a Banquet, that neither his Guards, nor Fire, nor Water,
could preserve him from them. Ibid.

5. The Egyptians ordained Death it self for a Punishment to perjured Persons,
and to such as declared not the very Truth, in their Declaration which they
were obliged to make Yearly, both touching their Names, and the Means they had
to nourish their Family. Ibid. Though Mr. Clark says, they had no Punishment
for Lying.

6. Certain Arians suborned a Harlot to accuse Eustathius, a good Bishop of
Antioch, before 2500 Bishops, of Adultery; which she did, by fathering a Child,
which she had then in her Arms, upon him. But afterward, she fell sick, and
confessed that she was hired to it by the Arians; adding; that one Eustathius,
a Tradesman, had gotten that Child. Niceph. l. 8. c. 46. Athanasius was served
in the same manner; so was Mr. Hooker, Author of the Politics; and one Mr.
Sparks, a Flintshire Minister, was suspended on the like occasion, the Woman
afterward growing distracted.

7. In the Reign of King Canutus, the King in Parliament asked the Lords,
Whether in the Agreement made between King Edmund and him, there was any
mention made of Dividing any part of the Land to Edmund's Children or Brethren?
They answering in Flattery, No, and swearing it too, were ever after
Mistrusted, and Disdained by the King; (especially such of them, as had before
sworn Fealty to King Edmund;) some of them he banished, many he beheaded, and
diverse of them, by God's just Judgment, died suddenly. Clark's Exampl. Vol. I.
p. 194. Speed.

8. In Queen Mary's Reign, one William Fenning accused an honest Man, called
John Cooper, because he would not sell him two Bullocks, as if he had spoken
traitorous Words against the Queen, and suborned two false Witnesses to depose
it. Cooper was hanged and quartered, and all his Goods taken from his Wife and
Nine Children: But after a short time, one of these false Witnesses being well,
and at Harvest Work, was stricken by God, so that his Bowels fell out, and he
died miserably. Ibid. p. 195.

9. Thespis, an Athenian Poet, being checked by Solon, for acting in a Play,
because thereby he did lie openly in the Face of all the City, excused himself,
because it was but in jest. To whom Solon replied, If we commend or allow Lying
in sport, we shall soon find it used in good earnest, in all our Bargains and
Dealings. Plutarch.

10. Artaxerxes having found one of his Soldiers in a Lie, caused his Tongue to
be thrust through with three Needles. Idem.

11. The Papists have been so often found guilty of Lying, as in the Case of
John Husse, whom they caused to be burnt, after Letters of safe Conduct granted
him; in the Case of Luther, whose Life and Death they wrote, (whilst as yet the
Man himself was alive;) in the Case of Calvin and Beza, whose Lives were writ
by Bolsecus a Runagate Friar, stuffed with most abominable Lies; in the Case of
the House in Black-friars, falling upon the Papists at Mass, (which they
publicly reported to be upon an Assembly of Puritans;) in the Case of the
Powder Plot, which they endeavored in print, to throw upon the Puritans
likewise, etc. have obtained this Benefit to themselves, That now at long-run,
no Protestant of any good Brains will believe them, any further than he sees
them. They have the Fortune of the Shepherd's Boy in the Fable.

12. The old Scythians and Garamantes ordained Death for the Punishment of
Liars, and false Prognosticators. Sir Mart. Coguet's Pol. Disc. c. 28.

13. The Persians and Indians deprived the Liar of all Honor and Liberty of
Speech. Ibid.

14. The Gymnosophists and Chaldaeans deprived him of all Dignities, and
condemned him to remain in perpetual Darkness without speaking. Ibid.

CHAP. CXXXVI. Divine Judgments upon Cozenage, and Dissimulation.
OUR God is so far a Lover of Truth, that all false ways he utterly abhors; and
does so abhor them, that he has forbid them expressly, frequently, vehemently;
and ostentimes detects them, to the Shame and Disgrace of the Persons guilty:
And I dare be bold, to assert this for a true Proposition, That all Lies, and
Frauds, and Dissimulation, stand but upon one Leg, and are very easily kicked
down with one Spurn of the Divine Providence; when Truth and Sincerity have two
firm Legs to support them, their own Excellence, and the Favor of Heaven. God
will never connive long, though he may wink a while, nor contribute to the
Maintenance and Support of false Colors, how specious and artificial soever;
especially where the Cause is grossly bad, and the Person faulty, is obstinately
impenitent. Observe but these Stories following.

1. The Story of Magdalena Crucia, an Abbess in Corduba, reverenced for a very
devout Saint, and Prophetess, and afterward shamefully discovered to be a
Witch, and for 30 Years together in familiarity with the Devil, is related at
large before in the Chapter of Revelation of Things secret or future by
Divination, etc.

2. Pope Joan, otherwise called John of England, was a Woman born at Mentz,
brought up at Athens in Man's Apparel; where she so profited in the Arts, that
coming to Rome, she read the Liberal Sciences, and was held so sufficient a
Reader, that many of the better sort became her ordinary Hearers; afterward
with one Consent chosen Pope, she lived in the Sea of Rome two Years and
upwards: But betaking her self more than before to Idleness and Pleasure, she
could not live continently, as in her poor Estate, when she plied her Book
diligently; whereupon one Day, as she went with the Clergy in solemn
Procession, and in Papal manner, she was delivered of her first-begotten Son,
begot by one of her Chamber-waiters, near the Temple of Peace, which stands in
the City, as is evident by an old Marble Image, which stands there to this Day,
to denote so much in a Figure. And hereupon it is, that when the Popes go from
the Vatican to St. John Lateran's and back again, they go not the direct way
thither; but by other Streets further about, and so make their Journey longer.
Thus much says Theodorus de Niem, Bishop of Ferden, who lived Anno 1455. Vid.
Theodoric. and libr. de privil. and jurib. Imperii. N. B. Pope Pius the V.
removed the Image spoken of before.

This is attested by Luitprandus, Bishop of Cremona; Vid. Trithem. in vit.
Luitprandi. By Marian. Scot. in Chron. ad an. 854. l. 3. Sigeb. in Chron. ad
an. 854. By Otho Frizing. l. 7. By Gothfrid. in Chron. par. 20. in Catal. Romans
Pontif. By Hoveden, in Hist. Angl. With a matter of 30 more Authors, mentioned
by Dr. James, Library Keeper of Oxford, in his Introd. to Divin. And the Author
of a Pamphlet, entitled, Pope Joan; and printed at London, A. C. 1689.

3. M. Anton. de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, came over into England, wrote
here against the Church of Rome; afterward pretended Penitence, and was
Reconciled, and Readmitted into the Bosom of that Church: But his Conscience
would not be so served; it recoiled back upon him, and in his familiar
Discourses he broke out, as formerly, into an Assertion of his former Tenets.
And so after his Death, upon a solemn Citation and Process against him,
Sentence was given, viz. That he was unworthy of the Favor of the Holy
Apostolic See; that he should be deprived of all his Honor, Benefit, or
Dignity, his Goods Confiscate, and himself given over to the Secular Powers,
(which was de facto done;) He, and his Picture, and Books which he had written,
to be burned. Which was done accordingly, in Campo di Fiori. See the Relation
of the Process, sent from Rome; Published at London, 1624.

4. The pretended Possession of the London Nuns, and the possessed Woman at
Antwerp, is detected and discovered by the Duke of Lauderdale, in Letter to Mr.
Baxter. Hist. Disc. of Appar. and Witches, etc. c. 4. of the Staffordshire
Body, discovered by Bishop Moreton; who pissed through an Ink-horn.

5. The lying Wonders, and false Miracles wrought all over the World, and
laughed at by all wise People in the World, would fill a Volume, to Discourse
of them in particular.

6. The Supposititious Heirs, Perkin Warbeck, and Great Bellies made out with
little Pillows, etc. would be tedious to insist upon.

7. Hither may be referred those two Arch-Female Cheats, Marcy Clay, (alias
Jinny Fox) and the German Princess, famed lately for their Art of Lifting,
alias Cheating, who at last were deservedly preferred to Tyburn.

CHAP. CXXXVII. Divine Judgments upon Oppression, Tyranny.
IT IS said of Tyrants and Oppressive Persons, That they shall not live out half
their days, Psalm. 55.25. and common Experience gives attestation to the Truth
of it:

Ad Generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Juv. Satyr. 1. Adonizedeck, pharaoh, Abimelech, Athaliah, Jezabel, Herod,
Pilate, etc. may go for Scripture-Examples: Others follow.

1. Alexander the Great, after his Victories over Persia, Asia, India,
Hircania, Babylon; Scythia, Syria, Phoenicia, Judaea, Egypt, etc. grew Pound
and Tyrannical, witness his Murdering of Philotas (one of his brave Captains,
who had assisted him in all his Conquests) and his Father; his Rewarding a
Mariner, that had leaped into a Lake near Babylon, and swam to fetch off his
Hat with his Crown fastened to it, whither a Tempest had carried it off his
Head, as he was Rowing over it in his Galley, with a Talent; but causing his
Head to be cut off, for putting the Crown upon it to keep it dry. In the midst
of his Career, and the very height of his Vigor and Jollity, was cut off
himself by Death, in the Thirty Second Year of his Age, and but the Twelfth of
his Reign. Qu. Curt. in vita. Plutarch. Alsted, Eucyclop. p. 2977.

2. Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, who would not suffer a Barber to trim him,
nor Lodge with his Wives, without first searching the Chambers, nor speak to
his People, but out of a High Tower; who giving his Cloak and Sword to a Boy
that waited on him, caused a Man to be slain for saying, Sir, now you have put
your Life into his hands; and the Boy, for only smiling at it. That set
Damocles to a Feast, with a Company of Beautiful Boys to wait on him, together
with Crowns and Music, etc. and a sharp glittering Sword hanging over his
Head, tied with a Horse-hair, only for saying, Dionysius was a Happy Man; lived
with so little Security, that himself took little pleasure in Life, and his
Subjects generally desired his Death (except the Old Woman that went daily to
the Temple to Pray for him, lest the Devil himself should come in his room;) in
short, he was so tortured with his own Suspicions, that he would not suffer any
Man no come into his Chamber with a Gown on his back, no, not his own Son, or
Brother; nay, put a Soldier to Death, for only giving his Brother a Halbert to
describe a Plot of Ground to him, with the Situation of it; and slew Marsyas,
because he dreamed one Night, that he had killed him. Plut. in vit. Dionys.
Invidia Siculi non invenere Tyranni Tormentum majus.

3. Nero. that Monster of Mankind, that used to go by Night about the Streets
of Rome, beating and abusing, and sometimes throwing into Privies, People that
stood in his way, and resisted him; breaking open Shops, and robbing them;
caused the Genitals of a Boy that he loved, called Sporus, to be cut off, in
order to the making of him a Woman; killed his Wife Poppea Sabina, when great
with Child, murdered his Wife Octavia, and his Mother Agrippina (after he had
committed Incest with her) causing her Womb to be ripped up, to see where he had
lain; poisoned Claudius, from whom he received the Empire; murdered his Aunt
Domitia, and Antonia, Claudius his Daughter, because she refused to Marry him;
hired Conjurers to lay the Ghost of his Mother Agrippina, with whom he was
haunted; caused Crispinus, his Son-in-law by Poppea, to be drowned, as he was
Fishing (with many others of his Relations;) murdered Aulus Plancus, after he
had committed Sodomy with him: Enforced his Master Seneca to Murder himself,
sent Poison to his other Master, Burrhus: Poisoned several Rich Freemen, and
Old Men, who had been formerly helpful to him; caused the City of Rome to set
on Fire, whilst himself goes up to the top of Moecenas his Tower, tuning his
Harp, and singing, to feed his Eyes with the Pleasantness of the Sight, and
afterward put it on the Christians, to give an occasion of Persecuting them,
causing some of them to be clothed in the Skins of Wild Beasts, and torn in
pieces by Dogs, others to be crucified, others to be made Bonefires of, to
light him in his Night-sports: Wishing the World might be destroyed whilst he
lived, that he might be a Spectator of it. At last, the Senate judging him to
be an Enemy to Mankind, condemned him to be whipped to Death through the streets
of Rome; upon which he ran and hid himself among Briars and Thorns, and crying
out, I have neither a Friend, nor an Enemy, miserable Man that I am, threw
himself into a Pit four Foot deep, and there desperately slew himself. Sueton.
in vit.

4. Caligula, another Roman Emperor, who disinherited and slew Tiberius, who
was Coheir with him; compelled his Father-in-Law to Murder himself, caused his
Grandmother to kill her self for Reproving of him; banished his two Sisters,
after he had committed Incest with them; used all sorts of Magistrates
scornfully; murdered privately several of the Senators; stigmatized many
Persons of Quality, or dismembered them, and then condemned them either to the
Mines, or to mend Highways, or to Wild Beasts, or to be sawn asunder;
compelled Parents to be present at the Torment of their Sons; and one excusing
himself, he sent his Litter for him; another Father he caused to be slain,
because he desired to shut his Eyes, while his Children were tormented; a third
he brought home with him from seeing his Son's miserable Death, and would force
him to laugh, jest, and be merry; cast a Roman Knight to the Beasts, and
because he declared himself Innocent, caused his Tongue to be cut out, and cast
to them again; seized upon any that stood near, when he wanted Game for the
Wild Beasts; suborned Persons to go into the Senate House, and declare him,
whom he had a mind to murder, as a Public Enemy; would Command the Executioner
so to strike, that Persons might feel themselves die: Disannulled Persons
Wills, because they had not made him their Heir: Slew many Rich Men,
confiscated the Estates of others, levied unheard of Taxes, would with an
Artificial Engine vie with the Thunder of Heaven, throw up a Stone at such
times, saying, Either do thus kill me, or I will kill thee: Wished all the
People of Rome had but one Neck, that he might cut them off at one blow. At
last, two of the Tribunes conspired against him, slew him, and his Wife
Caesonia, and took his younger Daughter and dashed her Brains against the
Walls. In his Closet were found two Books, one called the Sword, the other the
Dagger, containing the Names of all those he designed for Slaughter; and a
great Chest stored with all sorts of most deadly Poisons. Ibid. in ejus vit.

5. Andronicus, who Traitorously murdered the Son and Heir of Emanuel the
Emperor, causing him to be tied in Sack, and so drowned in the Sea; then by
Violence took Possession of the Empire of Constantinople, and proceeded to
Rapes and Debaucheries, (not abstaining from his own Sisters) murdering most of
the Nobility; was afterward besieged, taken, degraded, despolied of all his
Ornaments, his Eyes plucked out, and he upon an Asse's back, with his Face
toward the Tail, and the Tail in his Hand, and a Rope about his Neck, led
through the Streets of Constantinople, the People shouting, throwing Dung,
Dirt, and Chamber-Pots upon him, then carried to the Gallows, and there hanged.
Beard's Theater.

6. Charles, King of Navarre, a cruel Oppressor and Tyrant over his Subjects,
as also a great Letcher, doting upon a Whore which he kept at Threescore Years
of Age; one day returning from her, and entering into his Chamber, went quaking
to Bed, and half frozen with Cold; they tried by blowing upon him with Brazen
Bellows, Aqua-vitae, and hot Blasts, to revive Nature; but it happening, that a
spark of Fire flew between the Sheets, and inflamed the dry Linen and
Aqua-vitae, so that in an instant, his late quivering Bones were half burnt: He
lived in great Torment for Fifteen days after, and then miserably died. Ibid.

7. Julian the Apostate and Persecutor, nubecula fuit and cito transivit; as
Athanasius said of him.

8. King John of England, by his Exactions gathered much Money, the Sinews of
War, of his Subjects; but lost his People's Affections, the Joints of Peace.

9. Richard the Third, and Queen Mary, as they had the bloodiest, so the
shortest Reigns of any since the Conquest.

10. The fearful Judgment by Rats, inflicted upon the Archbishop of Mentz, for
burning up the Poor of the Country in his Barn, is related before.

11. Novellus Carrarius, Lord of Pavia, after many Cruel Murders, and Bloody
Practices, at last, falling in Love with a Virgin of Excellent Beauty and
Chastity, and her Parents refusing to send her to him at his Command, he took
her out by violence, forced her to his Lust, and then chopped her into small
pieces, and sent her in a Basket to her Parents. Her poor Father carried it to
the Senate of Venice, to consider of the Fact, and revenge the Cruelty. The
Venetians made War upon him, seized him, and hanged him up with his two Sons.
Beard's Theater.

12. John Pontanus and Budaeus both tell of a Devilish Fellow, that for a
Spleen taken against his Master for some rough Usage, in his Master's absence,
broke in upon his Mistress, bound her Hand and Foot, takes her three Children,
carries them up to the Battlements, and when his Master came, first threw down
one, then another to the Pavement, and dashed them to pieces; the Father
begging upon his Knees for the Life of the other, he tells him, the only way to
Ransom it, was by cutting off his own Nose: The poor Father does so, and
disfigured his Face strangely. This Limb of the Devil, with a loud Laughter
tumbles down the other; and last of all, most desperately cast himself after.
Beard's Theater, etc.

CHAP. CXXXVIII. Divine Judgments upon Heretics, Schismatics, etc.
BY Heresy I mean an obstinate Assertion and Defense of some Doctrine contrary
to the Essential Truth of our Religion: By Schism, an uncharitable Separation
from our Brethren upon unnecessary and unwarrantable grounds. And surely if we
are bound to pursue after those things that make for Peace and Unity in our
Civil, much more in our Religious Societies. And it is hard to offend in these
cases, without incurring the Indignation of Heaven: God seldom permits the
Authors and Principal Fomentors of such Division, to go unpunished, even in
this World.

1. Antioch being overspread with the Arian Heresy, was punished with a
terrible Earthquake, and Fire mixed with it, which consumed Multitudes of
Persons. Evagr.

2. Arius himself, the Author, as he was easing Nature, his Bowels gushed out,
and he died miserably. Theod.

3. Simon Magus attempting to show his Power by flying in the Air, fell down,
and broke his Thigh, and so died. Isaack's Chron. p. 186.

4. Manes. or Manichaeus, was slain by the King of Persia, and his Skin stuffed
Chaff. Simps.

5. Emeritus, Bishop of the Donatists, at a Council held at Caesarea, being
challenged by St. Augustine to a Disputation, could not be persuaded thereto by
Parents or Friends, through a distrust of his own Cause, though in his own City,
and in the midst of his Friends: Which through the Mercy of God turned much to
the Advantage of the Church. Clark's Mirr. of Eccl. Hist.

6. Nestorius, being in the Council of Ephesus summoned by Theodosius Minor,
was condemned to Banishment in Oasis, for the Blasphemous Opinions he had
vented against the Deity of our Savior Christ; was struck with an Incurable
Disease, whereby his Tongue rotted; and breeding many Worms, was devoured by
them, so that he ended his Life miserably. Ibid. p. 87.

7. Cerinthus the Heretic, being at a Bath at Ephesus, the Apostle St. John
seeing him, called upon those that were with him to depart, lest the House
should fall upon their Heads; and immediately after their departure, it fell
upon Cerinthus and his Associates, and killed them. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist.

8. Montanus despaired, and hanged himself. Niceph. Centur. Magdeburg. etc.

9. The Emperor Valens, an Arian Heretic, was burnt by the Goths in Village,
leaving no Successor behind him. Sozom.

10. Benchocab, the Famous Pseudo-Messiah, under the Reign of the Emperor
Adrian, who drew many Disciples after him, was himself and all his Followers
slain; called therefore by the Jews, Benc^zby, the Son of a Lie. Eusebius.

11. Heraclius the Emperor, a Monothelite, having raised great Army against his
Enemies, in one Night 50000 of them died, and himself fell presently sick, and
died also. Simps.

12. Constans the Emperor, a Monothelite also, was slain by one of his Servants
in a Bath. Simps.

13. Constantius, a great favourer of the Arian Heresy, died suddenly of an
Apoplexy.

14. Sabinianus, presently after the Death of St. Hierom, denying the
distinction of Persons in the Trinity, wrote a Book for confirmation of his
Heresy, under the Name of St. Hierom: Sylvanus, Bishop of Nazareth, reproving
him sharply for it, do detect his Falsehood, agreed with Sabinianus, that if St.
Hierom did not the next day by some Miracle declare his Falsehood, he would
willingly die; if he did, the other should die. The day came, they went to the
Temple at Jerusalem; multitudes of People followed them, to see the Issue; the
day drew toward an end, and no Miracle appeared: Sylvanus is required to yield
his Neck to the Headsman; he did, and was ready to receive the blow; but
immediately somewhat like St. Hierom appeared, and stayed the blow; and
presently the Head of Sabinianus fell off, and his Carcass tumbled upon, the
Ground. This Mr. Clark, in his Examples. Vol. I. c. 63. tells us out of Cyril,
who (he says) Records it of his own knowledge.

15. Grimoald, King of Lombardy, an Arian, bled to Death. Ibid. viz. ex Clark.

16. Mahomet, that notorious Impostor, died of the Falling Sickness. Ibid.

17. Some Donatists, which cast the Elements of the Lord's Supper to Dogs, were
devoured by Dogs. Simpson.

18. John Duns Scotus, Doctor Subtilis, who obscured the Body of Divinity with
his crabbed, knotty, subtle Questions, and Distinctions, died miserably, being
taken with an Apoplexy, and buried before he was dead, etc.

19. Arminius, a Pelagian (if I may venture to put him into the Catalogue) a
Semi-Pelagian at least, died of a complicated Distemper, Cough, Gout, Ague,
Gripes, Asthma, Obstruction in his Optic Nerves, his left Eye blind, his right
Shoulder swelled, etc. Hist. of the Netherl.

20. Olympius, an Arian, Blaspheming the Trinity in a Bath at Carthage, was
suddenly burnt with three fiery Darts of Lightning. Ibid. ex Paul. Diacon.

21. Anno Christi 1327. Adam Duff, an Irishman, for denying the Incarnation of
Christ, the Purity of the Blessed Virgin, the Truth of Sacred Scriptures, and
the Resurrection of the Dead, as also the Trinity of Persons, was burnt at
Dublin. Camb. Brit. Irel. p. 181.

22. John of Leyden, a Tailor, King of the Anabaptists in Germany, presently
after his Coronation, invites 4000 Men and Women to a Feast, and between the
First and Second Course accuses a Man of High Treason, cuts off his Head,
returns merry to Supper, and after Supper with the same Bloody Hands
Administers the Lord's Supper. He and his Courtiers continuing to Feast (though a
great Famine was then in the City, viz. Munster) one of his Fifteen Wives, for
saying, She thought God was not pleased with their Feasting, when others, pined
with Hunger, died in the streets, was brought into the Marketplace, and her
Head cut off, and his other Wives commanded to Sing, and give Praise for it to
their Heavenly Father. Hist. Anabapt. Within the space of Two Years, John of
Leyden, and his Consul Knipperdoling, were tied to a Stake, and together with
their great Prophet, and their Flesh torn off with hot Pincers; and being
slain, had their Bodies put into Iron Cages, and hanged on the Steeple in St.
Lambert. Sleid. Comment. l. 10.

23. Thomas Muncer, another of the Tribe, was put to the Rack by George, Duke
of Saxony, where he roared most fearfully, and at last had his Head cut off,
and set upon a Pole in the Fields. Ibid.

24. Three Hundred Anabaptists, that fell upon a Monastery in Friesland, and
rifled it, were most of them either killed by the Ruins of the Monastery, or
put to Death by the Hangman. Ibid.

25. Michael Servetus, a Spanish Arian, was burnt at Geneva, 1551. For which
Calvin is blamed, as writing to the Magistrates, and pushing them on to do it.

26. Priscillian, for confounding the Persons of the Trinity, asserting Man's
Soul to be of the same Essence with God, pleading for Lying and Perjury, as
Lawful in Persecution, was Executed at Trevers. Clark's Exampl. Vol. I. c. 63.

27. The first Generation of Adamites in Bohemia, for going naked, and lying
promiscuously one with another, were slain by Zisca. Claver. Hist. Mund.

28. Anno Christi 1647. One Quarterman, then Marshal of the City of London,
affirmed, there was no more Holiness in the Scripture, than in a Dog's Tail,
and within a few days after was smitten with a violent Disease, whereof he died
presently. Clark's Examp. Vol. I. c. 63.

29. The same Year certain Sectaries in Yorkshire, pretending a Divine
Revelation to Sacrifice to God certain Creatures, and among the rest their aged
Mother (whom they slew accordingly) persuading her that she should rise again
the third day, were hanged at York. Ibid.

30. Anno 1648. A Sectarian Preacher, Gunne by Name, in Southwark; had lived in
Adultery with another Man's Wife for about Nine Years, and afterward lay with
one Green's Widow; but at last grew Raving Mad, and murdered himself. Ibid.

31 Bolton, one that by Separation made the first Schism here in England,
first, made a Recantation at Paul's Cross, and being still dogged with a
desperate Remorse, hanged himself. Baily's Disswasive, p. 13. etc. Robins.
Justif. etc.

32. 1647. Some She-Anabaptists at Newbery pretended to strange Revelations;
and one had very strange Fits, the like was seldom seen; she gave out, that
such a Night she should be taken up into Heaven; the Night came, People
assembled, the Women took their leave of her with Tears, expecting her
Ascension: 'Twas a Moon shiny Night, and a Cloud by chance covering the face of
the Moon, they all cry out, Behold, he come in the Clouds. The Cloud vanished
and Flock of Wind Geese appear a good way off; they cry out again, He comes, he
comes! But when the Wild Geese were gone, these tame, silly Women return home
again as wise as they came, having made themselves a ridiculous Spectacle to
may. Ibid.

33. Anno 1611. One Bartholomew Legate in London, for denying the Divinity of
our Savior (whom me confessed to King James, he had not prayed to for Seven
Years together) was burnt in Smithfield, Fuller's Eccl. Hist. p. 63.

34. The same Year, Edw. Whightman, for Ten abominable Heresies, was burnt at
Litchfield. Ibid.

35. Anno 1653. John Gilpin of Kendal in Westmorland; for joining himself with
the Quakers, began to quake, howl, and cry out terribly, was by the Devil drawn
out of his Chair, thrown upon the Ground all Night, tempted to cut his own
Throat, in hopes of Eternal Life; but at last by the Grace of God recovered out
of this Snare of the Devil. Attested by the Mayor and Minister, etc. of Kendal.

36 William Facy, Pastor of the Anabaptists at or near Tiverton in Devonshire,
after Suspension for his disorderly Life, and readmission, feigned himself Mad,
pretends to cut his Throat, and calls for a Basin to receive the Blood; offers
to cast his Child into the Fire, and the Child afterward sicken'd and died.
The Leper cleansed, p. 17. For this Act he was suspended again. Ibid.

37. James Naylor, a Blasphemous Quaker, was burnt in the Tongue at Bristol.

38. Jo. Collins, and Tho. Reeve, Ranters, for calling a Cup of Ale the Blood
of Christ, and saying, They could go into the House of Office, and make a God
every Morning, etc. were in the Old-Bailey Fined, and Sentenced to Six Months
Imprisonment. Tho. Kendal in Drury Lane, affirming there was no God or Hell;
fell down dead. See the Trials, Printed by B. Alsop, 1651. Muggleton was
condemned to the Pillory, and ^ined 500 l. 1676.

CHAP. CXXXIX. Divine Judgments upon Wizards, Witches, and Charmers, etc.
IT is worthy of a very serious Consideration, That those very People, who
leave the God of Israel, and think to better themselves by Idols, or Corrivals,
and a superstitious Adbesion to them, (either the World, or the Devil, or any
other Pretender) never got any thing by such Methods, but to be deluded in
their Hopes, and sink under the Vanity of their foolish and wicked Curiosity.
When did we ever see a Wizard, Rich! Or a Curioso, Prosperous? (I mean a
Curioso in the worst sense.) Or an Atheist make a Comfortable Exit out of the
World? I grant, sometimes by the Leave of him that Rules the World, and the
Industry of Satan, present Advantages may possibly accrue, and do too often, to
be Worshippers of Mammon; but generally when the Blot is great, and the
Criminal notorious, God looks upon it as conducive to his Honor, and
necessary, in point of Justice and Wisdom, to strike openly, and leave a Mark
of Ignominy upon such gross Delinquents. Read what follows, and ye will agree
with me in judgment.

1. Concerning John Faustus, Dr. Dee, and Edward Kelley, etc. See the Chapter
of Divine Judgments upon Curiosity.

2. A. C. 1553. Two Women were taken, who with a Tempest, Hail, and Frost,
designed to destroy all the Corn in the Country; but being found cutting a
Neighbor's Child in pieces, to boil in a Cauldron, in order to the making of a
Magical Ointment for the purpose, were put to Death. Beard's Theatr. p. 419.

3. At Ihena in Germany, (or near it,) An. 1558. a Magician that had used to
cure Diseases, by the Composition of Herbs, was for poisoning of a Carpenter
(whom he had a Quarrel with a little before) examined before the Senate,
confessed the Murder, and was burnt at a Stake. Ibid.

4. Cleomandes, a Conjurer in Rome, for practicing Death upon many little
Children, was sought for by the Parents; but having shut himself up close in a
Coffer, and they breaking it open, the Devil carried him away. Plutarch.

5. Piso being accused by Tiberius, for bewitching Germanicus to Death, cut his
own Throat. Tacit. Ann.

6. One Otto, a Dane, who by his Devilish Art, used to raise Storms, was at
last, by one more Expert, drowned in the Seas himself.

7. A Conjurer in Saltzburg, attempting to draw all the Serpents in the Country
into a Ditch, and feed them there, was by the old Serpent, the Devil, drawn in
amongst them, and perished miserably. Clarks Exampl. Vol. I. c. 8.

8. The Governor of Mascon, a great Magician, as he was at Dinner with some
Company, was snatched away by the Devil, hoisted up into the Air, and carried
three times about the Town, to the great Astonishment of the Inhabitants, to
whom he cried for help, but all in vain. Ibid. Ex Hug. de Clun.

An. 1437. Sir Giles Britain, Hight-Constable of France, having murdered above
160 Infants, and Women great with Child, and wrote Conjuring-Books with their
Blood, (which was proved against him) was adjudged to be hanged, and burnt to
Death, Ibid. p. 37.

10. Picus Mirandula writes, That in his time a great Conjurer promised a
certain Prince, that he would present to him the Siege of Troy, with Hercules
and Achilles fighting together, as when alive; but being at his Conjurations,
the Devil carried him away, that he was never heard of after. Ibid.

11. The Lord of Orve, in Lorrain, used to feast Noblemen splendidly, but
fraudulently, with all sorts of Dainties, so that at parting they found their
Stomachs empty, having eat nothing, was often seen scourged by a Monkey,
sometimes lying along upon his Table, and begging of the Monkey Let me alone,
Will thou always torment me at this rate? At last in great Misery and Beggary,
he was forced to get into an Hospital in Paris, where he ended his wretched
Life. Ibid.

12. An. 1530. A Popish Priest digging for a Treasure in a hollow Pit of the
City, which the Devil had directed him to, found at last a Coffer with a black
Dog lying by it; which whilst he was looking upon, the Earth fell upon him, and
rushed him to death. Wierus.

13. Cornelius Agrippa, a great Necromancer, always attended with a familiar
Spirit like a black Dog; his End approaching, he takes off the enchanted Collar
from the Dog's Neck, saying, Be gone, thou cursed Beast! thou have utterly
undone me! After which, the Dog vanished, and he died miserably. Clark. ex
Paul. Jovio.

14. An. 1578. Simon Pembroke, of St. George's Parish, in London, being
suspected for a Conjurer, and one that used to erect Figures, being questioned
for it, as he was before the Judge, he fell down and died, having some
Conjuring-Books found about him. Clark. Ibid.

15. A Sicilian, called Lyodor, for using Charms and Spells, transforming Men
into Beasts, and other Shapes, doing Mischief to the People of Catania,
charming himself out of the Hangman's Hands, being carried in the Air to
Constantinople, and back again, etc. was at last, by Leo Bishop of Catania,
seized before all the People, (who admired him,) and burnt alive in a hot
Furnace. Schot. Phil. Curios. etc.

16. Ann. Bodenham, of Fisherton-Anger, near Salisbury, a Witch, for predicting
things to come, helping People to stolen Goods, etc. was executed at Salisbury,
1653. Edm. Bowyer's Narrative.

17. An. 1642. One Mother Jackson, for bewitching one Mary Glover, in
Thames Street, a Merchant's Daughter, was arraigned and condemned at Newgate.

18. John Contius, an Alderman of Pentich, in Silesia, near 60 Years of Age,
being invited to the Mayor's Supper, (after the ending of a certain
Controversy between some Waggoners and a Merchant) gets leave first to go
home, to order some Concerns, leaving this Sentence behind him,

It Is good to be Merry whilst we may,
For Mischiefs grow fast enough every Day.
Going home, and looking upon the Hoof of one of his Geldings, he was so
struck, that he complained he was all on fire! fell sick, complained loudly and
despairingly of his Sins, but would have no Divine to come to him. The Night he
died, a Black Cat opened the Casement with her Nails, scratched his Face, and
Bolster, and so vanishing away, he breathed his last: A violent Storm of Wind
arose; a Spirit, in the shape of Contius, appeared in the Town, that would have
ravish d a Woman. After his Burial, his Ghost was very troublesome in the Town,
to many People, but especially to the Parson of the Parish, who penned this
Narrative, etc. Weinrich, p. 212.

19. Eliz. Mudy, for bewitching her Mistress to Death, at Hadington in
Scotland; the Mistress, Margaret Kirkwood, being then hanging her self in her
Chamber, whilst the Maid was observed at Church, to number upon her Fingers,
50, or 51, and crying aloud, in the presence of them all, Now the Turn is done;
was seized on Suspicion, confessed the Witchcraft, and was burned for the same.
Invis. World. p. 200.

It would be endless to give a particular Catalogue of all in England,
Scotland, Ireland, France, Spain, Germany, Denmark, New England, etc. that have
been arraigned and executed for Witchcraft. Nor is it difficult to believe,
that those who take their own time to apply themselves to the Devil, for his
Assistance, shall find him ready enough to call upon them, in his time; for a
nearer and more terrible Acquaintance.

20. In the Year, 1645. there was a notable Discovery of Witches in Essex, viz.
Elizabeth Clark, Ann West, and Rebecca her Daughter, Rose Hallybread, Joyce
Boanes, Susanna Cock, (whose Mother, Margery Stoakes, upon her Death bed, had,
for her Good, commended two Imps to her,) as also Elizabeth Weed of
Huntington-shire, John Winnick, of the same County, etc. all brought to the
Gallows, after a legal Trial. Inform. of Witches, etc. p. 6.

21. An. 1669 current, At Mokra in Sweedland, Lords Commissioners being sent
down by the King, on purpose to make Search and Examination, there were found
70 Persons (a goodly knot!) who were engaged in Witchery, in that one Village;
23 of which freely confessed their Crimes, and were contented to die; the
others pleading not Guilty, were sent to Fahluna, where most of them were
afterward executed: Fifteen Children also, who confessed as the rest did, died
as the rest; 36 Children, between 9 and 16 Years of Age, ran the Gantlet; 20
more, who were less, were condemned to be lashed with Rods, three Sundays
together, at the Church-door; and the aforesaid 36, were also doomed to be
lashed this way, once a Week, for a whole Year together. The Number of the
seduced Children was about 300. This is taken out of the public Register of
the Lords Commissioners.

Concerning the late Confederacy of Witches in New England, I have spoke
already in this Book; and have no more to add, but this, That if they be
Accursed who put their Trust in Man, they cannot certainly be expected to be
Happy, that put their Trust in Devils.

CHAP. CXL. Divine Judgments upon Backsliders, and Apostates.
TO show that the Almighty God takes it mighty ill from those People that fall
back from the Truth of the Gospel, after they have made Profession of it, there
needs no more Evidence to prove it, than the many Precepts and Cautions he has
given us against Apostasy, and the frequent Exhortations in Sacred Scripture to
Perseverance and Continuance in the Faith: The Curses threatened to those that
Relapse, and make shipwreck of a Good Conscience, add still more strength to
the Evidence; but the Execution of his Menaces puts it more out of doubt yet.
St. Peter's weeping bitterly, and turning back again in a penitential way;
Judas apostatizing, and dying in despair; the poor Jewish Church living under a
dismal Eclipse of the Divine Favor, to this Day, are Examples for our
Instruction. To lay down a few more:

1. Mr. Bilny, An. 1529. abjured the Protestant Doctrine, and submitted to the
Powers that then were; but fell into such Terrors of Conscience, that he was
near the point of utter Despair, and so continued a whole Year, his Friends all
the time endeavoring to comfort him, but in vain. At last, through God's
Mercy, he found Comfort, and presently resolved to lay down his Life for that
Truth which he had before renounced. Clark's Eccl. Hist. p. 163.

2. Lucian, who had made Profession of Religion, in the Time of Trajan,
afterward fell from it, became a Railer against it, and at last was torn in
pieces by Dogs. Suidas.

3. Porphyry being reproved for his Faults by some Christians, renounced the
Profession, wrote against the Religion, and died in despair. Id.

4. Origin being persuaded, rather to offer Incense to Idols, than be defiled
by an ugly Black-a-moor, lost the Peace of his Conscience.

5. Tamerus being seduced from the Reformed Religion by his Brother, a Papist,
fell into despair, and hanged himself. Theat. Hist.

6. 1569. One Henry Smith, in the Middle Temple, turning Papist, hanged himself
in his own Chamber. Acts and Mon.

7. Latomus of Lovain, once a Professor of the Gospel, afterward an Apostate,
made an Oration at Brussels before the Emperor Charles V. against Luther, and
his Followers, but so foolishly, that he was laughed to scorn; afterward, at
Lovain, in a public Lecture, he fell into an open Frenzy, despairing and
blaspheming, crying out continually, that he was damned etc. Senercleus in
Epist. ante Hist. de morte Diazii.

8. Arnold Bomelius, a Student of Lovain, and Favourer of the Gospel, (a Man of
good Parts,) apostatizing to Popery, fell into great Trouble of Mind, and
thence into Depsair; and afterward walking into the Fields with some Scholars,
he sat down by a Spring side, drew out a Dagger, and stabbed himself. Acts and
Mon.

9. Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, cried out on his Deathbed, That he
had denied his Master with Peter, but not repented with Peter; and so, stinking
above Ground, ended his wretched Life. Clark's Exampl. Vol. I. c. 6.

10. Mr. West, Chaplain to Bishop Ridley, in King Edward the Sixth's Reign,
turning Papist in Queeh Mary's, fell into such Torment of Conscience, that he
pined away and died. Acts and Mon.

11. Cardinal Pool was a Favourer of the Truth, afterward a Persecutor, but
within two or three Days after Queen Mary's death, himself died in Terror.
Clark's Exampl. Vol. I. c. 6.

12. Peter Castellan, Bishop of Maston, an Apostate from the Reformed Religion,
fell into a strange Disease; one half of his Body burning like Fire, and the
other cold as Ice; and in this case, with horrible Groans and Cries, died. Ibid.

13. Henry the Fourth, King of France, after he came to the Crown, turned from
Protestant to Papist, from Bonus Orbi to Orbus Boni, though still Borbonius,
was first stabbed in the Tongue by John Castile, at last in his Breast by
Ravilliac, and so died. Fren. Hist.

14. One Richard Denson, a Smith, in King Edward the Sixth's Days, encouraged a
young Man, then in Prison, to suffer: But for my part, says he, I cannot burn.
But though he could not for his Religion, he was afterward burnt for his
Apostasy, by occasion of a Fire in his Shop and House. Clark's Exampl. Vol. I.
c. 6.

15. Francis Spira is a sad Example of God's Judgment in such Cases; but I have
mentioned him elsewhere.

16. Poor Bishop Jewel was forced to spend a Recantation-Sermon beyond Sea, and
many a Prayer and Teat, and at last sacrificed his Right Hand, for but
tampering a little this way. It Is ill jesting with God, and our own
Consciences, who will neither of them be mocked.

17. Berengarius tried this; and therefore, though he retracted his Doctrine
against Transubstantiation, he relapsed again; and retracted, and relapsed
again; or rather returned, and repented, finding no Peace for his Conscience,
whilst he had not Truth in his Possesston.

CHAP. CXLI. Great Effects wrought by weak means.
IT is pleasant to observe how God delights to show his Power, by using weak
and contemptible Instruments, and to werk ^^eat Effects by little secondary
Causes; to make a World by speaking a Word or two; to punish and subdue a
slout-hearted Pharaoh, with Frogs, and Lice, and Locusts, and Darkness; to
baffle a Giant-like People, in Canaan, with a handful of Men; to make the Walls
of Jericho fall down, and the Peoples Hearts quail, with only a Shout, and the
Noise of Rams Horns; to overthrow the two great Religions of the World,
Judaisin and Pagan Idolatry, with the Foolishness of Preaching, and the Piety
and Patience of Confessors and Martyrs; to turn Sinners Thoughts into a Case of
Knives, or a Nest of Wasps, or Serpents, to sting and torment them with.

1. The Duke of Arcos, Viceroy of Naples, under the King of Spain, having
imposed many Gabels (or Taxes) both vendible and eatable, at last imposed a
Gabel upon Fruit also, which more irritated and offended that Multitude, than
all the former: Whereupon, by the public Cries and Lamentations of Men and
Women, they daily solicited the Viceroy, as he passed through the Marketplace,
to ease them of the said Burden; they used also the Mediation of others, and
not prevailing, they were ready to raise a Mutiny: Which so affrighted the
Viceroy, that he promised quite to take off the said Gabel; but delaying to do
it, some of the enraged People, one Night, but fire to some Powder in the
Marketplace, where the said Gabel was exacted, and blew it up. There were also
from Day to Day bitter Invectives, and fiery Protests against the public
Officers, fixed up in sundry Places of the City. The Viceroy being alarmed
thereby, often assembled the six Precincts of the City, to consult about this
Business: But they were divided; some persuading him to ease and please the
People, others advising him to Repair the Toll-house that was burnt down, and
continue the Gabel, saying, That they were but a few Tatterdemallions that had
made that Noise: Besides, diverse of the great Men, and Merchants of the City,
had advanced upon the said Gabel above 600000 Crowns, and were to pay 85000
Crowns of annual Rent.

This was noised abroad; and the Report went, That if this Tax was taken off,
there would be a new one set upon ^orn and Wine: Whereupon the enraged People
protested, That they would never endure the same; and whilst these Discontents
were hot, July 17. 1647. this Occasion suddenly presented it self.

A young Man, of about 24 Years old, being spritely, pleasant, and of a middle
stature, in Linen-Slops, Blew Wastcoat, and barefoot, with a Mariner's Cap on
his Head, happened to be in the Marketplace: His Profession was to angle for
little Fishes, as also to buy Fish, and carry them about to sell: He was
vulgarly called Massianello, and being naturally Crafty, he observed the
general Murmurings of the People, and so went up and down to the Fruiterers
Shops, and advised them, That meeting together, the next Day, in the
Marketplace, they should tell the Country Fruiterers, That they would buy no
more gabelled Fruit. Upon this, he listed many Boys under him, to the number of
Two Thousand, giving every one of them a little Cane in their Hand. Against a
great Festival that was approaching, a Feast that used to be made by the Boys,
and meaner fort of People, in the Marketplace; he gathered to the number of
Fifty Thousand. Upon this Success, the number of People increased, exclaiming
aloud against their Oppressions, protesting to pay no more Gabel, crying out,
Let the King of Spain live, and let the ill Government die. Massianello being
thus attended with his Boys, and an infinite Company of loose People, who were
now armed with Pikes, and Partisans, he leaped up on a Table, and with a loud
Voice cried, Be merry, my dear Companions, and give God Thanks, that the Hour
of your Redemption draws near: This poor barefooted Fellow, as another Moses,
who freed the Israelites from Pharaoh's Rod, shall redeem you from all Gab^ls.
Peter, a Fisherman, redeemed with his Voice, Rome, and with it all the World,
from Satan's Slavery, to the Liberty of Christ: Now another Fisherman, which
is Massianello, shall release Naples, and with it a whole Kingdom, from the
Tyranny of Gabels, etc. Nor to effect this, do I care a Rush to be torn in
pieces, and to be dragged up and down the Gutters of Naples; let all the Blood
in my Body spin out of these Veins; let my Head skip from my Shoulders by a
fatal Steel, and be pearched in this Marketplace on a Pole; yet I shall die
contentedly and gloriously: It will be Honor enough to me, to think, that my
Blood and Life perish in so glorious a Cause. In short, he afterward brought
the Viceroy to an Agreement; but after some time, falling into a Frenzy, by
either Excess of Wine, or Watching and Cares, died. See more in the printed
Narrative, or Clark 's Examples.

2. The Inhabitants of Myons, a City of Jonia, were so pestered with Gnats,
which were bred in a muddy Pond near them, that they were constrained thereupon
to leave the City, and fly to Milerum. This I read many Years ago, when a
Student in the University, but took no care then to Record my Author.

3. Luther, by his Preaching and Disputing, baffled the Arguments, Arts, and
Power, of two very potent Enemies, the Pope, and Emperor; and procured a happy
Reformation in the Church.

4. Francis Spira was punished in this World for his Apostasy, with the keen
Reflections of a guilty Conscience; and many others besides. Our own Thoughts
may be sufficient to make a Hell of.

5. Some have been convicted of Murder by the Barking of a Dog, the Flight of
Birds, the Shaking of Leaves. Anacreon was choked with a Grape-stone; Adrian
with a Gnat; others with the Excrements of Birds flying over their Heads. An
Acquaintance of mine dislocated her Thigh Bone, with only turning a Custard at
the Fire, and died upon it.

7. This very Year, a Woman, near Hanmer, going over a Hedge, was hung to Death
with her Head-string, catching accidentally in the Sticks; as was related to me
by Mr. Henry of Broad-oak, in Flintshire.

CHAP. CXLII. Remarkable Passages relating to Sickness, Death, and Funerals.
WHat was long since decreed in Heaven, God has sent Warrants to execute on
Earth, Semel mori, For us once to die. Then be acquainted with Death betimes;
for through acquaintance, Death will lose his Horror; like unto an ill Face,
though it be as formidable as a Monster, yet often viewing will make it
familiar, and free it from distaste: Walk every day, with Joseph, a turn or two
in thy Garden with Death, and thou shall be well acquainted with the Face of
Death, but shall never feel the Sting of Death: Death is black, but comely.
Philostrates lived Seven Years in his Tomb, that he might be acquainted with
it, against his Bones came to lie in it. Some Philosophers have been so wrapped
in this Contemplation of Death, and Immortality, that they discourse so
familiarly and pleasingly of it, as if a fair Death were to be prefer^^ (...) a
pleasant Life.

1. King Xerxes standing on a Mountain, and having many Hundred thousand of his
Soldiers standing in the Plain, fell a weeping, to think upon it, how in a few
Years he, and all those gallant valiant Men must die. Adam, he lived 930 Years,
and he died. Enoch, he lived 965 Years, and he died. Methusalem lived 967
Years, and he died. Oh the longest Day has its Night, and in the end Man must
die. Maximilian the Emperor made his Coffin always to be carried along with
him, to this end, that his high Dignity might not make him forget his
Mortality. Joseph the Jew, in his best Health, made his Stone Coffin be cut out
in his Garden, to put him in mind of his Ego abeo, I go hence. The Persians,
they buried their dead in their Houses, to put the whole Household in mind of
the same Lot, Semel mori, once to die. Simonides, when commanded to give the
most wholesome Rule to live well, willed the Lacedoemonian Prince ever to bear
in mind, Se tempore brevi moriturum, E're long he must die. I have read of a
sort of People that used dead Men's Bones for Money; and the more they have,
they are counted the more Rich: Herein consists my richest Treasure, to bear
that about me that will make me all my Life remember my End. Great Sultan
Saladin, Lord of many Nations and Languages, commanded upon his Deathbed, that
one should carry upon a Spear's point, through all his Camp, the Flag of Death,
and to proclaim for all his Wealth, Saladin has naught left, but this
Winding Sheet, An assured Ensign of Death triumphing over all the Sons of Adam.
I uncloath my self every Night, I put off all but what may put me in mind of my
Winding Sheet. Anaxagoras having Word brought him, his only Son was dead; his
Answer was, Scio me genuisse mortalem, I know he was born to die. Philip of
Macedon gave a Boy a Pension, every Morning to say to him, Philippe, memento te
hominem esse; Philip, remember thou art a Man, and therefore must die. When I
was a young Man, says Seneca, my care was to live well; I then practiced the
Art of Well-living: When Age came upon me, I then studied the Art of Dying
well. Platonius in Stobelas, It Is not enough, says he, to spend the present
Day well, unless thou spendest it so as if it were to be thy last. Caesar
Borgias being sick to Death, said, When I lived, I provided for every thing,
but Death; now I must die, and am unprovided to die. A Man, says Luther, lives
Forty Years before he knows himself to be a Fool; and by that time he sees his
Folly, his Life is finished: So Men die before they begin to live. When dying,
then sin if you can, said Picus Mirandula. In Sardis there grew an Herb, called
Appium Sardis, that would make a Man lie laughing when he was deadly sick: Such
is the Operation of Sin: Beware therefore of this [ Risus Sardonicus] Laughter
of Sardis. Commonly good Men are best at last, even when they are dying. It was
a Speech worthy the Commendation, and frequent Remembrance of so divine a
Bishop as Augustine, which is reported of an aged Father, in his time; who,
when his Friends comforted him on his Sick Bed, and told him, they hoped he
should recover; answered, If I shall not die at all, well; but if ever, why not
now? Surely it is Folly, what we must do, to do unwillingly. I will never think
my Soul in a good case, so long as I am loath to think of dying. There is no
Spectacle in the World so profitable, or more terrible, than to behold a dying
Man; to stand by, and see a Man dismanned. Curiously did thou make me in the
lowest part of the earth, says David: But to see those Elements which
compounded, made the Body; to see them divided, and the Man dissolved, is a
rueful sight. Every dying Man carries Heaven and Earth wrapped up in his Bosom,
and at this time each part returns homeward. Certainly, Death has great
dependency on the course of Man's Life, and Life it self is as frail as the
Body which it animates. Augustus Caesar accounted that to be the best Death
which is quick and unexpected, and which beats not at our doors by any painful
Sickness. So often as he heard of a Man that had a quick passage, with little
sense of pain, he wished for himself that Euthanesie: While he lived, he used
to set himself between his two Friends, Groans and Tears: When he died, he
called for his Looking-glass, commanded to have his Hair and Beard kembed, his
rivelled Cheeks smoothed up; then asking his Friends, if he acted his part
well? when they answered, Yes; Why then, says he, do you not all clap your
hands for me? Happy is he, who always, and in every place, so lives, as to
spend his every last moment of Light, as if Day were never to return. Epictetus
most wisely teaching this; Death, says he, and Banishment, and all that we
look upon as Evils, let them be daily set before thy Eyes; but of all most
chiefly Death: So shall thou think upon nothing that is too low, nor too
ardently covet any thing. The Day-Lily is a Flower, whose Beauty perishes in a
Day. There is also a Bird haunts the River Hypanis, called Haemorobios, or the
Bird of one Day; ending its Life the same Day that it begins; dying with the
dying Sun, and traveling through the Ages of Childhood, Youth, and Old Age, in
one Day: In the Morning it is hatched, at Noon it flourishes, in the Evening it
grows old and dies: But this is more to be wondered at in that winged Creature,
that it makes no less Provision for one little Day, than if it were to live the
Age of a Crow, or a Raven. To this little Animal the Life of Man is most fitly
to be compared: It inhabits by the River of Gliding Time; but more fleet than
either Bird or Arrow: And often only one Day determines all its Pomp, oft-times
an Hour, and as often a Moment. We ambitiously desire great Names; and without
any prejudice to our Ears, we hear the Titles of Magnificent, most Illustrious,
Happy, Pious, Most Potent, Most August, Most Invincible, the Best, the
Greatest. What can we do more, unless we should imitate Sapor, King of the
Persians, in an Epistle, which he thus began to Constantine the Emperor: Sapor
King of Kings, Companion of the Stars, and Brother to the Sun and Moon, to
Constantine my Brother, wishes Health. Or rather, let us borrow Names from the
Bisnagentian King, who was wont to be saluted, The Bridegroom of Good Luck, the
God of great Provinces, the King of most potent Kings, Lord of all the Armies
of Horse, the Master and Teacher of those that understand not how to speak,
Emperor over three Emperors, Conqueror of whatever he saw, Preserver of his
Conquests, whom Eight Parts of the World fear; a Knight to whom there is none
to be compared, a Vanquisher of every one that boasts in Strength, the Hunter
of Elephants, Lord of the East, South, North, West, and Sea. All this Peter
Irricus relates. Are here Titles enough? If you please, let us add a Series of
Eulogies, which the Sultan sets before his Epistles, in this order: Omnipotent
Salmander before Carthage, Lord of Jordan, Lord of the East, Lord of Bethlehem,
Lord of Paradise, Prefect of Hell, Supremest Emperor of Constantinople, Lord
of the Dry Fig, the Lord by whom the Sun and Moon steer their course, Protector
of John the first Priest, Emperor, King of Kings, Lord of the Christians, Jews,
Turks, the God's Friend. In a Style not much unlike to this, Solomon wrote to
our Caesar: To Charles the Fifth, always most August Emperor, Solomon his
Contemporary, sprung from the Victorious and most Noble Family of the Ottomans,
Emperor of Trebizond and Constantinople, Lord of the World, and Conqueror of
the Earth, etc. What would ye have more? O truly Splendid Misery! O Ashes and
Nothing! O Vanity of Vanity! Most shameful is that Ignorance, when Man forgets
himself to be Man. Would thou have an Abstract, an Epitome of all Humane
Life? Daniel the Archbishop and Elector of Mentz in Germany, in a little Book
of Prayers, wrote with his own Hand these Precepts of Living: 1. Life short. 2.
Beauty deceitful. 3. Money flies away. 4. Empire envied. 5. War pernicious. 6.
Victory doubtful. 7. Friendship fallacious. 8. Old Age miserable. 9. Death
happiness. 10. Wisdom, Fame Eternal. That Heavenly Wisdom that brings us to
Kingdoms never destitute, never to be invaded, eternal. A Nation bordering upon
the Thracians, and in Customs agreeing with them, has this one peculiar to
themselves: That when an Infant is born, the Relations sitting about it,
weeping and wailing enumerate the Miseries which the Child is to endure. On the
other side, when a Man dies, they bury him with Joy and Exultation, recounting
from how many Miseries he is delivered. Deservedly this Nation claims to it
self the Applaute of Wisdom, who celebrate the Birth of Man with Tears, and his
Funeral with Pomp and Gladness. Elegantly answered Lae^ius, that Wise Man, to a
certain Person, saying, I am Sixty Years of Age. Thou call these Sixty,
answered he, which thou have not: Neither what is past, nor what is to come is
thine. We depend upon a point of flying Time, and it is the part of a great
Man, to have been moderate. Plato was of Opinion, that any Man became so much
the wiser, by how much the more lively he considered Death: Therefore he gave
this Law to his Disciples, studious in Philosophy, that when they went a
Journey, they should never cover their Feet; whereby that wise Man insinuated,
that the end of Life was always to be thought on. Nicholas Christophorus
Radzivile, Prince of Poland, affirms, that in Egypt, they who excelled others
in Prudence and Age, were wont to carry the long Bones of dead Men carved out
of Wood or Ebony, show them one to another, and thereby exhort one another to
Contemplation: They also introduce the Remembrance of Death at their Tables,
and conclude their Banquets with this sad Sentence, Memento Mori, Remember to
Die. Caleph, King of the Tartars, in the City of Bagdat, upon a Festival Day,
which they call Ramadan, being resolved to show himself to the People, rode
forth upon a Mule, clad in Vestments, that glistered with Gold, Silver, and
precious Stones; but over his Tulipan he wore a black Veil, signifying that all
his Pomp was one day to be clouded by the shades of Death. Justinian the
Emperor being dead, a Coverlet was thrown over him, wherein were wrought in
Phrygian Work, the Essigies and Figures of the Vanquished Cities and Barbarous
Kings, whom he had overcome. Behold the Image of Death among Pageants,
Scaffolds, Triumphs and Victories. Death plays with Empires, and knocks as well
at the Towers of Kings, as at the Cottages of the Poor. Pope Martin the Fifth
had this Symbol of a speaking Picture, or of silent Poesy. Upon a Funeral
Pile, kindled and ready to burn, lay the Popes Triple Crown, the Cardinals Hat,
the Archbishops Cap, the Emperors Diadem, the Kings Crown, the Ducal Cap and
Sword, with this Motto, Sic omnis gloria Mundi, Thus all the Glory of the
World. I cannot but approve the Answer of a certain Mariner, who being asked
where his Father died? In the Sea, said he. And when the other asked him the
same Question concerning his Grandfather, his Great Grandfather, and his Great
Great Grandfather, the Mariner still returned him the same Answer. Then
inferred the other, And do not thou fear to go to Sea? To which the Seaman
waving a Reply: And where did your Father die? In his Bed, said the other,
where your Father, your Grandfather, and the rest of your Ancestors? They all,
said the other, died in their Beds. Then said the Mariner, And do not you fear
to go to Bed, so Fatal to all your Predecessors? Very Elegantly, and somewhat
above a Sailor's Genius. John, Patriarch of Alexandria, who took his Name from
giving Alms, while he was living and in health, caused his Monument to be
built, but not to be finished, for this Reason, that upon Solemn Days, when he
performed Divine Service, he might be put in mind by some of the Clergy, in
these Terms: Sir, your Monument is yet unfinished; command it to be finished;
for you know not when the Hour may come. When the Emperor of the East was newly
chosen, no Person had liberty to speak to him, before the Stone-cutter had
showed him several sorts of Marble, and asked him, of which his Majesty would
be pleased to have his Monument made. What was the meaning of this, but only to
intimate these Words: O Emperor, exalt not thy self; thou art but a Man, thou
shall die like the meanest of Beggars; therefore so govern thy Kingdom, which
thou art to lose, that thou may gain an Eternal Kingdom. Domitian the
Emperor gave a Banquet to the Chief of the Senate, and the Order of Knighthood,
after this manner: He hung his House all with Mourning; the Roofs, Walls,
Pavements, Seats, were all covered with black, bespeaking nothing but sorrow.
Into this Funeral Dining Room were all the Guests introduced by Night, without
any Attendants: By each was placed a Bier, with every one his Name inscribed
upon it, with such Candles as they were wont to burn in their Monuments. They
that waited were dad in black, and encompassed the Guests with Funeral
Salutations. They supped in the mean time with a deep silence: Domitian in the
mean time began a Discourse relating to nothing but Death and Funerals: While
the Guests in the extremity of Terror were ready to die for fear. What then?
Domitian thought he had given wholesome Admonition to himself and the Senators.

Abraham, that great Person, when he, by the Command of God, had been forced as
a Pilgrim, to wander from place to place, minded nothing more than the Purchase
of a Burying-place, that he would have to be so surely his own, that he might
possess it by all the Right and Law imaginable. For this reason he paid down
the Money demanded of the Seller, Current Money among the Merchants. Nor was it
enough for him, that the Purchase should be publicly made; he required that
all the Inhabitants of the Country should be Witnesses of the Bargain. Whereby
that Person of high Credit intimated, that nothing is more a Man's Property
than his Sepulcher, which he may truly above any thing else call his own;
according to the Example of Abraham, the best of Men always reckoning it among
their chiefest Cares, to take care of their Sephlchres. The Emperor Maximilian
the First, three Years before he died, caused his Coffin, made of Oak, to be
put up in a great Chest, and carried along with him wherever he went; and
provided by his Will, that his Body should be put into it wrapped in Linen,
without any Embalming or Disembowelling, his Nose, Mouth, and Ears only being
filled with Quicklime. What meant that great Personage? Only to have his
Monument always in his sight, to give him this continual Document, Think upon
Death; that it should also further say, wherefore do thou amplify and extol
thy self; wherefore do^t thou possess so much, and covet more? Thee whom so
many Provinces and Kingdoms will not contain, a little Chest must hold. But why
did he put the Lime into those hollow parts? Behold the Spices that Embalmed
him. Maximilian, that thou were great, thy Actions declare, but this more
especially before thy Death. What need I call to mind the Bier of Ablavius, who
being Captain of the Pretorian Bands, a Prince among the Courtiers of
Constantine the Great, an insatiable devourer of Gold, which he thought upon
more than his Tomb. This Person, Constantine taking by the Hand, How long, said
he, Friend, shall we heap up Treasure? And speaking those words, with the Spear
that he held in his Hand, he drew out the form of a Coffin in the Dust, and
then proceeding, Though thou had all the Riches in the World, yet after thou
art dead, a Place or Chest no bigger than this which I have here marked out,
must contain thee; if so large a piece of Ground do come to thy Lot.
Constantine was a Prophet; for Ablavius being cut into bits, had not a piece
left big enough to be buried. The Emperor Charles the Fifth, of Famous Memory,
most piously imitating that Maximili^n whom I have mentioned, long before his
Death withdrew himself of his own accord from Public Affairs, and having
resigned his Cares to his Young and Vigorous Son, shut himself up in the
Monastery of St. Justus in Spain, only with Twelve of his Domestics, applying
himself to Religious Duties. He forbid himself to be called by any other Name
than Charles; and disclaiming with Business the Names of Caesar, and Augustus,
contemned whatever savoured of Honorable Title. This also is farther reported,
that long before the Resignation of his Empire, he caused a Sepulcher to be
made him with all its Funeral Furniture, which was privately carried about with
him wherever he went. This he had five Years by him in all places, even when
he marched against the French to Milan, causing it every Night to be placed in
his Chamber. Some that waited on him imagined the Chest had been full of
Treasure, others full of Ancient Histories; some thought one thing, some
another. But Caesar well knowing what it contained, and wherefore he carried it
about, smiling said, that he carried it with him for the use of a thing which
was most dear to him in the World. Thus Charles continually thought upon Death,
and every day could say, I have lived; rising every day to Heavenly Gain. Many
others have happily imitated Charles the Emperor, who have been used, twice
every day to contemplate their Coffins, the Monument of their Death. Genebald,
Bishop of Laudanum, lay in a Bed made like a Coffin for seven Years together,
all which time he lived a most severe Life. Ida, a Woman of applauded Sanctity,
long before her Death, caused her Coffin to be made, which twice a day she
filled full of Bread and Meat, which she twice a day gave liberally to the
Poor. The study of Virtue is the best Preparation for Death. No Death can
defile Virtue. He easily contemns all things, who always meditates upon this,
That he is to die. I am told of a worthy Person, now living in London, who
keeps his Coffin by him, and has done so for a considerable time. Mrs. Parry,
an Ancient Gentlewoman, kept her Coffin by her several Years; she lived in the
Town of Bergavenny in Wales.

On LIFE.
Life is a Dream, a Bubble, Ice, a Flower, and Glass:
A Fable, Ashes, and the fading Grass;
A Shadow, a small Point, a Voice, a Sound;
A blast of Wind, at length it is nothing found.
Sc. Ambrose having received the News of his Death, when his Friends bewailed
him, and begged of God to grant him a longer space of Life; I have not lived,
as to be ashamed to live among you, neither do I fear to die, because we have a
gracious God. St. Austin, nothing troubled at the News of his Death; He never
shall be great, says he, who thinks it strange, that Stones and Wood fall, and
that Mortals die. St. Chrysostom, a little before his Death, in Exile, wrote to
Innocentius, We have been these three Years in Banishment, exposed to
Pestilence, Famine, continual Incursions, unspeakable Solitude, and continual
Death. But when he was ready to give up the Ghost, he cried out aloud, Glory be
to thee, O God, for all things. Aemylius and Plutarch, at the approach of the
Theban Exile, being reported to the Magistrates of the Thebans, they being in
the midst of their Jollity, took no notice of it. At the same time Letters
being brought to the Chief Magistrate, wherein all the Counsels of the Exiles
were discovered, and delivered to him at the same Banquet, he laid them under
his Cushion, sealed as they were, saying, I deferr serious Business till to
Morrow. But this deferrer of Business, with all his Friends, was that Night
surprised and killed. Thus Death uses to surprise those that delay; while they
deliberate, while they muse, while they deferr, he comes and strikes with his
unlook'd-for Dart. St. Austin, a most faithful Monitor, thus instructs one that
promises, I will live to Morrow: God has promised thee Pardon, but neither God
nor Man has promised thee to Morrow. Sigismund the Second, King of Poland,
because of his perpetual delay and heaviness in weighty Affairs, was called the
King of tomorrow. Such are we certainly, Men of tomorrow; we delay all
things, most willingly also, if we could, to put off Death it self; but the
business of dying admits of no delay, suffers no put-offs. Francis the First,
King of France, being taken by Charles the Fifth, when he had read at Madrid
Charles's Impress upon the Wall, Plus ultra, Farther yet; added thereto, To day
for me, to morrow for thee. The Victor took it not ill; but to show that he
understood it, wrote underneath, I am a Man, there is no Humane Accident but
may befall me. Barlaam the Hermit, an Old Man of Seventy Years, when Jehosaphat
the King asked him, how Old he was? Answered, Forty five; at which when the
King admired. He replied, that he had been absent rom his Studies Twenty five
Years; as if those Years which he had spent upon the Vanity of the World, had
been quite lost. Sir Tho. Moor, that no Age might delude a Person with the
hopes of a longer Life, gives this Admonition: As he that is carried out of a
Prison to the Gallows, though the way be longer, yet fears not the Gallows the
less, because he comes to it a little the later; and though his Limbs are firm,
his Eyes quick, his Lungs sound, and that he relish his Meat and Drink, yet
this is still his Affliction, that he is upon his Journey. Thus are we all
carried to the Gibbet of Death, we are all upon the way, only parted by some
little Intervals. The Elector of Brandenburg came to Visit Charles the Fifth,
being Sick of the Gout, and advised him to make use of his Physicians. To whom
Charles replied, The best Remedy, in this Disease, is Patience: The complete
Armor of a Sick Man, is Patience; being so guarded, he need fear neither
Sickness, Pain, nor Death: He is Proof against the blows of his Enemies, and
shall certainly overcome; for Patience overcomes all things. St. Austin, Bishop
of Hippo, went to visit another Bishop of his Familiar Acquaintance lying in
Extremity; to whom, as he was lifting up his Hands to Heaven, to signify his
Departure, St. Austin replied, That he was a great support of the Church, and
worthy of a longer Life: To whom the sick Person made this Answer: If never,
'twere another thing; but if at any time, why not now? Thus Sitenus, being
taken by Midas, and asked, what was the best thing could happen to Man? For a
while stood silent. At length, being urged to speak, he answered, That the best
thing, was never to be born, the next, to die the soonest that might be. This I
must not omit, very wonderful, unheard of, and pleasant in the Relation:
Lodowick Cortusius, a Lawyer of Padua, forbid to his Relations all Tears and
Lamentations by his Will: And desired that he might have Harpers, Pipers, and
all sorts of Music at his Funeral, who should partly go before, partly follow
the Corpse, leaving to every one of them a small Sum of Money. His Bier he
ordered to be carried by Twelve Virgins, that being clad in green, were to sing
all the way such Songs as Mirth brought to their remembrance; leaving to each a
certain Sum of Money instead of a Dowry. Thus was he buried in the Church of
St. Sophia in Padua, accompanied with a Hundred Attendants, together with all
the Clergy of the City, excepting those that wore black, for such by his Will
he forbid his Funeral; as it were turning his Funeral-Rites into a
Marriage-Ceremony. He died the 17th. of July 1418. Admirable was the saying of
St. Bernard, Let them bewail their Dead, who deny the Resurrection. They are to
be deplored, who after Death are buried in Hell by the Devils, not they who are
placed in Heaven by the Angels.

Cyrus being about to die, My Son, said he, when I am dead, close up my Body
neither in Silver, nor in any other Metal, but return its own Earth to the
Earth again. His last words were, Be grateful to your Friends, and you will
never want the Power to punish your Enemies. Farewell, my dear Son, and tell
these my Words to your Mother also. Wisely said Theophrastus, upon his
Deathbed, Many fine and pleasant things does Life impose upon us, under the
pretense of Glory, than the love of which there is nothing more vain. Hither
may be referred the saying of Severus the Emperor; I was all things, but
nothing avails. Alexander, after many and great Victories overcome, at length
he fell, not only into his Bed, but into his Tomb, contented with a small
Coffin. Peter Alphonsus reports, That several Philosophers flocked together,
and variously descanted upon the King's Death. One there was that said, Behold,
now four Yards of Ground is enough for him, whom the spacious Earth could not
comprehend before. Another added, Yesterday could Alexander save whom he
pleased from Death, to Day he cannot free himself. Another viewing the Golden
Coffin of the deceased: Yesterday, said he, Alexander heaped up a Treasure of
Gold, now Gold makes a Treasure of Alexander. This was their Learned
Contention, yet all ended in this; Then he fell sick, and died. Lewis, King of
France, gave these his last Admonitions to his Son. Beware, my Son, that thou
never commit any deadly Sin; rather suffer all manner of Torments. First, choose
such about thee as will not be afraid to tell thee what thou art to do, and
what to beware. To thy Parents give all Obedience, Love, and Reverence.
Ferdinand the Great, King of Castile, falling sick of his last Sickness, caused
himself to be carried to the great Church, in all his Royal Robes, where
putting off all his Royal Ornaments, and as it were restoring God his own, he
put on a Hair-Cl^^, and casting himself upon the Ground, with Tears in his
Eyes, Lord, said he, the Kingdom which thou gave me, I return to thee again,
seat me, I beseach thee, in Eternal Light. Charles, King of Sicily, spoke these
words, Oh, the Vain Thoughts of Men! Miserable Creatures, we are delighted with
Honor, heap up Treasure, and neglect Heaven. O the happy Fate of the Poor,
who, content with little, sleep in Tranquillity. What does now my Kingdom, what
do all my Guards avail me? I might have been miserable, without all this Pomp.
Where is now the power and strength of my Empire? The same necessity involves
me, as hampers the meanest Beggar. Of so many Thousands of Clients, Servants,
and Flatterers, there is not one that will or can accompany me to the Tribunal
of God. Go, Mortals, go, and swell your Breasts with great Thoughts; to Day or
to Morrow ye must die. Farewell Earth, would I could say, welcome Heaven.
Dionysius the Areopagite, being condemned to lose his Head, with a Christian
Generosity contemning the Reproaches of the Spectators, Let the last words of
my Lord upon the Cross, said he, be mine in this World; Father, into thy Hands
I commend my Spirit. Basil the Great, lying at the last period of Life, after
he had piously instructed his own Friends, breathed out his Soul with these
last words, Lord, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. Cardan relates of a Man
in Milan, who having in Sixty Years been never without the Walls, yet when the
Duke hearing thereof, sent him peremptory Command, never to go out of the Gates
during Life: He that before had no inclination to do so, yet soon died of Grief
to be denied the Liberty of doing it. Chetwinds Hist. Collections.

The Customs of several Nations in the Burial of their Dead.
Many Persons, 1. Kiss, and kindly Salute their dead Friends and Relations, to
show the natural tenderness and love they had for the deceased; but this Custom
is now quite abolished with us in many places, though this Peactice ought not
to be altogether discommended. 2. As for the usage that is in some Countries,
of washing the Dead, St. Chrysostom tells us, that it was derived at first from
the Person of our Lord and Savior, whose precious Body was washed as soon as
they took it down from the Cross. And we read in the Ninth Chapter of the Acts
of the Apostles, that a Woman of Joppa, called Tabitha, whom St. Peter restored
to Life, had been washed before she was laid out for the Grave. The Indians
burn their Dead. 3. The Custom of Perfuming and Embalming the Corpse, has in
our days been (especially in England) much observed. And indeed the very
reason, why the Primitive Christians were so careful to Perfume the Dead, was,
because they regarded them as so many Members of the Mystical Body of the
Redeemer of the World. Tertullian in his Apology, upbraiding the Heathens with
the vast Expenses of sweet Scents and Perfumes consumed in the Temples, tells
them, that those Odours would be better employed, in Perfuming and Embalming
the Bodies of Christians, and their dear Friends departed. At the Canary
Islands they bury their Dead with a Bottle of Wine standing by them. 4. As
concerning the manner of Apparelling the Dead, all Christians use not the same
Practice; for some do only cover them with a large Winding Sheet, as they do in
France: And others dress them in the very same Clothes they were wont to wear,
as in Italy, and several other places. And others dress them, and lay them in
their Coffin, in a white Shirt, a clean Cap, and sometimes (as a late Act of
Parliament enjoins) in Flannel; this is the Custom in England. The Chinese
always before they bury their Dead (if he was a Married Man) bring him to his
Wife, that so she might first kiss him, and bid him farewell.

The Method that ought to be observed in Funeral Processions, for most Ranks ad
Degrees of Men.
First, Children of the Hospital. Two Conductors. Poor Men. Gentlemen's Servants
in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Gowns. Aldermen in Black. The
Preacher. A Penon of his own Arms, Helm, and Crest. The Coat of Arms. Chief
Mourners. Two Assistants. Aldermen not in Black. Master of the Company, if,
etc. Master of the Hospital. Then all Gentlemen not in Black. Neighbors and
others.

I might here enlarge upon Mourning for, and the Ancient Customs and Manners of
Burying the Dead in all Nations, throughout all the habitable World. The
Ancient Romans did use them that were dead after two manners, and they had two
kinds of Obsequies; the first, and most Ancient, was to cover the dead with
Earth, and to bury them as we do; the other to burn their Bodies, but this
manner did not continue long. Numa Pompilius was the Inventer of Obsequies, and
he instituted a High Priest, who had the Charge. The first Honor which they
used to perform in the Obsequies of Famous Persons, was to commend the Party by
an Oration. Valerius Publicola made a Funeral Oration on the Death, and in the
Praise of Brutus. In like manner Julius Casar, being but Twelve Years old,
commended his Grandfather; and Tiberius, at the Age of Nine Years, praised his
Father. The second Honor was to make Sword players to Fight. Marcus and
Decius, Sons to Junius Brutus, were the first that did practice this, in Honor
of their Father. The third Honor was, to make a Feast of Magnificent
Furnishment. The fourth was a distribution of Meat to all the common People.
And such (a I have said before) as could not be buried with the like, and so
great Pomp (for the Expenses were insupportable) were buried in the Nightime
by the Vespiliones clothed all in white, who carried the dead Body to his
Grave. They had likewise an Order, that within some while after the Obsequies,
they would strew diverse Flowers nd sweet Odours upon the Sepulcher, as the
Roman People did upon the Funeral Monument of Scipio. And also they accustomed
Yearly to Garnish, Deck, and Adorn the Tombs or Graves of the Dead, with
Posies, Crowns, and Garlands of all sorts of Flowers. Husbands (says St. Jerome
ad Pammachium) were wont to strew, spread, or scatter over, and upon the Graves
and Sepulchers of their deceased dear Wives. Violers, Roses, Lilies, Hyacinths,
and diverse Purple Flowers; by which Vxorious Office they did mitigate and
lessen the grief of their Hearts, conceived by the loss of their Loving
Bedfellows. The like expression of Mutual Love Wives showed to their buried
Husbands. Now, above all Flowers in these Ceremonious Observances, the Rose was
in greatest request, and had the sole pre-eminence, as Kirman relates. The
Ancient Ethnicks did hold the springing of Flowers from the Grave of a deceased
Friend, as an Argument of his Happiness; and it was their universal wish, That
the Tomb^stones of their dead Friends might be light unto them; and that a
perpetual Springtide of all kind of fragrant Flowers, might incircle their
verdant Graves. According to this of Persius, Sat. 7.

Dii majorum umbris tenuem and sine pondere terram,
Spirantesque crocos, and in urna perpetuum ver.
Lie Earth light on their Bones, may their Graves bear
Fresh fragrant Flowers; let Springtide still live there.
But to come back again. The Magnificence in burning the Bodies of the Dead,
did far exceed in charges all other kinds of Funeral; for with the Bodies of
Persons of Principal regard (as you may read in the Travels of George Sandys)
they burnt rich Odours, Gold, Jewels, Apparel, Herds of Cattle, Flocks of
Sheep, Horses, Hounds, and sometimes the Concubines and Slaves whom they most
respected, to supply their wants, to serve their delights, and attend upon them
in the lower Shades. With the like Solemnity, or far greater, the Funerals of
Patroclus were performed by Achilles, for with him were burned Oxen, Sheep,
Dogs, Horses, and twelve stout and valiant Sons of Noble Trojans. Achilles
pulls off the Hair off his Head, and casts it into the Flame; and besides
institutes certain Funeral Games to the Honor of his slain Friend, the Glory
of the Greekish Nation, Patroclus, which is recorded by Homer, in the 23d. Book
of his Iliads. They used to quench these Funeral Fires with Red Wine, and
gathering the Bones together, to include them in Urns, which they placed in or
upon some sumptuous rich Monument, erected or that purpose. The Custom of
Burning the dead Bodies continued among the Romans but until the time of the
Antonine Emperors, An. Dom. 200. or thereabouts; then they began to Bury again
in the Earth. Manutius de leg. Romans Fol. 125, 126. They had, at these Burials,
suborned, counterfeit, hired Mourners, which were Women of the loudest Voices,
who betimes in the Morning did meet at appointed Places, and then cried out
mainly; beating of their Breasts, tearing their Hair, their Faces, and
Garments, joining therewith the Prayers of the defunct, from the hour of his
Nativity, unto the hour of his Dissolution; still keeping time with the
Melancholic Music. (This is a Custom observed at this day in some Parts of
Ireland, but above all Nations, the Jews are best skilled in these
Lamentations, being

Fruitful in Tears; Tears that still ready stand
To sally forth, and but expect Command.)
Amongst these Women there was ever an old aged Beldam, called Praefica,
Superintendint above all the rest of the Mourners; who with a loud Voice did
pronounce these words, Ire licet; as much as to say, He must needs depart; and
when the dead Corpse was laid in the Grave, and all Ceremonies finished, she
delivered the last Adieu in this manner; Adieu, Adieu, Adieu, we must follow
thee, according as the course of Nature shall permit us. To Mourn after the
Interrment of our Friends, is a manifest Token of true Love. Our All-Perfect
and Almighty Savior Christ Jesus, wept over the Grave of dead Lazarus (whom he
revived) whereupon the standers by said among themselves, Behold, how he loved
him. The Ancient Romans, before they were Christians, mourned Nine Months, but
being Christians, they used Mourning a whole Year, clothed in black for the
most part, for Women were clothed partly in white, and partly in black,
according to the diversity of Nations. These Examples considered, I observe
that we, in these days, do not weep and mourn at the departure of the Dead, so
much, nor so long, as in Christian Duty we ought. For Husbands can bury their
Wives, and Wives their Husbands, with a few counterfeit Tears, and a sour
Visage, masked and painted over with dissimulation; contracting Second
Marriages, before they have worn out their Mourning Garments. Babilas the
Martyr appointed to be buried with the Bolts and Fetters which he had worn for
Christ. Mr. Barker 's Flores. It was Lewis the Second of France, who when he
was sick, forbad any Man to speak of Death in his Court. Mr. Barker 's Flores.
Abraham, see how he begins to possess the World, by no Land, Pasture, or
Arrable Lordship: The first being is a Grave. So every Christian must make this
Resolution. The first Household Stuff that ever Seleucus brought into Babylon,
was a Sepulchre-stone, a Stone to lay upon him when he was dead, that he kept
in his Garden. Beza says of a Sickness he had at Paris, Morbus iste verae
Sanitatis mihi principium fuit: That Disease was the beginning of my true
Health. And Olevian to the same purpose, of a Sickness he had, said, I have
thereby learned more of Sin and the Majesty of God than I ever knew before. As
also Rivet said, In the space of ten days, since I kept my Bed, I have learned
more of true Divinity, than in the whole course of my Life before. Mr. Barker
's Flores. Socrates the Night before he was to die, would learn Music, because
he would die learning something. Chetwind's Hist. Collections. We can never be
quiet till we have conquered the fear of Death. The sight of Cyrus's Tomb
struck Alexander into a dumps. But when Grace prevails, Death has lost his
Terror. Aristippus told the Mariners, that wondered why he was not as they,
afraid in the Tempest, that the Odds was much, for they feared the Torments due
to a wicked Life, and he expected the Reward of a good one. And it was cold
Comfort that Diogenes gave a lewd Liver, that being banished, complained that
he should die in a Foreign Soil, Be of good cheer, wheresoever thou art, the
way to Hell is the same. Feltham Resolves, p. 42. Queen Ann, the Wife of King
Henry the Eighth, when she was lead to be beheaded in the Tower, espying one of
the King's Privy-Chamber, she called him unto her, and said unto him, Commend
me unto the King, and tell him, he is constant in his course of advancing me;
for from a Private Gentlewoman he made me a Marchioness, from a Marchioness a
Queen, and now that he has left no higher Degree of Worldly Honor for me, he
has made me a Martyr. Baker's Chron. Hen. VIII. Philip King of Macedon,
walking by the Seaside, got a fall, and after he was risen, perceiving the
Impression of his Body upon the Sand, Good God, said he, what a small parcel of
Earth will contain Us, who aspire to the Possession of the whole World? That
Great Man, Hugo Grotius, near his Death professed, That he would gladly give
all his Learning and Honor for the Integrity of a Poor Man in his
Neighborhood, that spent Eight Hours of his Time in Prayer, Eight in Labor,
and Eight in Sleep and other Necessaries; and unto some that applauded his
mavelous Industry, he said, Ah, Vitam perdidi operose nihil Agendo! But unto
some that asked, the best Counsel which a Man of his Attainment could give, he
said, Be serious. sabina, a Roman Matron, being condemned to die for her
Religion, fell in Travel, and cried out: And one said to her, If you cry out
thus now, what will you do when you come to the Stake? She answered, Now I cry
out, because I feel the fruit of Sin; but then I shall be in comfort, as
suffering and dying for my Savior. Mr. Barker 's Flores.

CHAP. CXLIII. The Last words of Dying Men; as also their Last Wills and
Testaments.
WE are apt to make Enquiry after the Last Speeches and Sentiments of Persons,
when they are going out of the World; because we then believe, that their Exes
are open, and their Judgments (...), and they dare net tell a Lie for Fear or
Affection, when they are going to appear before their Judge, and commencing:
state of E^ernily.

The Last Words, so far as we can understand by Records,

1. Of Ignatius, I am God's Corn, I shall be ground to Meal by the Teeth of
Wild Beasts, and he found God's white Bread. Dr. Cave 's Prim. Christ. Clark 's
Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. Of Dionysius Ar^^pag. He with Eyes and Hands lift up to Heaven, said, O
Lord God Almighty, thou only begotten Son, and Holy Spirit; O Sacred Trinity,
which art without beginning, and in whom is no Division; received the Soul of
thy Servant in Peace, who is put to Death for thy Cause and Gospel. Ibid. viz.
Clark 's Marrow, etc.

3. Epiphanius dying, said to his People of Salamia, God bless you, my
Children, for Epiphanius shall see your Face no more in this Life. Ibid.

4. S. Augustine, whose usual wish was, that Christ when he came, might find
him either Praying or Preaching, was accordingly answered; for in the Siege of
Hippo by the Goths, after he had for some Months together continually exercised
himself in Prayers, in the third Month of the Siege he fell sick of a Fever, in
his Sickness breathing forth most Pious Ej^culations, as Vivere renuo, ut
Christo vivam, viz. I refuse to live, that I may live to Christ, etc. and so
died, making no Will, having nothing to bestow, but only Books, which he left
to several Libraries. Aged 76. Anno Christi 430. having been a Minister 40
Years. Ibid.

5. Prosper upon his Deathbed speaking to many of his People, that wept sore,
said, the Life which I have enjoyed, was but given me, upon condition to render
it up again, not grudgingly, but gladly: For me to stay longer here, might seem
better for you, but for me it is better to be dissolved. Ibid. p. 89. And so
praying, and lifting up his Hands before them all, be departed, Anno Christi
466.

6. Bid in his Sickness comforted himself with Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord
loves, be chasteneth, etc. When his Scholars were weeping about him, he said,
in the words of S. Ambrose, Non sic vixi, ut pudeat me inter vos vivere, sed
nec mori timeo, quia bonum Dominum habemus. The time is come, if my Creator
pleases, that being freed from the Flesh, I shall go to him, who made me, when
I was not, out of nothing; I have lived long, and the time of my Dissolution is
approaching, proaching, and my Soul desires to see my Savior Christ in his
Glory. Ibid. p. 101. His Epitaph was, Hac sunt in fossa Bedae -- ( Venerabilis,
put in, as Tradition says, by an Angel) Ossa.

7. S. Bernard in his Sickness wrote this Letter to Arnold, Abbot of Boneval:
We received your Love in Love, and not in Pleasure; for what Pleasure can there
be, where Pain and Bitterness challenges all to it self? Only it is a little
delightful to me to eat nothing. Sleep is departed from me, that Sorrow and
Pain may never depart by the benefit of my Senses lulled asleep: The want of a
Stomach is all that I suffer; only it lacks to be continually refreshed with
some comfortable Liquor: But if I admit more than is meet, it is very grievous
to me. My Feet and Thighs are swollen, as in a Dropsy. And in all these things
(that I may conceal nothing from my Friend, who defires to know the state of
his Friend) the Spirit is willing, but the Flesh weak. Pray unto my Savior,
who desires not the Death of a Sinner; not that he will defer, but guard my
Departure hence with his Angels. Take you care, that my Heel, which is naked of
Merits, he strengthened and defended by your Prayers; that he which lies in
wait, may not find where to fasten his Tooth, and inflict a Wound. Farewell. To
his Monks he said, I am in a Straight, not knowing which to choose, Life or
Death; but leave all to the will of God. Ibid. p. 105.

8. John Husse used these words by way of Prayer, at his suffering Martyrdom:
Land Jesus Christ, assist and help me, that with a constant and patient Mind,
by thy most gracious help, I may bear and suffer this most Cruel and
Ignominious Death (burning, with a tripe Crown of Paper, painted with ugly
Devils, on his Head) whereunto I am condemned for Preaching thy most Holy
Gospel. And when the Fire was kindled, he sung three times with a loud Voice,
Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, have Mercy upon me. And so the Wind
drove the Flame into his Face, and choked him, Ibid. p. 119.

9. Cardinal Woolsey being arrested by the King's Order, breathed out his Soul
in words to this purpose: If I had served the God of Heaven as faithfully as I
did my Master upon Earth, he had not forsaken me in my Old Age, as the other
has done. Lloy's State-worthies, p. 19.

10. Luther dying in his Clymacterical Year, made this his last Prayer: O
Heavenly Father, my Gracious God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou God
of all Consolation, I give thee hearty Thanks, that thou have revealed unto me
thy Son Jesus Christ, whom I believe, whom I profess, whom I love, whom I
glorify; whom the Pope and the wicked Rout do persecute and dishonor: I
beseech thee, Lord Jesus Christ, receive my Soul. O my Heavenly Father, though I
be taken out of this Life, and must lay down this frail Body, yet I certainly
know, that I shall live with thee eternally, and that I cannot be taken out of
thy hands. God so loved the World, etc. Lord, I render up my Spirit into thy
Hands, and come to thee -- And again, Lord, into thy hands I commend my Spirit;
Thou, O God of Truth, have redeemed me. And so as one falling asleep, and
without any bodily Pain as could be discerned, he departed this Life, Feb. 18.
Anno Christi 1548. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 143.

11. Calvin makes this his Last Will -- In the Name of God, Amen. Anno Christi
1564. April 25. I Peter Chenalat, Citizen and Notary of Geneva, do Witness and
Profess, that being sent for by that Reverend Man, John Calvin, Minister of the
Word of God in the Church of Geneva, and a Free Denizen of the same City, who
then truly was sick in Body, but sound in Mind, told me, that his purpose was
to make his Testament, and declare his Last Will, etc. which was this -- In the
Name of the Lord, Amen. I John Calvin, Minister of the Word of God in the
Church of Geneva, oppressed and afflicted with diverse Diseases, so that I
easily think the Lord has appointed shortly to lead me out of this World; I
therefore have determined to make my Testament, and to commit to Writing my
Last Will in this form following. First, I give Thanks to God, that taking pity
of me, whom he created and placed in this World, has delivered me out of the
deep Darkness of Idolatry, into which I was plunged, and that he brought me
into the Light of his Gospel, and made me a partaker of the Doctrine of
Salvation, whereof I was most unworthy: Neither has he only gently and
graciously born with my faults, for which yet I deserved to be rejected by him,
and driven out; but has used toward me so great meekness and mildness, that
he has vouchsafed to use my Labors in Preaching the Truth of his Gospel. And
I Witness and Profess, that I intend to pass the remainder of my Life and
Religion which he has delivered to me by his Gospel, and not to seek any other
Aid or Resuge for Salvation, than his free Adoption, in which alone Salvation
rests: And with all my Heart I embrace the Mercy which he has used toward
me for Jesus Christ's sake, recompensing my Faults with the Merit of his Death
and Passion, that Satisfaction may be made by this means for all my Sins and
Crimes, and the remembrance of them may be blotted out. I witness also, and
profess, that I humbly beg of him, that being washed and cleansed in the Blood
of that most high Redeemer, shed for the sins of Mankind, I may stand at the
Judgment Seat under the Image of my Redeemer. Also I profess, that I have
diligently done my Endeavor, according to the measure of Grace received, and
Bounty which God has used toward me, that I might Preach his Word holily and
purely, both in Sermons, Writings, and Commentaries, and interpret his Holy
Scriptures faithfully. I also witness and profess, That I have used no
Jugglings, no Evil and Sophistical Arts in my Controversies and Disputations,
which I have held with the Enemies of the Gospel; but have exercised my self
heartily and sincerely in maintaining the Truth. But (out alas!) that Study and
Zeal of mine (if it be worthy to be so called) has been so remiss and
languishing, that I confess, innumerable things have been wanting in me to the
well-performing of my Duty; and unless the unmeasurable Bounty of God had been
present, my Studies had been vain and languid. Moreover, I acknowledge, that
unless the same Bounty had been present to me, the Goods of the Mind which God
has given me, would have made me guilty of the greater sin and Slothfulness
before his Judgment Seat. For which causes I witness and profess, that I hope
for no other help for Salvation, but this only, that seeing God is a Father of
Mercy, he showed himself a Father unto me, who acknowledge my self a Miserable
Sinner. As for Other Things; after my Departure out of this Life, I would have
my Body committed to the Earth, in that order and manner which is usual in this
Church and City, till the blessed Day of Resurrection comes. As for that
Slender Patrimony, which God has given me, I determine thus to dispose of it.
Let Anthony Calvin, my most dear Brother, be my Heir; but only for Honour-sake,
let him take before hand, and have to himself, the Silver Charger given me by
Varannius, wherewith I desire him to be contented: For whatsoever things remain
in my Inheritance, I request and commit them to his Faith, that he return them
to his Children when he dies. I bequeath Ten Golden Scutes to the School of
Boys from the same my Brother and Heir. Also so much to Poor Strangers. So much
to Joan, the Daughter of Charles Costan, and of my Kinswoman. But to Samuel and
John, the Sons of my said Brother, I desire 40 Golden Scutes may be given to
them by mine Heir when he dies. To Ann, Susan, and Dorothy his Daughters, 30
Scutes of Gold; but to David their Brother, because of his lightness and
miscarriages, but 25. This is the whole Sum of the whole Patrimony and Goods
which God has given me, so near as I can estimate it, setting a Price upon my
Library, my Movables, and all my Household Goods, with all other my Faculties.
If there be found any thing above, I would have it to be distributed to all
these Children, the Sons and Daughters of my Brother. Neither do I exclude that
David, if he prove a good Husband. If there shall be any surplusage above that
Sum (I believe there will be no great matter, especially when my Debts are
paid) the care thereof I have committed to my said Brother, upon whose Love and
Fidelity I rely. For which cause I will and appoint him to be the Executor of
my Testament, and together with him, the Worshipful Lawrence Normandy, giving
them power to takean Inventory of my Goods, without any more accurate Diligence
of the Court. I also permit them to sell my Movables, that out of the Money
made thereof, they may execute my Will above-written. Dated this 25th. of Apr.
A. C. 1564.

After this Will signed, he made a Speech to the Senators, and another to the
Ministers, both very grave and pathetical; wrote a Letter to Mr. Viret, an old
Friend of his, 80 Years of Age, to prevent his Visiting of him, concluding
thus: I would not have you to weary your self for my sake: I hardly draw my
Breath, and I expect daily when it will fail me wholly. It is enough, that I
live and die to Christ, who is gain to his, both in Life and Death. Again,
Farewell. May 11th. 1564. On May 27th. after much short breathing, and sighing,
and those Words frequently uttered, How long! Lord, how long! about Sun setting
he fell asleep. Ibid. p. 312.

12. Cardinal Bellarmine made this his Last Will and Testament. In the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, I Robert Bellarmine, Cardinal of the Title of our
Blessed Lady's Church, called in Via (This was a Year before his Death changed
to the Name of St. Praxedes) being promoted thereunto out of the Society of
Jesus, desired leave of Clement VIII. of Sacred Memory, to make my Will, That
my Goods might be applied to pious Uses, that I might be sure that such
Temporal Things, as should remain after my Death, and such, as whilst I lived,
could neither be bestowed on the Poor, or on Churches, as being necessary for
my own Maintenance, might return unto the said Poor and Churches. The Pope gave
me a more general Grant than I desired, which I did not accept, but only for
bestowing them on good Uses, as I had desired. This Indult or Grant is amongst
other Bulls granted me, in a great Leaf of Parchment sealed with Lead, dated A.
C. 1603. Apr. 8. in the 12th. Year of the Pontificate of the said Pope Clement.
This Grant presupposed, I made my Will at Capua, whilst I was Archbishop of
that City; afterward that Will being annulled, I made another in Rome; but the
Circumstances of things being altered, and that Second also abrogated, I
determined now again to make my Will, being of the Age of Sixty Nine, and very
near, as I imagine, to my last Day, but yet, by the Grace of God, in perfect
Health of Body and Mind. First therefore I desire with all my Heart, to have my
Soul commended into the hands of God, whom from my Youth I have desired to
serve; and I beseech him, not as a Valuer of Merit, but as a Giver of Pardon,
to admit me amongst his Saints and Elect. I will have my Body, not being
opened, to be carried without any Pomp to the Church of the Society, either of
the Roman College, or of the professed Fathers; and let the Exequies be made by
the Fathers and Brothers alone of the Society, without Concourse of the Holy
College, (to wit, of the Cardinals,) without any Bed made aloft, without Arms,
or Scutcheons, with the same plainness as is usual for others of the Society:
And this I do, as earnestly as I can, humbly entreat His Holiness, that he will
satisfy my Desire in it. As for the Place of my Burial, I would gladly have
had my Body at the Feet of blessed Aloysius Gonzaga, once my ghostly Child; but
notwithstanding let the Superiors of the Society bury it where they list. Of
the Temporal Things granted me by the Apostolic See, or gotten any other way,
I dispose in this manner: I nominate and make my general Heir, the House of the
professed Fathers in Rome, of the Society of Jesus, of which Order I was; but
first of all, I will that my Debts he paid, if there be any, and all Duties
discharged to whom they are due; then for Forty Days, as is the Fashion, let
there be given to my Family such things as pertain to their Diet, that is to
say, so much as is allotted them in Money for their Bread, Wine, and Victuals.
I am able to leave them nothing else, because I desired this leave of making my
Will, to bestow all I had on pious Uses, as Churches, and Poor People, and for
that cause gave every one of them Wages, or some Allowance beside their Diet.
Let there be restored unto my own Brother (or his Heirs) an Image in a Frame,
of Robert Clement VIII. Let there be given to my Nephew Angelo, also a little
Picture, in a Frame, of Robert Cardinal de Nobilibus, and one of the two in
Frames, of S. Charles Borromeus, and one of the little Crosses which I wear
about my Neck, with the Relics that are in it. Let there be restored to the
Roman College Six Tomes of the Annals of Baronius, which it lent me; that the
other Six of mine might be given to the same; for on this Condition I received
of the College the first Six Tomes, which was given thereunto in my Name, by
the Author himself, that after my death, I should leave them all his Works
entire. To the sam College I leave one of my three best Vestments, with the
Stole and Manuple, which they please, also all my Writings, and my whole
Library, unless it shall please our most Reverend F. General, to bestow the
Library upon some other House of the Society, that is in greater Want. To our
Blessed Lady's Church in Via, which is my Titular, I leave another of my three
best Vestments, such as it shall please mine Heir to give. I leave no more to
that Church, because, as the Friars know, I have been at great Charge in
Building of the same; and they requested that of me, in lieu of other
Ornaments, which I had determined to have brought them. Whatsoever else does
belong unto me, or shall belong, whether Immoveables, Movables, living Things,
Duties or Debts owing to me; whether Sacred, belonging to the Chapel; or
Profane, belonging to my Wardrobe, or to my Cellars, or other Places; whether
ready Money, or whatsoever else, I will, as is said, that all entirely belong
to the Heir, viz. to the House of the Professed Fathers in Rome: And I appoint
and nominate the same for Heir in all and every of these Things. For the Help
of my Soul, I leave or prescribe nothing; because very little will come unto my
Heir, as I suppose, seeing I never took care to heap up Money, or gather
Wealth; as also for that I trust, or rather know, the pious Charity of my
Mother (the Society of Jesus) will not be wanting to help me, as it is never
wanting to other of her Children, and as my self have never been wanting all my
Lifetime, to offer Sacrifices and Prayers for such as were departed out of the
same. I nominate, for Honor's sake, my most Illustrious and Reverend Lord
Cardinal Aldobrandino, for the Executor of this my last Will. I hope there will
need no labor in the Execution thereof. And I leave unto the said most
Illustrious Lord (than which) have nothing more dear) a wooden Cross, filled
with most precious Relics, the Names of which he shall find in a little Desk
covered with red Silk. -- This Will and Testament I will have to stand in
force, the former two being annulled, which in all things, and for all, I
revoke, make void, and annul, notwithstanding this Will has not perhaps been
made with wonted Solemnities, as the Law requires; for the Bull of Clement
VIII. in which leave is given me, to make my Will, does expressly grant me this
Liberty; and further, to make it by simple Letter, or any other Writing
subscribed with my own Hand. I Robert Bellarmine, do Dispose, Ordain, Bequeath
and Appoint by Testament, as above, not only in the aforesaid, but in any other
better form whatsoever. Jan. 23. 1611.

In his Sickness he used often to kiss a little Cross of Silver, and therewith
to bless himself, and mutter over some Prayers: In his last Hours, after the
Paternoster, and Ave Maria, repeated over and over again, together with the
Creed, he breathed his last, Sept. 17. about Six or Seven in the Morning. In
the Relation of his Death, published by J. C. 1621.

I put this Copy of Bellarmine's Will (the rather) in this Place, to oppose it
to Calvin's mentioned before; because Opposites set one against another, give
the greater Light one to another.

I might have set down a Parcel of Luther's Will too -- Lord, I thank thee,
that thou would have me live a poor and indigent Life upon Earth; I have
neither House, nor Land, nor Possessions, nor Money, to leave: Thou, Lord, have
given me Wife and Children; them, Lord, I give back to thee, etc. See the
Chapt. of Good Pastors, etc.

Luther had a Wife and Children, but no Estate to leave them. Calvin's
Inventory, according to Computation amounted not to above a Hundred Pound.
Bellarmine's seems to consist mostly in a Library of Books, Vestments, and
Pictures.

13. Oecolampadius, in the 49th. Year of his Age, falling sick of an Ulcer that
broke forth about the Os sacrum, sent for the Ministers of the Church, and
bespake them to this purpose: Oh, my Brethren, the Lord is come, He is come; he
is now calling me away, etc. I desired to speak with you, to encourage you, to
continue faithful Followers of Christ, to persevere in Purity of Doctrine, in
Lives conformable to the Word of God: Christ will take care for the Defense of
his Church; therefore Let your Lights so shine before Men, etc. Continue in
Love unfeigned, walk as in God's Presence, adorn your Doctrine with Holiness of
Life: A Cloud is arising, a Tempest is coming, and some will fall off; but it
becomes you to stand fast, and God will assist you, etc. For my self, I value
not the Aspersions that are cast upon me; I bless God, I shall with a clear
Conscience stand before the Tribunal of Christ: I have not seduced the Church
of Christ, as some affirm, but leave you all Witnesses, that at the last gasp I
am the same that formerly I was.

He had nothing to give, and therefore made no Will; but calling for his
Children, he stroked them on the Head, and tho the Eldest was but three Years
old, bid them, See, that they loved God, and desired his Wife and Kindred, to
take care they might be brought up in the Feat of God; and then commanded them
to be taken away.

That Night the Ministers continuing with him, a certain Friend coming to him,
Oecolampadins asked him, What News? The Answer being made, None. But, says he,
I Will tell you some News, I shall presently be with my Lord Christ. Being asked,
if the Light offended him? Putting his Hands to his Eyes, he answered, Here is
abundance of Light; and then praying earnestly with the Words of David, Psalm.
51. to the end, and saying, O Christ save me, he fell asleep. Clark. Ibid.

14. Queen Mary the Second, of blessed Memory, on her Deathbed, when the Most
Reverend Archbishop Tenison bespoke her, Madam, Settle your Affairs, your
Family, and your Mind; you have lived and finished the course which the Parent
of Nature has all^tted you; replied with an undaunted Cheerfulness, Father,
How good a Messenger are you to me, who, as it were commanded from Heaven,
bring the Tidings of my last Necessity of Dying! Here I am ready to submit to
whatever pleases God, the Disposer of my Life and Death. I am not now to learn
that difficult Art of Well-dying. I have made up my Account with God, by the
Assistance of my Surety, Christ. I have discharged my Conscience long since; I
have considered the Condition of my Mortality; I have settled all my Affairs;
and surrendered into the Bosom of my dearest Husband all those Cares that
concern the World: And therefore he that calls, finds me ready to lay down the
Burden of this Life, being no more than a load of Infirmities, Sin, and Labor.
Then turning to her Husband, standing by her Bedside, she is said to have
broke forth into Words, to this Effect: Farewell, my William, and live mindful
of our undefiled Matrimony, till thy Lot shall restore thee to me, or more to
thee. I shall not altogether die, while you singly possess the sole Image of us
both, etc. Spanheim, in his Fun. Orat. of Queen Mary the Second.

This; I suppose contains the sum of what that Excellent Queen delivered; but
I suspect the Author has set it off with an Embellishment of Words, which did
not become a dying Person. The most Reverend Archbishop delivers it more
nakedly and briefly.

15. Anthony Walleus, on his Deathbed, exhorted all his Family to Fear God,
and the Children to Reverence their Mother; for so God would bless and provide
for them. That every one should take care of all the rest, but especially, that
every one should take care of himself. Then he bad his Son John to have a
special Care of his Mother; and so kissing them, took his Leave of them all;
and then turning his Face from them, he fell asleep, out of which he never
awaked, only some time, when his Pains came upon him, he stirred a little; and
so on the Sabbath, about Eleven of the Clock, he quietly resigned up his Spirit
unto God, A. C. 1639. Aetat. 66. Clark's Exampl. p. 490.

16. Henry Alting, the Day before his Death, sang the 130 Psalm with a sweet
Voice, and warm Zeal, and spent the rest to his time in hearty Prayers, and
holy Meditations. In the Evening he blessed his Children; and then commanded
his Son, Dr. James Alting, to pray with him, and in his Prayers to remember the
Church and University. The next Day, which was the Sabbath Day, being visited
by Camerarius, and Strasbergerus, Agents for the Crown of Sweden, and his old
Friends, he was refreshed a little with their Company; but told them, that he
should depart before Sunset; and accordingly, about Three of the Clock in the
Afternoon, with a constant Voice, he bid them all Farewell; and after the Prayer
of Emmius, Pastor of the Church, without the least struggling he quietly slept
in the Lord, A. C. 1644. Ibid. p. 497.

17. Mr. John Bruen of Stapleford, a little before his Death, said I will have
no black, no proud, or pompous Funeral, neither is there any cause of Mourning,
but of Rejoicing rather, in my particular. And immediately before he expired,
lifting up his Hands he said: The Lord is my Portion, my Help, and my Trust;
his blessed Son Jesus Christ, is my Savior and Redeemer, Amen. Even so says
the Spirit unto my Spirit. Therefore come Lord Jesus, and kiss me with the
Kisses of thy Mouth, and embrace me with the Arms of thy Love. Into thy hands I
commend my spirit. O come now, and take me to thine own self: O come, Lord
Jesus, come quickly; O come, O come, O come. Mr. Hind, in his Life.

18. Berengarius is said to have breathed out these Words with his last gasp:
Now I am to go and appear before God; either to be acquitted by him, as I hope;
or condemned by him, as I fear. Mr. Fuller, Abel. Rediv. p. 7. out of Illyricus.

19. Erasmus, by his Last Will and Testament (confirmed both by the Emperor and
Pope) declared Bonifacius, Amerbachius, his Heir; Hieronymus Frobenius, and
Nicolaus Episcopius, Overseers of his Will, wherein to several Friends he
bequeathed several Legacies; as a Clock of Gold, to Ludovicus Berus; a Spoon
and Fork of the same, to Beatus Rhenanus; to Petrus Vetereus, 150 Crowns; as
much to Philippus Montanus; to his Servant Lambert, 200 Florins; to Brischius,
a Silver Tankard; to Paulus Volsius, 100 Florins; to Signismundus Tilenius, 150
Ducats; to Erasmus Frobenius, his Godson, two Rings; to Hieronymus Frobenius,
his wearing Clothes, Bedding, and Houshold-stuffs, to his Wife, a Ring, wherein
was set a precious Stone, having therein engraven, a Woman looking ove her Left
Shoulder; to Episcopius, a fair Silver Bowl, with a Cover; to his Wife, a
Diamond Ring; to Go^lenius, a Silver Bowl; his Library he sold upon his
Deathbed, to Johannes a Lasco; his Medals, ancient Coins, ready Money, and
Debts, with the remainder of his Watches, Clocks, Rings, Plate, Jewels, and
other Curiosities, of no small value, to his Heir Amerbachius, not for his own
use, but to be sold, and the Money, by Advice of the forenamed Overseers, to
be distributed; first, to the poor infirm Persons, whether through Age, or
Sickness; secondly, to portionless Virgins, to procure them Husbands; and
thirdly to poor, but hopeful young Scholars, for Advancement of their Studies.
His Heir he restrained merely to his Legacy, which was none of the greatest.

He fell sick first of the Gout, and then fell into an Hepatical Flux; so that
for a whole Month together, he came seldom out of his Bed, and but once over
the Threshold of his Chamber; yet whilst his Body lay tortured upon this double
Rack, he wrote a Treatise de Puritate Ecclesiae, and made a hard shift to
finish his Recognitions of Origin. These were the two last Songs of this dying
Swan, whose Patience ever increased with his Torments, and in the end
surmounted them. He retained his Speech to the last gasp, and breathed out his
Soul in these Ejaculations: Mercy, sweet Jesus. Lord, loose these Bands. How
long, Lord Jesus! how long! Jesus, Fountain of Mercy, have Mercy on me, etc. He
died, July 12. 1536. Aged 71, or 73. Ibid. p. 75, 76. out of the Bishop of
Kilmore.

20. Mr. Bilney going to the Place of Execution, comforted himself with this
Consideration, That he was then sailing upon the troubled Sea, but e're long,
his Ship would be in a quiet Harbor; and I doubt not, says he, but through
the Grace of God I shall endure the Storm, only I would entreat you to help me
with your Prayers. As he wet along the Streets, he gave much Alms to the Poor,
by the Hands of one of his Friends. At the Stake he made a long Confession of
his Faith in an excellent manner, and gave many sweet Exhortations to the
Pople, and then earnestly called upon God by Prayer, and at the end rehearsed
the 143 Psalm. Then turning to the Officers, he asked if they were ready?
Whereupon the Fire was kindled, he holding up his Hands, and crying sometime
Jesus, and sometime Credo: But the Wind blowing away the Flame from him, and
the Pain enduring the longer, he was put to a longer exercise of Patience, till
at last he gave up the Ghost. Ibid. p. 124.

21. William Tindal, whilst he was tying to the Stake, cried with a fervent and
loud Voice, Lord open the King of England 's Eyes: And so he was first
strangled by the Hangman, and then burnt, A. C. 1556. Ibid. p. 129.

22. Leo Judae, a little before his Death, sent for the Pastors and Professors
of Tigure, and made before them a Confession of his Faith, concluding thus: To
this my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, my Hope and my Salvation, I wholly offer
up my Soul and Body, I cast my self wholly upon his Mercy and Grace, etc. Ibid.
p. 137.

23. Cruciger, after three Months illness, calling his two young Daughters to
repeat their Prayers before him; and then himself praying with great fervency
for himself, the Church, and those his Orphans, concluded: I call upon thee
with a weak, yet a true Faith; I believe thy Promises, which thou have sealed
with thy Blood and Resurrection, etc. Ibid. p. 145.

24. Martin Bucer, in his Sickness, to Mr Bradford, coming to him, and telling
him, that he would remember him in his Prayers, (being that Day to preach)
uttered these Words, Ne abjicias me in tempore senectutis, etc. Forsake me not
in the time of Age, when my Strength fails me. And being admonished in his
Sickness, that he should arm himself against the Assaults of the Devil; he
answered, That he had nothing to do with the Devil, because he was wholly in
Christ: And God forbid, God forbid, said he, but that I should have some
Experience of his Heavenly Comfort. After Sermon, Mr. Bradford coming again,
and declaring unto him the great Fear which the Physicians had to prescribe any
thing unto him, by reason of the Weakness of his Body; with his Eyes fixed
toward Heaven, he uttered these Words, I Will, ille regit and moderatur omma, He,
he it is that rules and governs all things. And so, in the midst of many pious
Prayers, he quietly yielded his Soul into the Hands of God. Febr. 27. 1551.
Ibid. p. 160.

25. George Prince of Anhalt, falling sick of a most troublesome Disease, was
frequent in holy Prayer, for himself, for all the Princes of that Family, for
his Country, and for Germany. He had some portion of Holy Scriptures daily read
to him: He made his Will, wherein he set down the Confession of his Faith, and
commended the Defense of the Churches to his Brother; adding something to the
Stipends of all the godly Ministers under his Charge; often ruminated on those
Texts, God so loved the World, that he gave, etc. No man shall take my sheep
out of my hand. Come uto me all ye that are weary, etc. And so in holy
Meditations and Prayers he resigned up his Spirit unto God. A. C. 1543. Ibid.
p. 165.

26. John Rogers being degraded and excommunicated in Queen Mary's Reign, was
warned to prepare for Death before he arose. If it be so, said he, I need not
tie my Points. Being afterward brought to Smithfield, and a Pardon offered
him, he refused to Recant. His Wife with Nine small Children, and the Tenth
sucking at her Breast, coming to him, the sorrowful Sight nothing moved him:
But in the Flames he washed his Hands, and with wonderful Patience took his
Death. He was the Protomartyr in Queen Mary's Reign. The Sabbath before his
Death, he drank to Mr. Hooper, who lodged in a Chamber beneath him; bidding the
Messenger, to commend him to him, and tell him, That there was never a little
Fellow, that would better stick to a Man, than he would to him: Supposing they
should be both burned together, though it happened otherwise. Ibid. p. 168.

27. Laurence Saunders being in Prison for a Year and three Months, wrote
thence in a Letter to his Wife: I am merry, and trust I shall be merry, maugre
the Teeth of the all the Devils in Hell. Riches I have none to endow you with;
but that Treasure of tasting how sweet Christ is to hungry Consciences
(whereof, I thank my Christ, I do feel part) that I bequeath unto you, and to
the rest of my beloved in Christ, etc. When he came near the Place of
Execution, at Coventry, to be burned, he went cheerfully to the Stake, kissing
of it, and saying, Welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome Everlasting Life. And
the Fire being kindled, he sweetly slept in the Lord. Ibid. p. 171.

28. Bishop Hooper being come to the Stake, prayed about half an Hour; and
having a Box with a Pardon set before him, he cried, If you love my Soul, away
with it; if you love my Soul, away with it. Three Irons being prepared to
fasten him to the Stake, he only put an iron Hoop about his middle, bidding
them to take away the rest, saying, I doubt not, but God will give me strength
to abide the extremity of the fire without binding. When Reeds were cast to
him, he embraced and kissed them, putting them under his Arm, where he had Bags
of Gunpowder also. When Fire was first put to him, the Faggots being green,
and the Wind blowing away the Flame, he was but scorched. More Faggots being
laid to him, the Fire was so suppressed, that his nether Parts were only
burned, his upper being scarce touched; he prayed, O Jesus, the Son of David,
have mercy upon me, and receive my Soul; and wiping his Eyes with his Hands, he
said, For God's Love let me have more Fire. A third Fire being kindled, it
burned more violently, yet was he alive a great while in it; the last Words
which he uttered, being, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Ibid. p. 175.

29. Rowland Tailor going to the Stake, at Hadley, the Streets were full of
People, weeping and bewailing their Loss, to whom he said, I have preached to
you God's Word and Truth, and am come to seal it with my Blood. He gave all his
Money to the Poor, for whom he was wont thus to provide formerly. Coming to the
Place of Execution, he was not suffered to speak to the People, who much
lamented his Death; yet was very cheerful, saying, Thanks be to God, I am even
at home. And when he had prayed, and made himself ready, he went to the Stake,
and kissed it. The Fire being kindled, he held up his Hands, and called upon
God, saying, Merciful Father of Heaven, for Jesus Christ my Savior's sake,
receive my Soul into thy hands: And so stood still, without moving, till one
with an Halberd struck out his Brains. Ibid. p. 178.

30. Mr. Bradford, as soon as he approached the Stake, fell flat on the Ground,
intending there to pur forth his Prayers to Almighty God, for he was not
permitted to do it publicly; but Woodroffe the Sheriff commanded him to arise
and dispatch, for the People increased and pressed upon him. Whereupon, as soon
as he got up, he embraced the Stake, and kissed it; put off his Clothes, gave
them to his Servant, comforted the Stripling that was to be burned with him,
and earnestly exhorted the People to Repentance; Which so enraged the Sheriff,
that he commanded his Hands to be tied. His last Words that were audible were:
Strait is the way, and narrow is the gate that leads to salvation, and few
there be that find it. He endured the Flame as a fresh gale of Wind in a hot
Summer's Day, without any Reluctance. Ibid. p. 189.

31. Bishop Ridley, and Bishop Latimer, suffered together; but were not
permitted to speak at the Stake. The Evening before their Execution, Ridley
washed his Beard and his Feet, and bad those that supped with him, to his
Wedding the next Day, demanding of his Brother, Mr. Skipfide, whether he thught
his Sister (his Wife) could find in her Heart to be there? and he answering,
That he durst say, she would with all her Heart; he professed to the thereof
very glad. At Supper-time he was very cheerful, and merry, desiring those there
present, that went, (of which number Mrs. Irish, his Hostess, though an eager
Papist, was one) to quiet themselves, affirming, That though his Breakfast was
like to be somewhat sharp and painful, yet his Supper, he was sure, would be
pleasant and sweet. They endured a long time in the Fire with most grievous
Pains, to the great Grief of the Beholders, through the Indiscretion of those
that composed the Pile; burning as it were by piecemeal; till at last their
Souls mounted, as in a flaming Chariot, up to Heaven. Ibid. p. 203, 204.

32. Bishop Latimer, when he came to the Stake, lifting up his Eyes, with a
comfortable and lovely Countenance, cried out, God is faithful, who will not
suffer us to be tempted above what we are able; and when the Fire was kindled,
O Father of Heaven, receive my Soul. His Blood, as he was burning, running out
of his Heart, in such abundance, as if all the Blood of his Body had been
gathered thither, to the great Astonishmnt of the Beholders. Ibid. p. 210.

33. Mr. Philpot going into Smithfield, and the way being very foul, two
Officers took him up, and bore him to the Stake; to whom he said merrily, What
will you make me a Pope? Being got into Smithfield, he kneeled down, and said,
I will pay my Vows in the midst of thee, O Smithfield! and kissing the Stake,
Shall I disdain to suffer at this Stake, when my Lord and Savior refused not
to sufer a most vile Death for me? And when the Fire was kindled, with much
Meekness and Comfort he resigned up his Spirit unto God. Ibid. p. 222.

34. Archbishop Cranmer, when tied to the Stake, thrust first of all his Right
Hand into the Fire, wherewith he had subscribed to Popery, crying out, Ah, my
unworthy Right Hand! So that his Hand died a Malefactor, and the rest of his
Body a Martyr. Ibid. p. 228.

35. Bugenhagius drawing near to his End, often repeated, This is Life Eternal,
to know Thee, the only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ; and
so quietly departed this Life, Aged 73. Ibid. p. 233.

36. Phil. Melancthon, in the midst of many Heavenly Prayers, surrendered his
Soul unto him that gaveit, Aged 63. Ibid. p. 241.

37. Hyperius falling sick of a Fever, gave diverse Instructions to his Wife,
for the Education of his Children; to his Children, for the serving of God, and
obeying their Mother; and when his Friends visited him, requested them to bear
Witness, That he now died in that Faith, which he had taught while he lived,
and so yielded up his Spirit to God, Aged 53. Ibid. p. 265.

38. John Brentius falling sick of a Fever, made his Will, and therein set down
a Confession of his Faith, received the Sacrament, exhorted the Ministers of
Stutgard, to Unity in Doctrine, and a mutual Love, always saying, That he
longed for a better, an Eternal Life, and so died, Aged 71. Ibid. p. 298.

39. Bishop Jewel died praying, and prayed dying: His last Words, worthy to be
written with the Point of a Diamond, never to be razed out, were these: A Crown
of Righteousness is laid up for me; Christ is my Righteousness; this is my
Body; this day, quickly let me come unto thee; this day let me see thee, Lord
Jesus. He was arrested by Death, as he was preaching at Lacock, upon those
Words, Walk in the Spirit, and so carried from the Pulpit to Bed, from which he
never rose more. Ibid. p. 311.

40. John Knox, a Day or two before his Death, sending for Mr. Lawson, Mr.
Lindsey, the Elders and Deacons of the Church, told them, the Time was
approaching which he long thirsted for, wherein he should be released from all
his Cares, and be with his Savior Christ for ever: And now, says he, God is
my Witness, whom I have served with my Spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that I
have taught nothing but the true and sincere Word of God. I am not ignorant,
that many have and do blame my too great Rigor and Severity; but God knows,
that in my Heart I never hated those, against whom I thundered God's Judgments:
I did only hate their Sins, and labored, according to my power, to gain them
to Christ. That I did forbear none of what Condition soever; I did it out of
Fear of my God, who has placed me in the Function of his Ministry, and I know
will bring me to an Account. Now, Brethren, for your selves, I have no more to
say, but to warn you, to take heed to the Flock, over which God has placed you
Overseers, which he has Redeemed by the Blood of his only-begotten Son. And
you, Mr. Lawson, Fight a good Fight, do the Work of the Lord with Courage, and
with a willing mand, and God from Heaven bless you, and the Church whereof you
have the Charge: Against it (so long as it continues in the Doctrine of the
Truth) the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. Having thus spoken, and the Elders
and Deacons being dismissed, he called the two Preachers to him, and said,
There is one thing that grieves me exceedingly; you have sometime seen the
Courage and Constancy of the Lord of Grang. [See this Passage under the Head
of Discovery of Things secret or future, by Impulses.] The next Day, Knox gave
Order for the making of his Coffin, continuing all the Day in fervent Prayer,
crying, Come, Lord Jesus; sweet Jesus, into thy hands I commend my Spirit.
Being asked, whether his Pains were great, he answered, That he did not esteem
that a Pain, which would be to him the end of all Troubles, and the beginning
of Eternal Joys. Often, after some deep Meditation, he used to say, Oh! serve the
Lord in Fear, and Death shall not be troublesome to you: Blessed is the Death
of those, that have part in the Death of Jesus. The Night before his Death, he
slept some Hours with great unquietness, often sighing and groaning: And being
asked, why he mourned so heavily? he answered, In my Lifetime I have been
assaulted with Temptations from Satan, and he has often cast my Sins into my
Teeth, to drive me to Despair; yet God gave me Strength to overcome all his
Temptations: But now the subtle Serpent takes another course, seeking to
persuade me, that all my Labors in the Ministry, and the Fidelity that I have
showed in that Service, has not merited Heaven and Immortality. But blessed be
God, that brought to my Mind these Scriptures, What have thou, that thou have
not received? And, Not I, but the Grace of God in me: With which, he is gone
away ashamed, and shall no more return. And now I am sure, that my Battle is at
an end; and that without pain of Body, or trouble of Spirit, I shall shortly
change this Mortal and miserable Life with that Happy and Immortal Life, that
shall never have end. After which, one Praying by his Bed, asked him, after he
had done, If he heard the Prayer? Yea, said he, and would to God, all present
had heard it with such an Ear and Heart, as I. Adding, Lord Jesus, receive my
Spirit. With which words, without any motion of Hands or Feet, he fell asleep,
aged 62. A. C. 1572. The Earl of Murray, when the Corpse was put into the
Ground, saying, Here lies the Body of him, who in his Lifetime never feared
the face of any Man. Fuller, Abel Rediv. p. 323, 324.

41. Henry Bullinger in his last Sickness endured the sharpest Pains for four
Months with an admirable Patience, caused the Pastors and Professors of the
City to come to him, unto whom he delivered a large Oration, wherein he thanked
them for their Love, opened to them his Faith, freely forgave all his Enemies,
exhorted them to Constancy and Unity; commended the Care of the Church and
Public School in Writing to the Senate, desired that Rodolphus Gualterus might
be his Successor, etc. And so in the midst of his Extremities, sometimes
repeating the 16, sometimes the 42, and sometimes the 51 Psalms, sometimes the
Lord's Prayer, sometimes other Prayers; at the last, as one going to sleep, he
quietly yielded his Soul into the hands of God, Sept. 18. 1575. aged 71. Ibid.
p. 339.

42. Mr. Edw. Deering to his Friends on his Deathbed, upon occasion of the Sun
shining, said, There is but one Sun in the World, nor but one Righteousness,
one Communion of Saints; if I were the most Excellent of all Creatures in the
World, equal in Righteousness to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, yet had I reason to
confess my self to be a sinner, and to expect Salvation only in the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, for we all stand in need of the Grace of God. As
for my Death, I bless God, I feel so much inward Joy and Comfort, that if put
(...) my choice, whether to die or live, I would a Thousand times rather choose
Death, if it so stand with the Holy Will of God. Ibid. p. 342.

43. Boquine in the Year 1582. on a Lord's Day preached twice, and in the
Evening heard another Sermon, then supped cheerfully, and after Supper
refreshed himself by walking abroad; then went to visit a sick Friend, and
whilst he was comforting of him, he found his own Spirits begin to sink, and
running to his Servant, he said unto him, Pray; adding, Lord, receive my Soul,
and so departed in the Lord. Fuller, Abel Rediv. p. 349.

44. Mr. Gilpin, finding Death to approach him, commanded the Poor to be called
together, unto whom he made a Speech, and took his leave of them; he did so
likewise by others, made many Exhortations to the Scholars, and to diverse
others, and so at last fell asleep in the Lord, Anno 1583. aged 66. Ibid. p.
360.

45. Olevian in his Sickness made his Will, and by Pious Meditations prepared
for Death; declared, that he had learned by that Sickness to know the greatness
of Sin, and the greatness of God's Majesty, more than ever he had done before:
To John Piscator, coming to visit him, he said, that the day before for four
hours together, he had been filled with ineffable Joy; for, said he, I thought
I was in a most pleasant Meadow, in which as I walked up and down, I was
besprinkled with a Heavenly Dew, and that not sparingly, but plentifully, where
both my Body and Soul were filled with unspeakable Joy. To whom Piscator made
answer, That good Shepherd, Jesus Christ, lead thee into fresh Pastures; yea,
said Olevian, to the Springs of Living Waters. Afterward having repeated some
Sentences full of Comfort out of Psalm. 42. Isa. 9. and Mat. 11. he often said,
I would not have my Journey to God any longer deferred; I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. And so bidding Farewell to his Colleagues and
Friends, in the Agony of Death, Alsted asking, if he were sure of his Salvation
in Christ? He answered, Most sure; and so gave up the Ghost, Anno 1587. aged
51. Ibid. p. 376.

47. George Sohnius of Fribourg in Wetteraw, bore his last Sickness with much
Patience, and with fervent Prayer, often repeating, O Christ, thou art my
Redeemer, and I know that thou have redeemed me: I wholly depend upon thy
Providence and Mercy; from the very bottom of my Heart I commend my Spirit into
thy Hands. And so he slept in the Lord, Anno Christi 1589. aged 38 Ibid. p. 385.

48. James Andreas, born in Waibling at Wittenberg, falling sick, sent for
James Herbrand, saying, I expect that after my Death, many Adversaries will
rise up to asperse me; and therefore I sent for thee, to hear the Confession of
my Faith, that so thou may witness for me, when I am dead and gone, that I
died in the True Faith. The same Confession he made also before the Pastors and
Deacons of Tubing. The Night before his Death he slept, partly upon his Bed,
and partly in his Chair: When the Clock struck Six in the Morning, he said, My
^our draws near. He gave Thanks to God for bestowing Christ, for revealing his
Will in his Word, for giving him Faith and the like Benefits. And when ready to
depart, he said, Lord, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit: And so fell asleep,
A. C. 1590. aged 61. Ibid. p. 389.

49. Robert Rollock, being sick of the Stone, which came upon him at last with
great violence, set his House in Order, and commended his Wife, after Ten Years
Barrenness, then with Child, to the Care of his Friends, requested two
Noblemen, his Visitants, to go from him to the King, and entreat him, in his
Name, to have a care of Religion, and to persevere in it to the end, as
hitherto he had done, and to Reverence and Esteem the Pastors of the Church, as
it was meet. And to the Pastors of Edinburgh he made an excellent exhortation
and Profession of his Sincerity; he made such a Divine and Heavenly Speech, as
astonished the Hearers. And when the Physicians were preparing Physic, he
said, Thou, Lord, wilt heal me. Then he prayed fervently, that God would Pardon
his Sins for Christ's sake, and that he might have an Happy Departure, and
enjoy God's Presence, which he had long breathed after. Desired the Magistrates
to be very careful of the University, desiring them to choose in his room Henry
Charter, and commended his Wife to their care, professing, that he had not laid
up one Penny of his Stipend, and therefore hoped they would provide for her.
And when he had their Promise for these things, he said, I bless God, I have
all my Senses entire, but my Heart is in Heaven: And Lord Jesus, why should
not thou have it? It hathbeen my care all my Life long to dedicate it to thee;
I pray thee take it, that it may live with thee for ever. Come, Lord Jesus, put
an end to this Miserable Life. Haste, Lord, and tarr^ not. Come, Lord Jesus,
and give me that Life, for which thou have redeemed me. And when some told him,
that the next day was the Sabbath, he said, Thy Sabbath, O Lord, shall begin my
Eternal Sabbath. The next Morning, to Mr. Belcanqual, praying for his long
life, he said, I am weary of this Life, all my desire is, that I may enjoy the
Celestial Life that is hid with Christ in God. And so quietly resigned to his
Spirit, A. C. 1598. aged 43. Ibid. p. 412.

50. Nic. Hemingius a little before his Death expounded the 103 Psalm with so
much Fevour, Efficacy, and Power of the Holy Ghost, that all that heard him
wondered at it, and shortly after resigned up his Soul, Anno 1600. aged 87.
Ibid. p. 414.

51. Chytraeus before his Death made a Confession of his Faith, received the
Sacrament, and lying sick on his Bed, if any Discourse were raised about a
Controversy, called to them to speak out; for that he should die with more
Comfort, if he could learn any new thing before his departure. Ibid. p. 421.

52. Tossanus being grown very old and infirm, laid down his Professors Place,
though with the Reluctance of the University of Heidelberg; and having in his
Lectures expounded the Book of Job to the end of the 31st. Chapter, he
concluded with these words, The words of Job are ended. And presently after
falling sick, he comforted himself with these Texts of Scripture; I have fought
the good Fight, etc. Be you faithful unto the Death, and I will give thee a
Crown of Life. We have a City not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, etc.
And when he had made a good Confession of his Faith, etc. he departed quietly,
A. C. 1602. aged 61. Ibid. p. 430.

53. Bishop Andrews was not sick in Thirty Years (except once) till his last
Sickness at Downham in the Isle of Ely, the Air of that Place not agreeing with
the Constitution of his Body. But there he seemed to be prepared for his
Dissolution; saying oftentimes in that Sickness, It must come once, and why
not here? And at other times, The days must come, when, whether we will or
nill, we shall say, with the Preacher, we have no pleasure in them, Eccles.
12.1. Of his Death he seemed to Presage with himself a year before he died, and
therefore prepared his Oil, that he might be admitted in due time into the
Bride-chamber. That of qualis vita, etc. might be truly verified of him, for as
he lived, so he died: As his Fidelity in his Health was great, so the strength
of his Faith in his Sickness increased. His Gratitude to Men was now changed
into Thankfulness to God; his Affability to incessant Prayers, his Laborious
Studies to restless Groans, Sighs, Cries, and Tears; his Hands laboring, his
Eyes lifted up, and his Heart beating and panting to see the Living God, even
to the last of his Breath. He departed this Life, A. C. 1626. aged 71. Mr.
Isaacson, in his Life.

54. Dr. Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury Twenty Years and Five Months, used
these his last words to His Majesty, who in Person visited him the day before
he died, when he could hardly be understood, Pro Ecclesia Dei, pro Eclesi^ Dei,
etc. For the Church of God, for the Church of God. Fuller, Abel Rediviv. p. 463.

55. Beza on the Lord's Day, October. 13. 1605. rising early, and calling his
Family to Prayers, afterward (Prayers ended) walked up and down some few
Paces, and receiving some small quantity of Wine, repaired to his Bed again,
demanding, whether all things were quiet in the City, and when Answer was made,
they were; he forthwith gave up his Soul into the hands of Almighty God, with
all alacrity and cheerfulness, aged 86. Ibid. p 474.

56. Dr. John Reynolds on his Deathbed being desired to obviate some
scandalous Reports raised concerning him by the Papists, as if his Conversion
were not sincere; and a form of Confession being offered him to Subscribe, he
shook his Head, called for his Spectacles, and signed the Writing with his Name
in very fair Characters, at which they all admired, because he had that Morning
assayed to write, but could not through extreme weakness. The next day he
resigned his Ghost, being Holy-Thursday, May 21. 1607. Ibid. p. 490.

57. Mr. Tho. Holland, born in Shropshire, and Regius Professor at Oxford, in
his old Age growing sickly, spent all his time in Fervent Prayers, and Holy
Meditations; and when his End approached, he often sighed out, Come, O Come,
Lord Jesus, thou Morning Star; Come, Lord Jesus, I desire to be dissolved, and
to be with thee; and so quietly departed in the Lord, A. C. 1612. aged 73.
Ibid. p. 501.

58. John Gerardus, having desired the Communion to be administered to him, and
told his Wife what he would have done after his Death, and instructed his
Children, and laid his Hand on his Youngest Son, with those words, Disce, mi
fili -- Learn, my Son, the Commandments of the Lord, and he will provide for
thee; and at last, turning to the Neighbors, and declaring in what Faith he
died, he fell asleep, Anno 1564. aged 53. Ibid. p. 518.

59. Archbishop Parker, before his decease, some space of time, the better to
mind him of his Mortality, caused his Monument to be made of plain black
Marble, and to be placed in the Chapel of Lambeth House, where he received his
Archiepiscopal Consecration. His chief Motto, painted on the Walls of his
House, and in his Windows, was that of St. John, The World passes away, and
the lust thereof. Ibid. p. 529.

60. Archbishop Abbot preached upon this his last Text, John 14.16. I will pray
the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that may abide with you
for ever. Upon the first Proposal whereof, as many of his Hearers presaged his
departure from them, so it proved his last Farewel-Sermon: For soon after he
came out of the Pulpit, he fell into grievous Fits of the Stone, which first
stopped the Passages of Nature, and within a few days shut up all the Offices
of his Senses. To those that came to visit him, who were not a few, and among
others, the Judges being then at Sarum, in their Circuit, he comunicated most
Christian and grave Advice, insisting very much upon the Benefit of a good
Conscience, the Comfort whereof he felt now in his Extremity, admonishing all
that heard him so to carry themselves in their most private and secret Actions,
as well as public, that they might obtain that at the last, which would stand
them in more stead, than what all the World could afford them besides. At last,
with Hands and Eyes lift up to Heaven, he gave up the Ghost, with these Words;
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly; finish in me the Work that thou have begun:
Into thy hands I commend my Spirit; for thou have redeemed me: Save me for thy
Mercy's sake; for I put my whole trust in thee: Let thy mercy be showed upon
me, for my sure trust is in thee: O let me not be confounded for ever. Ibid. p.
550.

61. William Cooper, born at Edinburgh, used these amongst other Meditations in
his last Sickness: Now, my Soul, be glad; for of all parts of this Prison, the
Lord has set to his Pioneers to loose thee; Head, Feet, Milt and Liver, are
fast failing; yea, the middle Strength of the whole Body, the Stomach, is
weakened long ago! Arise, make ready, shake off thy Fetters, mount up from the
Body, and go thy way. I saw not my Children, when they were in the Womb, yet
there the Lord fed them without my knowledge; I shall not see them, when I go
out of the Body, yet shall they not want a Father: Death is somewhat dreary,
and the Streams of that Jordan, between us and our Canaan, run furiously; but
they stand still, when the Ark comes. Let your Anchor be cast within the Veil,
and fastened on the Rock Jesus. Let the end of the threefold Cord be buckled
to the Heart, so shall ye go through. He expressed a great Willingness to
Exchange this Life for a better; which he did, Anno 1619. Ibid. p. 563.

62. Andrew Willet, in a Journey from London, homewards, had his Leg broken by
a Fall from a Horse, and was God's Prisoner for 9 Days together, (being so long
confined to his Bed;) where his Time he spent in meditating upon the Song of
Ezekiel, Isa. 38. (his Contemplations being taken down in Writing by his Son,
who then attended upon him.) Two Sabbath Days, which happened in that time, he
spent in Conscionatory Exhortations to those who waited upon him. Upon the
tenth Day, on occasion of a Bell tolling for one near Death, he discoursed with
his Wife, touching the Joys of Heaven; and then they both sang an Hymn,
composed by himself, which they usually every Morning praised God with: Their
Spirits being thus raised, they continued their Melody, and sang the 146 Psalm;
sometimes stopping a little, and glossing upon the Words, by way of
Self-application; till on a sudden, fetching a deep Sigh or Groan, he sunk down
in his Bed; but being raised up a little, he said, Let me alone, I shall do
well; Lord Jesus -- And with that Word gave up the Ghost. ibid. p. 575.

63. Mr. Bolton falling sick of a Quartan-Ague, and finding his Distemper get
strength, revised his Will; and having preached upon Death, Judgment, and Hell,
he promised next to preach upon Heaven, the only fourth and last Thing that
remained; but never preached more. He often breathed forth these Speeches, O
when will this good Hour come? When shall I be dissolved? When shall I be with
Christ? -- Though Life be a great Blessing, yet I infinitely more desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. He thanked God for his wonderful Mercy, in
pulling him out of Hell, in sealing his Ministry by the Conversion of Souls,
which he wholly ascribed to his Glory: He called for his Wife, and desired her
to bear his Dissolution with a Christian Fortitude; and turning to his
Children, told them, they should not now expect from him, in his Weakness, to
say any thing to them; he had told them enough formerly, and hoped they would
remember it, and verily believed, that none of them durst think to meet him at
the great Tribunal in an unregenerate State. Some of his Neighbors moved to
him, that he would tell them what he felt in his Soul: Alas! said he, do ye
look for that now from me, who want Breath and Power to speak? I have told ye
enough in my Ministry: Yet to satisfy you, I am, by the wonderful Mercies of
God, as full of Comfort as my Heart can hold, and feel nothing in my Soul but
Christ, with whom I heartily desire to be. And seeing some weeping, he said,
Oh, what a deal of Do there is before one can die! The very Pags of Death
being upon him, after a few gapings for Breath, he said, I am now drawing on
apace to my Dissolution: Hold out Faith and Patience, your Work will quickly be
at an end. Then shaking them by the Hand, he desired them to make sure of
Heaven, and remember what he had formerly taught them, protesting, that it was
the Truth of God, as he should answer it at the Tribunal of Christ, before whom
he should shortly appear. And a dear Friend taking him by the Hand, asked him,
if he did not feel much pain? Truly no, said he, the greatest that I feel is
your cold Hand. And then being laid down again, not long after he yielded up
his Spirit unto God, Anno 1631. Aged 60. Ibid. p. 591.

64. Mr. Will Whately, in his Sickness, gave heavenly and wholesome Counsel to
his People, exhorting them to Redemption of Time, Reading, Hearing and
Meditating on the Word of God, to be much in Prayer, Brotherly Love and
Communion of Saints, etc. A Minister praying with him, That if his time were
not expired, God would restore him, or put an end to his Pains, etc. he lifting
up his Eyes steadfastly toward Heavne, and one of his Hands, in the close of
that Prayer, gave up the Ghost, shutting his Eyes himself, as if he were fallen
into a Sleep, Anno 1639. Aged 56. a little before the Civil Wars began, and
before the sad Desolations that befell the Town of Banbury in particular. Ibid.
p. 599.

65. Dr. Robert Harris, when his End drew near, being often asked how he did?
answered, In no great pain, I praise God, only weary of my unuseful Life. If
God have no more Service for me to do here, I could be gladly in Heaven, where
I shall serve him better, free from Sin and Destractions. I pass from one Death
to another, yet I fear none: I praise God, I can live, yet dare die. If God
have more Work for me to do here, I am willing to do it, although my infirm Body
be very weary. Desiring one to pray, That God would hasten the Work; it was
asked, whether Pain put him upon that Desire? he replied, No: But I do now no
Good; I hinder others, which might be better employed, if I were not? Why
should any desire to live, but to do God Service? Now I cease from that, I do
not live. The Violence of his Distempers, and Advice of Physicians, forbidding
his Speech, he called upon his Attendants to read the Scriptures, and his Son
to Pray with him, and whilst Life and Language lasted, he concluded all Prayers
with a loud Amen. Once upon his awaking, finding himself exceeding ill, he
called for his Son, and taking him by the hand, said, Pray with me, it is the
last time in all likelihood, that ever I shall join with you. And complaining
to him of his weariness, his Son answered, There remains a Rest. To whom he
replied, My Sabbath is not far off, and yours is at hand; ere that, I shall be
rid of all my Trouble, and you shall be eased of some. At last, his ruinous
Fort, which had held out beyond all expectation, came to be yielded up. About
Saturday Evening he began to set himself to die, forbids all Cordials to be
administered, gives his Dying Blessing to his Son (who only of all his Children
was with him) and upon his Request, enjoins him to signify in that Country,
where he was longest known, that he lived and died in the Faith which he had
Preached and Printed, and now he found the Comfort of it. And afterward spoke
no more, only commanded Romans 8. to be read to him, dying into his perpetual
Rest betwixt Twelve and One of the Clock on Saturday Night, December 11. 1658.
aged 80, and more. W. D. in the Life and Death of Dr. Harris, p. 58, 59, etc.

In all his Wills, this Legacy was always renewed: Item, I bequeath to all my
Children, and their Children's Children, to each of them a Bible, with this
Inscription, None but Christ, Ibid.

I may not here forget to Remark an Answer, which he made to one that told him,
Sir, You may take much comfort in your Labors, you have done much good, etc.
All (said he) was nothing without a Savior; my best Works would Condenmn me;
O, I am ashamed of them, being mixed with so much Sin! Oh! I am an unprofitable
Servant! I have not done any thing for God as I ought! Loss of Time sits heavy
upon my Spirits! Work, work apace; assure your self nothing will more trouble
you, when you come to die, than that you have done no more for God, who has
done so much for you. At another time -- I never in all my Life saw the worth
of a Christ, nor tasted the sweetness of God's Love in that measure, as now I
do. And to two Reverend Doctors, his chief Friends, -- I praise God, he
supports me, and keeps off Satan: Beg that I may hold out, I am now in a good
way home, even quite spent, I am now at the Shore; I leave you tossing on the
Sea. O, it is a good time to die in. Ibid. p. 57. 58.

66. Mr. John Machin made the following Will. I commit my Soul to God, my God,
and my Savior, that created and redeemed it, even into the Bosom of the Father
of Spirits; my Body to my Father Corruption, and to the Worms my Mother and
Sister, Job 17.14. In hopes he will make good to me (who with them some time
have endeavored to serve him) his Promise of Eternal Life, Romans 2.7. As for my
dear beloved Wife, I freely return (and I pray it may be with Advantage) to him
that has lent her, to whom I leave, John 17.24. Rev. 21. last, Jude 24. Psalm.
84.10, 11, hoping that I leave them Heirs together with me, or rather with
Jesus Christ, of a Kingdom that cannot be removed. If the Lord should
graciously give me Issue, (I pray it may be of his Heritage, and prepared for a
Room in Heaven!) to it I would leave, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. and I pray God see it
executed according to my Will. And it is my Will concerning my Heir, (if the
Lord give one) that he may be a Samuel lent to the Lord and his Service in the
Ministry; for I can say, he is an asking of the Lord, as was Samuel. And that
he may have my Inheritance, performing his Father's and my Will concerning my
Lecture. As for my Personal Substance, etc. ending thus -- Praying whoever
Rules here, may keep open house for God and his, and all I leave may be his, to
whom I would in Faith say, Psalm. 31.5. hereunto subscribing with my Heart and
Hand, (...) J. M.

And in a Schedule dated herewith as follows. Some Particulars concerning the
thing that has long been in my heart to do for God, written as my last Will,
as an occasion of some standing Service, when I am not.

Motives. God's Glory, Christ's Kingdoms increase, and poor Souls Salvation, an
expression of my Thankfulness for what he has done for our Family, and for me
the least and last of it. And the rather, because I am here in my own
apprehension so little serviceable in speaking, doing, and suffering for him,
and nothing at all advantageous in writing, as others have been, and I could
have desired. Those Motives, together with that blessed Experience I have had
of its Advantage already through God's sealing work with it, makes me to think
my self favored the more of God, if I may do this for him; and I doubt not but
he can and will, if need be, give me and mine much more than this, as is said,
2 Chronicles. 25.9. and if I could say as David, 1 Chronicles. 29.23. I would think it
little betwixt him and me, who has said, That whosoever shall give you a Cup
of cold Water to drinkin my Name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say
unto you, he shall not lose his Reward; and my Prayer is, that those that come
after me (whose it might have been) think it is better bestowed, than the rest.

The Thing. A double Lecture, viz. of two Sermons once a Month, chiefly
intending Souls Conversion.

The Ministers. The most Orthodox, Able, and Powerful that can be procured for
love to Jesus Christ, and his Service, or the Will of the Dead; chosen by my
Trustees successively.

The Trustees. Four Ministers, and four Laymen. The Ministers I leave in
Trust, and question not their Faithfulness herein for Christ's sake, are my
dearest fellow laborers in our Lord's Work, Mr. N. Mr. S. Mr. B. and Mr. J.
with whom I only leave for their Direction and Encouragement, 1 Cor. 15.58.
Mat. 28.20. The Lay men whom I put in Joynt-Trust, are Mr. B. Mr. M. Mr. B. and
plain-hearted T. H. all whose Faces I hope to see in Heaven; with them I leave
for their Refreshment, when taking some steps about it, Mat. 25.39, 40 -- for
Eternity is the place I would be for, to which when gone, I am but a little
before, and you a little behind.

This Lecture he kept up by his constant cost and care, from Aug. 4. 1653.
Monthly, until Jan. 2. 1659. whereof he kept an exact Account in a Catalogue,
wherein he took notice of the day of the Month, the Place, the Persons that
Preached, and their Texts, some hints of the Congregation, both number and
seriousness. See his Life.

And having thus made use of some of his Memorials, we shall add what himself
said of the 'writing of them, in these words: The occasion of making and
writing these things, was a thought I had, what was become of all my
Forefathers, and what what Price I should set upon one of their Manuscripts
concerning the state of our Family, Nation, or Church of God in it 500 Years
since. Whereupon I resolved this Work formy Son's sake, and Posterity's
imitation; when it may be said of us in this Generation, as of Israel once, in
that Exodus 1.6. And Joseph died, and all his Brethren, and all that Generation.
I John Machin, called by him who separated me from the Womb, ( Gal. 1.15.) to
the hope of having my Name in the Book of Life, and likewise to be an
Ambassador of my Lord Christ Jesus, was in my great Master's Work at Astbury in
Cheshire, Anno 1655. when I first set Pen hereunto. See his Life.

67. Part of Mr. Richard Baxter's Last Will, as I find it published by Mr.
Sylvester, in the Narrative of his Life.
I Richard Baxter, of London, Clerk, an unworthy Servant of Jesus Christ,
drawing to the end of this Transitory Life, having, through God's great Mercy,
the free use of my Understanding, do make this My Last Will and Testament -- My
Spirit I commit with Trust and Hope of the Heavenly Felicity into the hands of
Jesus my glorified Redeemer and Intercessor, and by his Mediation into the
hands of God, my Reconciled Father, the Infinite, Eternal Spirit, Light, Life,
and Love, most Great, and Wise, and Good, the God of Nature, Grace, and Glory,
of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things; my absolute Owner,
Ruler, and Benefactor; whose I am, and whom (though imperfectly) I serve, seek,
and trust, to whom be Glory for ever. Amen. -- To him I render most humble
Thanks, that he has filled up my Life with abundance of Mercy, pardoned my
Sins by the Merits of Christ, and vouchsafed by his Spirit to renew and seal me
as his own, and to moderate and bless to me my long-sufferings in the Flesh,
and at last to sweeten them by his own Interest and comforting Approbation, who
takes the cause of Love and Concord as his own -- Now let the Reader Judge (
adds the Reverend Mr. Sylvester, in his Preface to Mr. Baxter 's Life) whether
any thing in all this can in the least infer his doubting, or denial of a
fature state, as some have reported.

68. The Reverend Mr. John Dunton, late Rector of Aston Clinton in Bucks, after
he had in his Last Will bequeathed his Soul to God who gave it, speaking next
concerning his Funeral, he adds, That it is his desire, that his Funeral might
not be performed till Five days after his decease. Which Request was occasioned
by his first Wife's lying seemingly dead for three days, and afterward coming
to Life again, to the Admiration of all that saw her.

69. A Copy of the Will made by the Reverend Dr. Samuel Annesly, who departed
this Life on Thursday, December. 31. 1696. in the 77th. Year of his Age.
IN the Name of God. Amen. I Dr. Samuel Annesly, of the Liberty of
Norton-Folgate in the County of Middlesex, an unworthy Minister of Jesus
Christ, being through Mercy in Health of Body and Mind, do make this my Last
Will and Testament, concerning my Earthly Pittance.

Formy SOUL, I dare humbly say, it is through Grace devoted unto God, otherwise
than by LEGACY, when it may live here no longer: And I do believe that my BODY,
after its sleeping a while in Jesus, shall be reunited to my Soul, that they
may both be for ever with the Lord.

Of what I shall leave behind me, I make this short disposal: My Just Debts
being paid, I give to each of my Children One Shilling, and all the rest to be
equally divided between my Son Benjamin Annesly, my Daughter Judith Annesly,
and my Daughter Ann Annesly, whom I make my Executors of this my Last Will and
Testament, revoking all former, and confirming this with my Hand and Seal this
29th. day of March, 1693.

SAMVEL ANNESLY.

70. Cardinal Richelieu was visited by the King in his last Sickness, which
(says my Author) was the greatest Favor he could receive from any Mortal Man;
seeing, that having lived altogether for his King, he was to die near him, and
almost in his Arms. He desired in his Sickness, That he might live no longer,
than he was able do the King and the Kingdom of France Service. He expired
December. 4. St. N. 1642. aged 58. He was buried in the College of Sorbonne,
where he had caused his Monument to be built during his Life. Gabriel Du-gres,
in the Life of Jean Arman Du Plessis, D. of Richelieu, p. 65.

71. Cardinal Mazarine thus expressed himself to the Queen Mother of France
before his Death: Madam, your Favors have undone me; were I to live again, I
would be a Capuchin rather than a Courtier. [This, with some others following,
I am not now able to cite my Authors for, having taken the Abstracts out of
borrowed Books, several Years ago.]

72. Sir John Mason, Privy-Counsellor to four Princes, expressed himself thus:
Seriousness is the best Wisdom, Temperance the best Physic, a good Conscience
the best Estate; and were I to live again, I would change the Court for a
Cloister, my Privy-Counsellor's Bustles for an Hermit's Retirement, and the
whole Life I have lived in the Palace, for one hours enjoyment of God in the
Chapel. All things else forsake me, except my God, my Duties, and my Prayers.

73. Hugo Grotius wished, that he might exchange all his Learning and Honor
for the plain Integrity of Jean Vrich, (who was a Poor Religious Man, that
spent Eight hours of his Day in Prayer, Eight in Meat and Sleep, and Eight in
Labor.)

74. Salmasius his last Reflections were to this purpose: Oh! I have lost a
World of Time! Time, that most Precious thing in the World; whereof had I but
one Year more, it should be spent in David's Psalms, and Paul's Epistles. O
Sirs, mind the World less, and God more. The Fear of the Lord, this is Wisdom.

75. Mr. Seldom, to Archbishop Usher -- Notwithstanding my curious Enquiries,
and Books, and Collections, I can rest my Soul on nothing but the Scriptures;
and above all, that Passage lies most upon my Spirit, Titus 2.11, 12. The Grace
of God, that brings Salvation, etc.

76. Dr. Donn on his Dying-bed told his Friends, I Repent of all my Life, but
that part I spent in Communion with God, and doing good.

77. Sir Walter Rawleigh, in a Letter to his Wife, after his Condemnation, has
these words: If you can live free from Want, care for no more, for the rest is
but a Vanity: Love God, and begin betimes, in him shall ye find True,
Everlasting, and Endless Comfort. My dear Wife, Farewell; Bless my Boy, Pray for
me, and let my True God hold you both in his Arms.

78. Mr. Herbert, the Divine Poet, to one going about to Comfort him with the
Remembrance of a good Work he had done, in Repairing a ruinous Church belonging
to his Ecclesiastical Dignity; made answer, It Is a good Work, if sprinkled with
the Blood of Christ. In the Preface before his Poems.

79. Mr. Tho. Cartwright, the last Sermon that he made was, Dec. 25. on Eccl.
12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, etc. On the Tuesday following,
the Day before his Death, he was two Hours on his Knees in private Prayer, in
which (as he told his Wife) he found wonderful and unutterable Joy and Comfort;
and within a few Hours after, he quietly resigned up his Spirit to God, Dec.
27. 1603. Mr. Clark 's Martyrol. p. 21.

80. Mr. Paul Baines, in his last Sickness, had many Fears and Doubts; God
letting Satan loose upon him; so that he went away with far less Comfort, than
many weaker Christians enjoy. Ibid. p. 24.

81. Mr. William Bradshaw exhorted all that came to him, to lay a good
Foundation for a comfortable Death in time of Life and Health; assuring them,
that their utmost Addresses and Endeavors would be little enough, when they
came to that Work. Ibid. p. 51.

81. Mr. Richard Rothwel foretold his own Death: I am well, and shall be well
shortly, said he to some that sent to enquire how he did: And afterward
whispering one in the Ear, there present, said, Do you know my meaning? I shall
be with Christ, e're long; but do not tell them so. And after Prayer, smiling,
said he, Now I am well: Happy is he that has not bowed a knee to Baal. He
called upon the Company to sing Psalm. 120. And in the singing of it, he died.
An. 1627. Aged 64. Ibid. p. 71.

83. Dr. Preston, the Night before he died, being Saturday, he went to Bed, and
lay about three Hours, desirous to sleep, but slept not: Then said, My
Dissolution is near, let me go to my Home, and to Jesus Christ, who has bought
me with his most precious Blood. About Four of the Clock the next Morning, he
said, I feel Death coming to my Heart; my Pain shall now be quickly turned into
Joy. And after Prayer made by a Friend, he looked on the Company, turned away
his Head, and at Five a Clock on the Lord's Day in the Morning, gave up the
Ghost, An. 1628. Aged 41. or near it. Ibid. p. 113.

84. Mr. Hildersam, sickening with the Scurvy, in the midst of Winter, on March
4. being the Lord's Day, was prayed for in the Congregation of Ashby. His Son
also prayed with him diverse times that Day; and in the last Prayer he departed,
March 4. 1631. [Had I time to pause upon it, methinks, the Death of many worthy
Persons happening upon the Christian Sabbath, is worthy of a special Remark.]
Mr. Hildersam had given order in his Will, that no Funeral Sermon should be
preached at his Burial. Ibid. p. 123.

85. Dr. Tho. Tailour, of Aldermanbury, expressed himself thus; O, said he, we
serve a good Lord, who covers all our Imperfections, and gives us great Wages
for little Work: And on the Lord's Day he was dismissed hence, to keep a
perpetual Sabbath in Heaven, in the Climacterical Year of his Age, 56. Ibid. p.
127.

86. Mr. John Carter likewise, Feb. 21. 1635. being the Lord's Day, ended his
Life with a Doxology, The Lord be thanked. Ibid. p. 140.

87. Dr. Sibs died, Anno 1631. Aged 58. Ibid. Dr. Chaderton, Anno 1640. Aged
94. Ibid.

88. Mr. Ball being asked in his last Sickness, whether he thought he should
live or die? answered, I do not trouble my self about that matter: And
afterward, how he did? replied, Going to Heaven apace. He died 1640. Aged 55.
Ibid.

89. Dr. Potter died about the great Climacterical Year of his Age, being
suspected to have laid to Heart the Reproaches of some thrown upon him, for a
Sermon preached a little before at Westminster, as too sharp against
Innovations in the Church. Ibid.

90. Mr. Julines Herrings, the Night before his Departure, was observed to rise
upon his Knees, and with Hands lifted up to Heaven, to use these Words: He is
overcome, overcome, through the Strength of my Lord and only Savior Jesus,
unto whom I am now going to keep a Sabbath in Glory. And accordingly next
Morning, March 28. 1644. Aged 62. on the Sabbath Day, he departed. Ibid. 168.

91. Mr. John Dod was tried with most bitter and sharp Pains of the Strangury,
and great Wrestlings with Satan, but was Victorious. To one watching with him,
he said, That he had been wrestling with Satan all Night, who accused him, That
he had neither preached, nor prayed, nor performed any Duty well, for manner or
end; but, says he, I have answered him from the Example of the Prodigal and
the Publican. One of his last Speeches was (with Eyes and Hands lift up to
Heaven) I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Which desire was
granted him, Anno 1645. aged 96. Ibid. p. 178.

92. Mr. Herbert Palmer, after Isa. 38 Chap. being read, prayed himself to this
purpose. First, for himself, That God would heal the sinfulness of his Nature,
pardon all his Transgressions, deliver him from Temptation, accept him in
Christ, etc. Then for the Public, the Nation, King, and Parliament, Ministers,
etc. For Scotland, and the Churches in France, New England, etc. Queen's
College, Westminster, the Country, his Benefactors, etc. He departed, December
25. 1647. aged 46. He desired his Friends not to Pray for his Life; but Pray
God, says he, for Faith, for Patience, for Repentance, for Joy in the Holy
Ghost. Lord, says he, cast me down as low as Hell in Repentance, and lift me
up by Faith to the highest Heavens in confidence of thy Salvation. The Tuesday
before he departed, This day Seven-night, said he, is the Day on which we have
used to remember Christ's Nativity, and on which I have preached Christ; I
shall scarce live to see it; but for me was that Child born, unto me was that
Son given, etc. Ibid. p. 201.

93. Mr. John Cotton, to Mr. Wilson, taking his last leave of him, and praying,
that God would lift up the Light of his Countenance upon him, and shed his Love
into his Soul; presently answered, He has done it already, Brother. And to one
that had been helpful to him in his Sickness, The God that made you, and bought
you with a great Price, Redeem your Body and Soul unto himself: Which were his
last words, December. 23. 1652. aged 68. Ibid. p. 229.

94. Dr. Will. Gouge, after three days illness, complained, Alas! I have lost
three days. And to a Friend visiting him, I am willing to die, having, I bless
God, nothing to do but to die. And to his Sister, being afraid to leave him
alone, Why, Sister, said he, I shall, I am sure, be with Christ, when I die:
Which he did, December. 12. 1653. aged 79. Ibid. p. 246.

95. Mr. Tho. Gataker gave this his last Charge to his Relations, Sister, Son,
Daughter, etc. My heart fails, and my strength fails; but God is my Fortress,
and the strong Rock of my Salvation; into thy hands therefore I commend my
Soul, for thou have redeemed me, O God of Truth. Son, you have a great Charge,
look to it; Instruct your Wife and Family in the fear of God, and discharge
your Ministry conscientiously. To his Sister, two Years older than himself, he
said, Sister, I thought you might have gone before me, but God calls for me
first; I hope we shall meet in Heaven, I pray God to bless you. He admonished
his Daughter to mind the World less, and God more; for that all things without
Piety, and the true fear of God, are nothing worth. Advising his Son Draper to
Entertain some Pious Minister in his House to teach his Children, and instruct
his Family; exhorting them all to Love and Unity: And then commanded them all
to withdraw. He died July 27. 1654. aged near 80. Ibid. p. 259.

96. Mr. Bolton dying, told his Children, That none of them should dare think
to meet him at God's Tribunal in an unregenerate Estate. And when some of his
Parish desired him to express what he felt in his Soul, of the exceeding
Comforts that are in Christ, answered, I am, by the wonderful Mercy of God, as
full of Comfort, as my heart can hold, and feel nothing in my Soul but Christ,
with whom I heartily desire to be: And looking upon some that were weeping,
said, Oh, what a deal of do there is ere one can die. Chetwind's Collections.

97. Mr. Whitaker -- Do not complain, but bless God for me, and entreat him to
open the Prison-door. He died 1654. aged 55. Ibid. p. 272.

98. Mr. Rich. Capel, Sept. 21. 1656. preached twice, taking his leave of the
World, by pressing Faith in God. That Evening he repeated both his Sermons in
his Family, read his Chapter, went to Prayer, and so to Bed, and died
immediately, Sept. 21. 1656. He often said, That if God saw fit, one had better
die of a quick, than lingering Death. Ibid. p. 313.

99. Mr. Jessey the last Night he lived cried out, Oh, the unspeakable Love of
God! Oh, the vilest! Oh, the vilest! that he should reach me, when I could not
reach him! And then rehearsing over and over, Blessed be that ever, ever, ever
Blessed and Glorious Majesty! And when a Cordial appointed for him was brought,
Trouble me not, upon your own Peril, trouble me not. Then showing his care for
the Poor, Widows, and Fatherless, and desiring Prayers, and afterward
repeating Acts 2.27. and calling for more Julip, more Julip (meaning more
Scriptures) by and by he sang this Hymn: Jerusalem, my heart's Delight,
I come, I come to thee;
Then shall my sorrows have an end,
When I thy Joys shall see.


Then often repeating those words, Praises for ever: Amen, Amen. Praises to the
Amen, for ever and ever, Amen. After a while he fell asleep, Sept. 4. 1663.
aged 63. Mr. Collier, in his Life and Death, p. 94.

100. Mr. Brand thus -- Oh! my God, my God, what is sinful Man! Worm-man! what
manner of Love is this! Love indeed! O, I cannot express it! -- Oh! let me be
with thee! with thee, O my God! Oh! I long for Heaven! Oh! welcome Death! Oh!
happy Death, that will put an end to all my Troubles and Afflictions! one
Moment in Abraham's Bosom will make amends for all, turn Sorrow to Joy: What a
dreadful Appearance will there be at the Great Day! what a sad thing to be
disappointed, and come short of Heaven! O, my Redeemer lives, I have served a
good Master! I would not desire Life for a Moment, unless to promote the
Interest of Christ. If God would give me my choice, what I would ask, I would
not ask Life: Nay, I have prayed to God, that I might die. Why so, said a
by-stander? That I may be, said he, with God! O my God, I would come to thee!
Let me live with Thee! As he was going to Bed, with much concernedness of Mind
he said, There will be a Cry at Midnight, Prepare, Prepare. Which came to pass
accordingly; for after going to Bed, he was taken with a Vomiting of Blood, and
after that died. Dr. Annesly in his Life.

101. Mr. John Janeway, for the latter part of his Life, he lived like a Man
that was quite weary of the World, and that looked upon himself as a stranger
here, and that lived in the constant sight of a better World. He plainly
declared himself but a Pilgrim that looked for a better Country, a City that
had Foundations, whose builder and maker was God. His Habit, his Language, his
Deportment, all spoke him one of another World. His Meditations were so
intense, long, and frequent, that they ripened him apace for Heaven, but
somewhat weakened his Body. Few Christians attain to such a holy contempt of the
World, and to such clear, believing, joyful, constant Apprehensions of the
transcendent Glories of the unseen World. On his Deathbed he thus expressed
himself: O help me to Praise God, I have now nothing else to do; I have done
with Prayer, and all other Ordinances; I have almost done conversing with
Mortals. I shall presently be beholding Christ himself, that died for me, and
loved me, and washed me in his Blood. I shall, before a few hours are over, be
in Eternity, singing the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb. I shall
presently stand upon Mount Zion, with an innumerable company of Angels, and the
Spirits of the Just made perfect, and Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant; I
shall hear the voice of much People, and be one amongst them, which shall say,
Hallelujah, Salvation, Glory, Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God; and
again, we shall say, Hallelujah. And yet a very little while, and I shall sing
unto the Lamb, a Song of Praise, saying, Worthy art thou to receive Praise, who
were slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and
Tongue, and People, and Nation, and have made us unto our God, Kings and
Priests, and we shall Reign with thee for ever and ever. Methinks I stand, as
it were, with one Foot in Heaven, and the other upon Earth; methinks I hear the
Melody of Heaven, and by Faith I see the Angels waiting to carry my Soul to the
Bosom of Jesus, and I shall be for ever with the Lord in Glory. And who can
choose but rejoice in all this? And now, my dear Mother, Brethren, and Sisters,
Farewell; I leave you for a while, and I commend you to God, and to the Word of
his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among
all them that are sanctified. And now, dear Lord, my Work is done. I have
finished my course, I have fought the good Fight; and henceforth, there
remains for me a Crown of Righteousness. Now come, dear Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Then a Godly Minister came to give him his last Visit, and to do the
Office of an inferior Angel, to help to convey his blessed Soul to Glory, who
was now even upon Mount Pisgah, and had a full sight of that goodly Land at a
little distance. When this Minister spoke to him, his heart was in a mighty
flame of Love and Joy, which drew Tears of Joy from that precious Minister,
being almost amazed to hear a Man just a dying, talk as if he had been with
Jesus. He died June 1657. Aged between 23 and 24, and was buried in
Kelshall-Church in Hartfordshire. For a larger Account of this Extraordinaay
Person, see his Life, written by his Brother, Mr. James Janeway.

102. Mrs. Allein, in the History of the Life and Death of Mr. Joseph Allein,
writes thus concerning his Death, viz. About Three in the Afternoon, he had, as
we perceived, some Conflict with Satan, for he uttered these words: Away, thou
foul Fiend, thou Enemy of all Mankind, thou subtle Sophister, art thou come now
to molest me! Now I am just going! Now I am so weak, and Death upon me. Trouble
me not, for I am none of thine! I am the Lord's, Christ is mine, and I am his:
His by Covenant; I have sworn my self to be the Lord's, and his I will be:
Therefore be gone. These last words he repeated often, which I took much notice
of; That his Covenanting with God was the means he used to expel the Devil and
all his Temptations. The time we were in Bath, I had very few hours alone with
him, by reason of his constant using the Bath, and Visits of Friends from all
Parts thereabouts, and sometimes from Taunton; and when they were gone, he
would be either retiring to GOD, or to his Rest: But what time I had with him,
he always spent in Heavenly and Profitable Discourse, speaking much of the
Place he was going to, and his Desires to be gone: One Morning as I was
Dressing him, he looked up to Heaven and smiled, and I urging him to know why,
he answered me thus: Ah, my Love, I was thinking of my Marriage-Day, it will be
shortly: O, what a joyful Day will that be! Will it not, think thou, my dear
heart? Another time, bringing him some Broth, he said, Blessed be the Lord for
these Refreshments in the way home; but O, how sweet will Heaven be! Another
time, I hope to be shortly where I shall need no Meat, nor Drink, nor Clothes.
When he looked on his weak consumed hands, he would say, These shall be
changed; This vile Body shall be made like to Christ's Glorious Body. O what a
Glorious Day will the Day of the Resurrection be! Methinks I see it by Faith:
How will the Saints lift up their heads and rejoice, and how sadly will the
wicked World look then! O come let us make haste, our Lord will come shortly,
let us prepare. If we long to be in Heaven, let us hasten with our Work; for
when that is done, away we shall be fetched. O this vain, foolish, dirty World,
I wonder how reasonable Creatures can so dote upon it! What is in it worth the
looking after! I care not to be in it longer than while my Master has either
doing, or suffering Work for me, were that done, farewell to Earth. Thus far
Mrs. Allein.

103. Dr. Peter du Moulin, Professor of Divinity at Sedan, at his last Hour
pronounced these Words, I shall be satisfied when I awake, etc. and twice or
thrice, Come, Lord Jesus, come; Come, Lord Jesus, come; and the last time, that
Text which he loved so much, He that believes in Christ, shall not perish, but
have everlasting life; and a little after, Lord Jesu, receive my Spirit. It
being said to him, You shall see your Redeemer with your eyes; laying his Hand
on his Heart, he answered, with an Effort, I believe it; and so departed, 1658.
aged 90. Out of the French Copy of his Death.

104. Arminius, in his Sickness, was so far from doubting any whit of that
Confession he had published, that he steadfastly judged it to agree in all
things with the Holy Scriptures; and therefore he did persist therein, That he
was ready at that very moment, to appear with that same Belief before the
Tribunal of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Judge of the Quick and Dead. He
died of a Disease in the Bowels, which caused Fevers, Cough, Extension of the
Hypochondria, Atrophy, Gout, Iliack Passion, Obstruction of the Left Optic
Nerve, Dimness of the same Eye, etc. which gave occasion to some Censures. He
died Oct. 19. In his Life, by an unknown Hand.

105. Simon Episcopius, An. 1643. falling sick of an Ischuria, (for Eleven Days
not being able to make a drop of Water,) continued ill two Months, or more, and
at last, for some Weeks, was deprived of his Sight; which Loss had been more
grievous to him, had not his deep and almost continual Sleeping, lessened the
same: For he complained of it to his Friends, that he should not be able to
serve the Church of Christ any more. He died, April 4 at Eight of the Clock in
the Morning, the Moon being then eclipsed, says the Author of his Life, p. 26.

106. Gustavus Ericson, King of Sweden, having lived 70 Years, and reigned 38.
gave in Charge to his Children, to endeavor the Peace, and maintain the
Liberties of their Country; but especially to preserve the Purity of Religion,
without the Mixture of Human Inventions, and to live in Unity, as Brethren
among themselves; and so sealing up his Will, he resigned his Spirit to God,
An. 1562. Clark's Martyrol. p. 370.

107. Edward the Sixth, King of England, in the Time of his Sickness, hearing
Bishop Ridley preach upon Charity, gave him many Thanks for it, and thereupon
ordered Gray-Friars Church, to be a House for Orphans; St. Bartholomew's, to be
an Hospital; and his own House at Bridewel, to be a Place of Correction: And
when he had set his Hand to that Work, he thanked God, that he had prolonged
his Life, till he had finished that good Design. About three Hours before his
Death, having his Eyes closed, and thinking none near him, he prayed thus with
himself.

Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched Life, and take me
among thy Chosen; howbeit, not my Will, but thine be done. Lord! I commend my
Spirit to thee. O Lord! thou know how Happy it were for me to be with thee;
yet for thy Chosen sake send me Life and Death, [ I suspect some Mistake in
recording these last Words, perhaps Life or Death,] that I may truly serve
thee: O my Lord God! bless thy People, and save thine Inheritance: O Lord God,
save thy People of England: O my Lord God, defend this Realm from Papistry, and
maintain thy true Religion; that I, and thy People, may praise thy Holy Name,
for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake.

His last Words were, I am faint; Lord have mercy, and take my Spirit. He died
aged 17.

108. The Lady Jane Gray, by King Edward's Will proclaimed Queen of England,
the Night before she was beheaded, sent her Sister her Greek Testament, in the
end whereof she wrote, as may be seen under the Head of Love of the Holy
Scriptures.

She spoke on the Scaffold thus:

GOod People, I am come hither to Die; and by a Law I am condemned to the same:
My Offense against the Queen's Majesty was only in consenting to the Device of
others, which now is deemed Treason; yet it was never of my seeking, but by
Counsel of those, who should seem to have further understanding of those things
than I, who knew little of the Law, and much less of Titles to the Crown: But
touching the Procurement thereof by me, or on my behalf, I do here wash my
Hands in Innocence before God, and the Face of you all this Day, (and therewith
she wrung her Hands, wherein she had her Book.) I pray you all, good Christian
People, to bear me Witness, that I die a true Christian Woman, and that I look
to be saved by no other means, but only by the Mercy of God, in the Blood of
his only Son, Jesus Christ: And I do confess, That when I knew the Word of God,
I neglected the same, and loved my self and the World; and therefore this
Plague and Punishment is justly befallen me for my Sins: And I yet thank God,
of his Goodness, that he has been pleased to give me Respite to Repent in. And
now, good People, while I am alive, I pray, assist me with your Prayers.

She died, 1554. aged 16.

Tu quibus ista legas, incertum est, Lector, ocellis, Ipsa equidem siccis
scribere non potui.

Fox 's Martyrol.
109. Queen Elizabeth is reported, upon her Deathbed, (but by what Author, I
confess, I do not presently remember,) to complain of the want of Time: Time,
Time, a World of Wealth for an Inch of Time; yet finished her Course with that
of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good Fight, etc.

110. The young Lord Harrington professed in his Sickness, That he feared not
Death in what shape soever it came; declaring about two Hours before his Death,
that he still felt the assured Comforts and Joys of his Salvation by Jesus
Christ: And when Death approached, he breathed forth these longing Expressions;
Oh, that Joy! Oh, my God! when shall I be with thee? And so sweetly resigned up
his Spirit unto God, An. 1613. aged 22. See in his Life, in the Young Man's
Calling, and my Christian's Companion.

111. Henry Prince of Wales, eldest Son to King James, in his Sickness had
these Words to one that waited on him; Ah, Tom! I in vain wish for that time I
lost with thee, and others, in vain Recreations. Which puts me in mind of what
Mr. Smith relates in the Funeral Solemnity of Mr. Moor, Fellow of Gaius
College, and Keeper of the University Library, viz. That he often lamented the
Misery of our English Gentry, who are commonly brought up to nothing but Hawks
and Hounds, and know not how to bestow their Time in a Rainy Day; and in the
midst of all their Plenty are in want of Friends, necessary Reproof, and most
loving Admonition.

112. The Earl of Strafford made this Speech on the Scaffold, May 12. 1641.

MY Lord Primate of Ireland, (and my Lords, and the rest of the Gentlemen,) it
is a very great Comfort to me, to have your Lordship by me this Day, in regard
I have been known to you a long time; I should be very glad to obtain so much
silence, as to be heard a few Words, but I doubt, I shall not. My Lord, I come
hither by the Good Will and Pleasure of Almighty God, to pay that last Debt I
owe to Sin, which is Death; and by the Blessing of God, to rise again, through
the Merits of Christ Jesus, to Eternal Glory. I wish I had been private, that I
might have been heard. My Lord, if I might be so much beholden to you, that I
might use a few Words, I should take it for a very great Courtesy. My Lord, I
come hither to submit to that Judgment which has passed against me: I do it
with a very quiet and contented Mind: I do freely forgive all the World; a
Forgiveness that is not spoken from the Teeth outward (as they say) but from
the Heart. I speak it in the Presence of Almighty God, before whom I stand,
that there is not in me so much as a displeasing Thought to any Creature. I
thank God, I may say truly, and my Conscience bears me witness, that in all my
Service, since I have had the Honor to serve His Majesty in any Employment, I
never had any thing in my Heart, but the joint and individual Prosperity of the
King and People: If it has been my Hap to be misconstrued, it is the common
Portion of us all, while we are in this Life; the Righteous Judgment is
hereafter; here we are subject to Error, and apt to be misjudged one of
another. There is one thing I desire to clear my self of; and I am very
confident, I speak it with so much clearness, that I hope I shall have your
Christian Charity in the belief of it: I did always ever think, the Parliaments
of England were the happiest Constitutions that any Kingdom or Nation lived
under, and under God, the happiest Means of making King and People happy; so
far have I been from being against Parliaments. For my Death, I here acquit all
the World, and pray God heartily to forgive them; and in particular, my Lord
Primate, I am very glad, that His Majesty is pleased to conceive me not
meriting so severe and heavy a Punishment, as the utmost execution of this
Sentence: I am very glad, and infinitely rejoice in this Mercy of his, and
beseech God to turn it to him, that he may find Mercy when he has most need of
it. I wish this Kingdom all the Prosperity and Happiness in the World; I did it
living, and now dying it is my Wish; I do now profess it from my Heart, and do
most humbly recommend it to every M^n here, and wish every Man to lay his Hand
upon his Heart, and consider seriously, whether the beginning of the Happiness
of a People should be written in Letters of Blood! I fear you are in a wrong
way; and I desire Almighty God, that no one drop of my Blood may rise up in
Judgment against you.

My Lord, I profess my self a True and Obedient Son to the Church of England;
to that Church wherein I was born, and wherein I was bred: Prosperity and
Happiness be ever to it! And wherein it has been said, That I have been
inclined to Popery: If it be an Objection worth answering, let me say truly,
That from the Time I was One and twenty Years of Age, till this Hour, going up
Nine and forty, I never had thought in my Heart, to doubt of the Truth of my
Religion in England, and never any had the boldness to suggest to me the
contrary, to the best of my Remembrance; and so being reconciled to the Mercies
of Christ Jesus my Savior, into whose Bosom I hope shortly to be gathered, to
enjoy those Eternal Happinesses that shall never have end,

I desire heartily the Forgiveness of every Man, both for any rash or unadvised
Word or Deed; and desire your Prayers: And, so my Lords, Farewell; Farewell all
the Things of this World. Lord, strengthen my Faith; give me Confidence and
Assurance in the Merits of Christ Jesus.

I desire, that you would be silent, and join in Prayers with me; and I trust
in God, we shall all meet and live eternally in Heaven, there to receive the
Accomplishment of all Happiness, where every Tear shall be wiped from our Eyes,
and every sad Thought from our Hearts; and so God bless this Kingdom, and Jesus
have Mercy upon my Soul.

After this, he prayed twice, and with a low Obeisance took his Leave,
submitting to the Block. The Relat. of his Execut.

113. Archbishop Laud made this his last Speech on the Scaffold, Jan. 10. 1644.

GOod People, this is an uncomfortable time to preach, yet I shall begin with a
Text of Scripture, Hebr. 12.2. Let us run with patience the race, etc. I have
been long in my Race, and how I have looked to Jesus the Author and Finisher of
my Faith, he best knows. I am now come to the end of my Race, and here I find a
Cross, a Death of Shame; but the Shame must be despised, or no coming to the
Right of God. Jesus despised the Shame for me, and God forbid, but I should
despise the Shame for him: I am going apace, as you see, toward the Red Sea,
and my Feet are now upon the very brink of it; an Argument, I hope, that God is
bringing me into the Land of Promise; for that was the way through which he led
his Prophets; but before they came to it, he instituted a Passover for them, a
Lamb it was, but to be eaten with sour Herbs: I shall obey, and labor to
digest the sour Herbs, as well as the Lamb; and I shall remember it is the
Lord's Passover; I shall not think of the Herbs, nor be angry with the Hand
that gathers them; but look only to Him, who instituted that, and governs
these; for Men can have no more power over me, than what is given them from
above. I am not in love with this Passage through the Red Sea; for I have the
Weaknesses and Infirmities of Flesh and Blood plentifully in me; and I have
prayed with my Savior, that this Cup of Red Wine might pass from me; but if
not, God's Will, not mine, be done: And I shall most willingly drink of this
Cup, as deep as he pleases, and enter into this Sea, yea and pass through it,
in the way that he shall lead me. But I would have it remembered, Good People,
that when God's Servants were in this boisterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the
Egyptians which persecuted them, (and did in a manner drive them into that
Sea,) were drowned in the same Waters, while they were in pursuit of them. I
know, the God whom I serve is able to deliver me from this Sea of Blood, as the
Three Children from the Furnace: And (I most humbly thank my Savior for it) my
Resolution is now, as theirs was then; they would not worship the Image the
King had set up, nor will I the Imaginations which the People are setting up,
nor will I forsake the Temple and the Truth of God, to follow the Bleating of
Jeroboam's Calf in Dan and in Bethel: And as for this People, they are at this
Day miserably misled; (God of his Mercy open their Eyes, that they may see the
right way!) for at this Day, the Blind lead the Blind; and if they go on, both
will certainly fall into the Ditch. For my self, I am (and I acknowledge it in
all Humility) a most grievous Sinner many ways, by Thought, Word, and Deed; and
I cannot doubt, but that God has Mercy in store for me, a poor Penitent, as
well as for other Sinners. I have now, upon this sad Occasion, ransacked every
corner of my Heart, and yet, I thank God, I have not found among the many, any
one Sin which deserves Death by any known Law of this Kingdom: And yet hereby I
charge nothing upon my Judges; for if they proceed upon Proof (by valuable
Witnesses) I, or any other Innocent, may be justly condemned; and, I thank God,
though the weight of this Sentence lie heavy upon me, I am as quiet within, as
ever I was in my Life; and though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the
first Man, that ever died by an Ordinance in Parliament, yet some of my
Predecessors have gone this way, though not by this means: For Elphegus was
hurried away, and lost his Life, by the Danes; 3. and Simon Suabury, in the
Fury of Wat. Tyler, and his Fellows; before these, St. John Baptist had his
Head danced off by a lewd Woman; and St. Cyprian, Archbishop of Carthage,
submitted his Head to a persecuting Sword: Many Examples (great and good) and
they teach me Patience; for I hope, my Cause in Heaven will look of another
dye, than the Color that is put upon it here; and some Comfort it is to me,
that I go the way of these Great Men, in their several Generations; and also,
that my Charge, as foul as it is made, looks like that of the Jews against St.
Paul, Act. 25.3. for he was accused for the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion;
and like that of St. Stephen. Act. 6.14. for breaking the Ordinances which
Moses gave, i. e. Law and Religion, the Holy Place and the Temple, v. 13. But
you will say, Do I then, compare my self with the Integrity of St. Paul, and
St. Stephen? No! far be that from me: I only raise a Comfort to my self, that
these Great Saints and Servants of God, were laid at in their times, as I am
now; and it is memorable, that he who helped on this Accusation against St.
Stephen, did, after all, fall under the very same himself. Yea, but here is a
great Clamor, that I would have brought in Popery; I shall answer that more
fully by and by. In the mean time, you know what the Pharisees said against
Christ himself; If we let him alone, all men will believe in him, (and venient
Romani,) and the Romans will come and take away both our Place and Nation. Here
was a causeless Cry against Christ, That the Romans would come; and see how
just the Judgment of God was: They crucified Christ, for fear least the Romans
should come, and his Death was it which brought in the Romans upon them; God
punishing them with that which they most feared: And I pray God, this Clamor
of venient Romani (of which I have given no cause) help not to bring them in:
For the Pope never had such a Harvest in England, since the Reformation, as he
has now upon the Sects and Divisions that are amongst us. In the mean time, by
Honor and Dishonor, by good Report and evil Report, as a Deceiver and yet
True, am I passing through this World. Some Particulars also, I think it not
amiss to speak of.

And first, this I shall be bold to speak of: The King, our gracious Sovereign,
has been also much and ^eed for bringing in of Popery; but on my Conscience
(of which I shall give God a present Account) I know him to be as free from
this Charge, as any Man living; and I hold him to be as sound a Protestant
(according to the Religion by Law established) as any Man in this Kingdom; and
that he will venture his Life as far, and as freely for it; and I think I do,
or should know, both his Affection to Religion, and his Grounds for it, as
fully as any Man in England.

The second Particular is concerning this Great and Populous City, (which God
bless:) Here has been of late, a Fashion taken up, to gather Hands, and then
to go to the Great Court of this Kingdom (the Parliament) and clamor for
Justice; as if that Great and Wise Court, before whom the Causes come, (which
are unknown to the many) could not, or would not do Justice but at their
Appointment. A way, which may endanger many an innocent Man, and pluck his
Blood upon their own Heads, and perhaps upon the City's also: And this has
been lately practiced against my self, (the Magistrates standing still, and
suffering them openly to proceed from Parish to Parish, without Check.) God
forgive the Setters of this, I beg it with all my Heart; but many well-meaning
People are caught by it: In St. Stephen's Case, when nothing else would serve,
they stirred up the People against him; and Herod went the same way, when he
had killed St. James, yet he would not venture upon St. Peter, till he found
how the other pleased the People. But take heed of having your Hands full of
Blood: For there is a Time, best known to himself, when God (above other Sins)
makes Inquisition for Blood; and when that Inquisition is on foot, the Psalmist
tells us, that God remembers, (but that is not all) he remembers, and forgets
not the complaint of the poor, that is, whose blood is shed by oppression, v.
9. Take heed of this. It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, but then especially when he is making Inquisition for Blood; and (with my
Prayers to avert it) I do heartily desire this City to remember the Prophecy,
Jer. 26.15.

The third Particular is the poor Church of England: It has flourished and
been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when Storms have driven upon
them. But, alas! now it is in a Storm it self, and God only knows whether, or
how it shall get out: And (which is worse than a Storm from without) it is
become like an Oak cleft, to shivers with Wedges made out of its own Body; and
at every Cleft, Profaneness and Irreligion is entering in; while (as Prosper
speaks, L. 2. de Contemptu Vitae, c. 4.) Men that introduce Profaneness are
cloaked over with the Name of Imaginary Religion: For we have lost the
Substance, and dwell too much in Opinion; and that Church which all the
Jesuits Machinations could not Ruin, is fallen into Danger by her own.

The last Particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self: I was
Born and Baptized in the Bosom of the Church of England established by Law; in
that Profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to die: This is
no time to dissemble with God, least of all, in matter of Religion; and
therefore I desire it may be remembered, I have always lived in the Protestant
Religion established in England. What Clamours and Slanders I have endured for
laboring to keep an Uniformity in the External Service of God, according to
the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church, all Men know, and I have abundantly
felt.

Now at last I am accused of High Treason in Parliament; a Crime which my Soul
ever abhorred. This Treason was charged to consist of these two Parts, an
Endeavor to subvert the Laws of the Land, and to overthrow the True Protesant
Religion established by Law. Besides my Answers to the several Charges, I
protested my Innocence in both Houses: It was said, Prisoners Protestations at
the Bar must not be taken. I can bring no Witness of my Heart, and the
intentions thereof, therefore I must come to my Protestation, not at the Bar,
but at this hour and instant of my Death: In which, I hope, all Men will be
such Charitable Christians, as not to think, I would die and dissemble, being
instantly to give God an Account for the Truth of it. I do therefore here in
the Presence of God and his Holy Angels, take it upon my Death, That I never
endeavored the Subversion either of Law or Religion; and I desire you all to
remember this Protestation of mine, for my Innocence, in these, and from all
Treasons whatsoever. I have been accused likewise as an Enemy to Parliaments:
No, I understand them too well, and the Benefit that comes by them too well, to
be so; but I did mislike the Misgovernments of some Parliaments, many ways, and
I had good Reason for it: For Corruption optimi est pessima; -- the better the
Thing is in nature, the worse it is corrupted: And that being the Highest
Court, over which no other here have jurisdiction, when it is misinformed or
misgoverned, the Subject is left without all Remedy. But I have done; I forgive
all the World, all and every of those bitter Enemies which have persecuted me;
and humbly desire to be forgiven of God first, and then of every Man, whether I
have offended him, or not, if he do but conceive that I have: Lord, do thou
forgive me, and I beg forgiveness of him; and so I heartily desire all to join
in Prayer with me.

O Eternal God, and Merciful Father, look down upon me in Mercy; in the Riches
and Fullness of all thy Mercies, look upon me; but not till thou have nailed my
Sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me in the Blood of
Christ, not till I have hid my self in the Wounds of Christ, that so the
Punishment due to my Sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased to try
me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee, give me now in this great Instant,
full Patience, proportionable Comfort, and a Heart ready to die for thy Honor,
the King's Happiness, and this Church's Preservation; and my Zeal to these (far
from Arrogance be it spoken) is all the Sin (Humane Frailty excepted, and all
Incidents thereto) which is yet known to me in this Particular, for which I now
come to suffer; I say, in this particular of Treason; but otherwise, my Sins
are very many and great. Lord, pardon them all, and those especially, whatever
they are, which have drawn down this special Judgment upon me: And when thou
have given me Strength to bear it, do with me as seems best in thine own Eyes;
and carry me through Death, that I may look upon it in what Visage soever it
appear unto me. Amen. And that there may be a Stop of this Issue of Blood, in
this more than miserable Kingdom; I shall desire, That I may pray for the
People too, as well as for my self. O Lord, I beseech thee, give Grace of
Repentance to all Blood-thirsty People; but if they will not Repent, O Lord,
confound all their Devices, defeat and frustrate all their Designs and
Endeavors upon them, which shall be contrary to the Glory of thy Great Name,
the Truth and Sincerity of Religion, the Establishment of the King and his
Posterity after him, in their just Rights and Privileges, the Honor and
Conservation of Parliaments in their just Power, the Preservation of this poor
Church in her Truth, Peace and Patrimony, and the Settlement of this distracted
and distressed People under their ancient Laws, and in their native Liberties:
And when thou have done all this, in Mercy, for them; O Lord, fill their Hearts
with Thankfulness, and with Religious Dutiful Obedience to thee and thy
Commandments, all their Days: So Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen: And receive my Soul
into thy Bosom. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

Again kneeling by the Block, he prayed thus:

Lord, I am coming as fast as I can; I know I must pass through the Shadow of
Death before I can come to see thee: But it is but umbra mortis, a mere Shadow
of Death, a little Darkness upon Nature; but thou, through thy Merits and
Passion, have broke through the Jaws of Death. So, Lord, receive my Soul, and
have Mercy upon me, and bless this Kingdom with Peace and Plenty, and with
Brotherly Love and Charity, that there may not be this Effusion of Christian
Blood amongst them, for Jesus Christ's sake, if it be thy Will.

Then laying his Head upon the Block, and praying silently to himself, he said
aloud, Lord receive my Soul. Which was the Signal given to the Executioner.
Thus he died, Aged 71. Jan. 10. 1644. A brief Relat. of his Death and
Sufferings, printed at Oxon, etc. 1644.

114. King Charles the First made this his last Speech upon the Scaffold:
I Shall be very little heard by any body here; I shall therefore speak a Word
unto you here: Indeed I could hold my Peace very well, if I did not think, that
holding my Peace would make some Men think, that I did submit to the Guilt as
well as to the Punishment; but I think it is my Duty to God first, and to my
Country, for to clear my self, both as an honest Man, and a good Christian. I
shall begin first with my Innocence: In troth, I think it not very needful for
me to insist long upon this; for all the World knows, I never did begin a War
with the two Houses of Parliament; and I call God to witness, to whom I must
shortly make an Account, that I never did intend to encroach upon their
Privileges. They began upon me; it was the Militia they began upon: They
confessed, that the Militia was mine; but they thought it fit, to have it from
me: And to be short, if any Body will look to the Dates of Commissions, both
theirs and mine, and likewise to the Declarations, will see clearly, that they
began these unhappy Troubles, not I: So that for the Guilt of these enormous
Crimes that are laid against me, I hope in God, that God will clear me of it; I
will not, I am in Charity. God forbid, that I should lay it upon the two Houses
of Parliament; there is no necessity of either; I hope they are free of this
Guilt: For I do believe, that ill Instruments between them and me, have been
the Cause of all this Bloodshed; so that by way of speaking, I find my self
clear of this; I hope (and pray God) that they may be so too. Yet for all this,
God forbid, that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say, That God's
Judgments are just upon me: Many times, he does pay Justice, by an unjust
Sentence; that is ordinary. I will only say this, That an unjust Sentence, that
I suffered to take effect, is punished now by an unjust Sentence upon me. That
is, so far I have said, to show you that I am an innocent Man.

Now for to show you, that I am a good Christian, I hope, there is a good Man
(pointing to Dr. Juxon) that will bear me witness, that I have forgiven all the
World, and those in particular, that have been the chief Causers of my Death;
who they are, God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive them. But
this is not all, my Charity must go further: I wish that they may repent; for
indeed they have committed a great Sin in that Particular. I pray God, with St.
Stephen, that this be not laid to their Charge; nay, not only so, but that they
may take the right way to the Peace of the Kingdom. So, Sirs, I do wish with
all my Soul, and I hope (there is some here will carry it further) that they
may endeavor the Peace of the Kingdom.

Now, Sirs, I must show you how you are out of the way, and will put you in a
way: First, You are out of the way; for certainly all the way you ever had yet,
as I could find by any thing, is in the way of Conquest. Certainly this is an
ill way; for Conquest, Sirs, in my Opinion, is never Just, except there be a
good just Cause, either for Matter of Wrong or a just Title; and then if you go
beyond it, that makes it Unjust in the end, that was Just at first: But if it
be only Matter of Conquest, then it is a great Robbery, as a Pirate said to
Alexander, That he was the great Robber, he was but a petty Robber. And so,
Sirs, I do think, the way you are in is much out of the way. Now, Sirs, for to
put you in the way, believe it, you will never do right, nor God will never
prosper you, until you give God his due, the King his due (that is, my
Successors) and the People their due: I am as much for them, as any of you. You
must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church, according to his
Scriptures, which is now out of order: For to set you in a way particularly,
now I cannot, but only this: A National Synod, freely called, freely debating
among themselves, must settle this, when that every Opinion is freely and
clearly heard.

For the King, indeed, I will not; the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct
you for that: Therefore, because it concerns my own particular, I only give you
a touch of it.

For the People, and truly I desire their Liberty and Freedom as much as any
body whomsoever; but I must tell you, That their Liberty and Freedom consist in
having (...) Government; those Laws by which their Lives and Goods may be most
their own. It is not for having a share in Government, Sirs, that is nothing
pertaining to them; a Subject and a Sovereign are clean different things; and
therefore until they do that, I mean, until you do put the People in that
Liberty, as I say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves.

Sirs, it was for this, that now I am come here: If I would have given way to
an Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed, according to the Power of the
Sword, I needed not to have come here; and therefore I tell you, (and I pray
God it be not laid to their Charge) That I am the Martyr of the People.

In troth, Sirs, I shall not trouble you much longer; for I will only say this
to you, That in truth, I could have desired some little time longer, because
that I would have put this that I have said, in a little more order, and a
little better digested, than I have done; and therefore I hope you will excuse
me.

I have delivered my Conscience; I pray God, that you may take those Courses,
that are best for the Good of the Kingdom, and your own Salvation.

(The Bishop of London minding him to say something concerning his Religion) he
answered,

I thank you very heartily, my Lord, for that I had almost forgotten it. In
troth, Sirs, my Conscience in Religion, I think, is very well known to all the
World; and therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian,
according to the Profession of the Church of England, as I found it left by my
Father; and this honest Man, I think, can witness it.

Then turning to the Officers, he said, Sirs, Excuse me for this same; I have a
good Cause, and a Gracious God; I will say no more.

Then turning to Colonel Hacker, he said, Take heed that they do not put me to
pain; and, Sir, this and it please you.

But then a Gentleman coming near the Ax, the King said, Take heed of the Ax,
Pray take heed of the Ax.

Then to the Executioner; I shall have but very short Prayers, and when I
thrust out my Hand --

Then the King called to Dr. Juxon, for his Nightcap; and having put it on, he
said to the Executioner, Does my Hair trouble you? Who desired him to put it
all under his Cap, which he did accordingly.

Then to Dr. Juxon; I have a good Cause, and a Gracious God on my side.

Dr. Juxon. There is but one Stage more: This Stage is turbulent and
troublesome; it is a short one; but you may consider, it will soon carry you a
very great way, from Earth to Heaven, and there you shall find a great deal of
Cordial Joy and Comfort.

King. I go from a Corruptible to an Incorruptible Crown, where no Disturbance
can be.

Doctor. "You are exchanged from a Temporal to an Eternal Crown; a good
Exchange.

Then the King took off his Cloak, and his George, giving his George to Dr.
Juxon, saying, Remember. And so humbly submitted to the Block, Jan. 30. 1648.
through the Indignity and unjust Dealing of ill Men. A brief Review of the most
material Parl. Transact. began Nov. 3. 1640.

115. Duke Hamilton, Earl of Cambridge, made this his last Speech on the
Scaffold, in the Palace-yard, march 9. 1649.
I Think it is truly not very necessary for me to speak much; there are many
Gentlemen and Soldiers there that see me, but my Voice truly is so weak, so
low, that they cannot hear me; neither truly was I ever at any time so much in
love with speaking, or with any thing that I had to express, that I took
delight in it; yet this being the last time that I am to do so, by a Divine
Providence of Almighty God, who has brought me to this End justly for my Sins:
I shall to you, Sir, Mr. Sheriff, declare thus much as to the Matter I am now
to suffer for, which is as being a Traitor to the Kingdom of England. Truly,
Sir, it was a Country I equally loved with my own; I made no difference, I
never intended either the Generality of its Prejudice, or any particular Man's
in it; what I did, was by the Command of the Parliament of the Country where I
was born, whose Command I could not disobey, without running into the same
hazard there, of that condition that I am now in.

It pleased God so to dispose that Army under my Command, as it was ruined; and
I, as their General, clothed with a Commission, stand here now ready to die: I
shall not trouble you with repeating of my Plea; what I said in my own Defense
at the Court of Justice, my self being well satisfied with the Command laid
upon me, and they satisfied with the Justice of their proceedure, according to
the Laws of this Land. God is Just, howsoever I shall not say any thing as to
the matter of the Sentence, but that I do willingly submit to his Divine
Providence, and acknowledge that very many ways I deserve even a Worldly
Punishment, as well as hereafter: For we are all sinners, Sir, I am a great
one; yet for my Comfort, I know there is a God in Heaven, that is exceeding
merciful, I know my Redeemer sits at his Right Hand, and am confident (clapping
his hand on his Breast) is Mediating for me at this instant. I am hopeful
through his Free Grace, and All-sufficient Merits, to be pardoned of my sins,
and to be received into his Mercy; upon that I rely, trusting to nothing but
the Free Grace of God through Jesus Christ. I have not been tainted in my
Religion, I thank God for it, since my Infancy; it has been such, as has been
professed in the Land, and established; and now it is not this Religion, or
that Religion, nor this or that Fancy of Men that is to be built upon, it is
but one that is right, one that is sure, and that comes from God, Sir, and in the
Free Grace of our Savior. Sir, there is truly somewhat that (he then observing
the Writers) had I thought my Speech would have been thus take^^^ would have
digested it into some better Method than now I can, and shall desire these
Gentlemen that do write it, that they will not wrong me in it, and that it may
not in this manner be published to my disadvantage, for truly I did not intend
to have spoken thus when I came here -- etc. [ With much more, which would be
too tedious to relate in this place. See the Narrative.] At last, with a
cheerful and smiling Countenance (embracing Dr. Sibbalds) he said, Truly, Sir,
I do take you in mine Arms, and truly, I bless God for it, I do not fear, I
have an Assurance that is grounded here (laying his hand upon his Heart) now,
that gives me more true Joy than ever I had. I pass out of a Miserable World,
to go into an Eternal and Glorious Kingdom; and Sir, though I have been a most
sinful Creature, yet God's Mercy I know is infinite, and I bless my God for it,
I go with so clear a Conscience, that I know not the Man I have Personally
injured.

Then Embracing those his Servants which were there present, he said to each of
them, You have been very Faithful to me, and the Lord bless you.

And so turning himself to the Executioner, he said, I shall say a very short
Prayer unto my God, while I lie down there, and when I stretch out my Hand (my
Right Hand) then, Sir, do your Duty, and I do freely forgive you, and so I do
all the World.

Then the Earl of Cambridge said to the Executioner, Must I lie all along? He
answered, Yes, and't please your Lordship. Then he said, When I stretch out my
hands -- but I will fit my Head first, tell me if I be right, and how you would
have me lie: And being told, he must lie a little lower, he said, Well, stay
then till I give you the Figure. And so having lain a short space devoutly
Praying to himself, he stretched out his Right Hand, whereupon the Executioner
at one blow severed his Head from his Body, which was received by two of his
Servants then kneeling by him, into a Crimson Taffaty Scarff, and that with the
Body immediately put into a Coffin, brought upon the Scaffold for that purpose,
and from thence conveyed to the House that was Sir John Hamilton's at the Mews.

116. The Speech of the Earl of Holland upon the Scaffold.
IT is to no purpose (I think) to speak any thing here; which way must I speak?
And then being directed to the Front of the Scaffold, he (leaning over the
Rail) said, I think it is fit to say something, since God has called me to
this Place. The first thing which I must profess, is, what concerns my
Religion, and my Breeding, which has been in a good Family, that has been
ever Faithful to the True Protestant Religion, in the which I have been bred,
in the which I have lived, and in the which by God's Grace and Mercy I shall
die.

I have not lived according to that Education I had in that Family where I was
born and bred: I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive that it is
very much his Pleasure to bring me to this Place for the sins that I have
committed.

The cause that has brought me hither, I believe by many has been much
mistaken: They have conceived that I have had ill Designs to the State, and to
the Kingdom; truly I look upon it as a Judgment, and a just Judgment of God;
not that I have offended so much the State, and the Kingdom, and the
Parliament, as that I have had an extreme Vanity in Serving them very
extraordinarily. For those Actions that I have done, I think it is known they
have been very Faithful to the Public, and particularly to the Parliament; my
Affections have been ever expressed truly and clearly to them. The disposition of
Affairs now have put things in another posture than they were when I was
engaged with the Parliament. I have never gone off from those Principles that
ever I have professed; I have lived in them, and by God's Grace will die in them,
etc, At last, the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, Here, my Friend, let
my Clothes and my Body alone, there is Ten Pounds for thee, that is better than
my Clothes, I am sure of it.

Execut. Will your Lordship please to give me a sign, when I shall strike? And
his Lordship said, You have room enough here, have you not? Execut. Yes.

Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, Friend, do you hear
me? if you take up my Head, do not take off my Cap. Then turning to his
Servants, he said to one, Fare you well, thou art an honest Fellow; and to
another, God be with thee, thou art an honest Man: And then said, Stay, I will
kneel down, and ask God forgiveness; and then prayed for a pretty space with
seeming earnestness. Then speaking to the Executioner, he said,

Which is the way of lying (which they showed him) and then going to the Front
of the Scaffold, he said to the People, God bless you all, and God deliver you
from any such Act as may bring you to any such Death as is violent, either by
War, or by those Accidents, but that there may be Peace among you, and you may
find that the Accidents that have happened to us, may be the last that may
happen in this Kingdom; it is that I desire, it is that I beg of God, next the
saving of my Soul; I pray God give all Happiness to this Kingdom, to this
People, and this Nation. And then turning to the Executioner, he said, how must
I lie? I know not.

Execut. Lie down flat upon your Belly. Whereupon after he had prayed with much
Affection for a short space, the Executioner (upon the sign given) at one blow
severed his Head from his Body.

117. The Lord Capel, after a brave Speech made upon the Scaffold, wherein he
prayed for his Enemies, taxed the Illegality and Injustice of the Proceedings
against him, lamented the Consent he gave to the Sentence of Death passed upon
the Earl of Strafford, as an Act of Cowardice; commended the King (Charles) for
a Virtuous and sufficient Prince, prayed for the Prince his Son, commended the
Case of the Nation to the Grace and Mercy of God, prayed for all the People,
and humbly begged, that God would stanch that Issue of Blood; and lastly, for
himself; at last he submitted his Neck to the stroke of the Executioner.

118. Mr. Love's Speech on the Scaffold on Tower Hill, August 22. 1651.
BEloved Christians, I am this Day made a Spectacle to God, Angels, and Men; a
Grief to the Godly, a Laughing Stock to the Wicked, and a Gazing-stock to all;
yet blessed be my God, not a Terror to my self, though there be but a little
between me and Death; yet this bears up my Heart, there is but a little between
me and Heaven. It comforted Dr. Tallour the Martyr, when going to Execution,
that there were but two Styles between him and his Father's House. There Is a
lesser way between me and my Father's House, but two steps between me and
Glory; it is but lying down upon the Block, and I shall ascend upon a Throne. I
am this day Sailing toward an Ocean of Eternity, through a rough Passage to my
Haven of Rest; through a Red Sea, to the promised Land. Methinks I hear God
saying to me, as to Moses, Go up to Mount Nebo, and die there; so, Go thou up
to Tower Hill, and die there. Isaac said of himself, That he was Old, and yet
did not know the day of his Death. But I cannot say thus; I am Young, and yet I
know the Day, the Kind, and the Place of my Death also. It is such a kind of
Death, as two Famous Preachers of the Gospel, John the Baptist, and Paul the
Apostle, were put to before me; we have mention of the one in Scripture-Story,
of the other in Ecclesiastical History. And Rev. 20.4. The Saints were Beheaded
for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus. But herein is the
disadvantage which I am in, in the thoughts of many, who judge that I Suffer
not for the Word or Conscience, but for meddling with State-matters: To this I
shall briefly say, that it is an old Guise of the Devil, to impute the cause of
God's Peoples Sufferings to be Contrivements against the State. The Rulers of
Israel would put Jeremiah to death upon a civil Account, though it was the Truth
of his Prophecy, made them angry, because he fell away to the Chaldeans. So
Paul must die, as a Mover of Sedition. The same thing is laid to my Charge;
whereas indeed it is, because I pursue my Covenant, and will not prostitute my
Principles to the Lusts of Men. Beloved, I am this Day to make a double
Exchange; I am exchanging a Pulpit for a Scaffold, and a Scaffold for a Throne;
and I might add a third, I am changing this numerous Multitude upon Tower Hill,
for the innumerable Company of Angels in the Holy Hill of Sion; and I am
changing a Guard of Soldiers for a Guard of Angels, which will receive and
carry me into Abraham's Bosom. This Scaffold is the best Pulpit I ever preached
in. God, through his Grace, made me an Instrument to bring others to Heaven,
but in this he will bring me to Heaven; and it may be, this Speech upon a
Scaffold may bring God more Glory, than many Sermons in a Pulpit.

Before I lay down my Neck upon the Block, I shall lay open my Case, and that
without Animosity, or Revenge: God is my Record, whom I serve in the Spirit; I
speak the Truth, I Lie not; I do not bring a Revengeful Heart unto the Scaffold
this Day. Before I came here, I did upon my bended Knees beg Mercy for them
that denied Mercy to me. I have forgiven, from my Heart, the worst Enemy I have
in the World; and this is the worst I wish to my Accusers and Prosecutors, who
have pursued my Blood, that I might meet their Souls in Heaven.

I have no more to say, but to desire the Help of all your Prayers, that God
would give me the Continuance and Supply of Divine Grace, to carry me through
this great Work I am now to do; that I, who am to do a Work I never did, may I
have a Strength that I never had; that I may put off this Body with as much
Quietness and Comfort of Mind, as ever I put off my Clothes to go to Bed. And
now I am to commend my Soul to God, and to receive my fatal Blow, I am
comforted in this, Though Men kill me, they cannot damn me; and though they thrust
me out of the World, yet they cannot shut me out of Heaven. I am now going to
my Long Home, to my Father's House, to the Heavenly Jerusalem, to the
innumerable Company of Angels, to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the New
Covenant, to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, to God the Judge of all, in
whose Presence there is Fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand there are
Pleasures for evermore.

Then he kneeled down, and made a short Prayer privately.

Then after rising up, he said, Blessed be God, I am full of Joy and Peace in
believing; I lie down with a world of Comfort. And then saying, The Lord bless
you, he lay down with his Head over the Block, and when he stretched out his
Hands, the Executioner did his Office.

118. The Last Speech of Sir Walter Rawleigh.
MY Honorable Lords, and the rest of my good Friends that are come to see me
die, know, That I much rejoice, that it has pleased God to bring me from
Darkness to Light, and in freeing me from the Tower, wherein I might have died
in Disgrace, by letting me live to come to this Place, where though I lose my
Life, yet shall I clear some false Accusations unjustly laid to my Charge, and
leave behind me a Testimony of a true Heart, both to my King and Country.

Two things there are, which have exceedingly possessed and provoked His
Majesty's Indignation against me, viz. A Confederacy or Combination with
France, and disloyal and disobedient Words of my Prince. For the first, His
Majesty had some Cause, though grounded upon a weak Foundation, to suspect mine
Inclination to the French Faction; for not long before my Departure from
England, the French Agent took occasion, passing by my House, to visit me: We
had some Conference, during the time of his abode, only concerning my Voyage,
and nothing else, I take God to witness.

Another Suspicion is had of me, because I did labor to make an Escape from
Plymouth to France: I cannot deny, but that willingly, when I heard a Rumor,
that there was no hope of my Life, upon my Return to London, I would have
escaped for the Safeguard of my Life, and not for any ill Intent, or Conspiracy
against the State.

The like Reason of Suspicion arose, in that I persuaded Sir Lewis Steukly, my
Guardian, to flee with me from London to France; but my Answer to this is, as
to the other, that only for my Safeguard, and nough else, was my Intent, as I
shall answer before the Almighty.

It is alleged, That I feigned my self Sick, and by Art made my Body full of
Blisters, when I was at Salisbury. True it is, I did so; the Reason was,
because I hoped thereby to deferr my cooming before the King and Council, and
so by delaying, might have gained time to have got my Pardon. I have an Example
out of Scripture for my Warrant, that in case of Necessity, and for the
Safeguard of his Life, David feigned himself Foolish and Mad, yet it was not
imputed to him for Sin.

Concerning the second Imputation laid to my Charge, That I should speak
Scandalous and Reproachful Words of my Prince, there is no Witness against me,
but only one, and he a Chemical Frenchman, whom I entertained rather for his
Jests than Judgment. This Man, to incroach himself into the Favor of the
Lords, and gaping after some great Reward, has falsely accused me of Seditious
Speeches against His Majesty; against whom, if I did either speak or think a
Thought hurtful or prejudicial, Lord blot me out of the Book of Life.

It is not a time to Flatter or Fear Princes; for I am a Subject to none but
Death: Therefore have charitable Conceit of me; That I know to swear, is an
Offense; to swear falsely at any time, is a great Sin; but to swear falsely
before the Presence of Almighty God, before whom I am forthwith to appear, were
an Offense unpardonable: Therefore think me not now rashly or untruly to
confirm, or protest any thing.

As for other Objections: as, That I was brought perforce into England; That I
carried Sixteen Thousand Pounds in Money out of England with me, more than I
made known; That I should receive Letters from the French King, and such like,
with many Protestations he utterly denied. England's Worthies, by Will.
Winstanley, p. 303.

119. The Death of Henry Bullinger.
Mr. Bullinger falling Sick, and his Disease increasing, many Godly Ministers
came to visit him; but some Months after, he recovered, and preached as
formerly, but soon Relapsed; when finding his vital Spirits wasted, and Nature
much decayed in him, he concluded his Death was at hand, and thereupon said as
follows: If the Lord will make any farther use of me and my Ministry in his
Church, I will willingly obey him; but if he pleases (as I much desire) to take
me out of this miserable Life, I shall exceedingly rejoice that he will be so
pleased to take me out of this miserable and corrupt Age, to go to my Savior
Christ. Socrates (said he) was glad when his Death approached, because he
thought he should go to Hesiod, Homer, and other Learned Men, deceased, and
whom he expected to meet in the other World; then how much more do I joy, who
am sure that I shall see my Savior Christ, the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, and all Holy Men, which have lived from the beginning of the World.
These (I say) I am sure to see, and to partake with them in Joy; Why then
should I not be willing to die, to enjoy their perpetual Society in Glory? And
then with Tears told them, That he was not unwilling to leave them for his own
sake, but for the sake of the Church. Then having written his Farewell to the
Senate, and therein admonished them to take care of the Churches and Schools,
and by their permission, chose one Ralph Gualter his Successor, he patiently
resigned up his Spirit into the Hands of his Redeemer, dying Anno Christi,
1575. and or his Age, 71.

120. Mr. Haines, Minister of Westminister, was acquainted with a Gentleman of
a very Holy Life and Conversation: Which said Gentleman, as he lay in his Bed
one Morning, a Boy, of about twelve Years of Age, appeared to him in a radiant
Light, and bid him prepare to Die in twelve Days. He being surprised at it,
sent for Mr. Haines, and told him of it; who persuaded him from believing of
it, telling him, 'twas only a Fancy. But within six Days, he was siez'd with a
violent Fever; and four or five Hours before his Death, the same Boy came and
sat upon his Pillow, and as the Gentleman grew paler, he changed color too;
and just as the Breath went out of the Body, he disappeared. This is attested
by the Gentleman's Family; for they all saw it; and Mr. Haines related it to a
Person of good Reputation, from whom I received it.

121. The Last Will of Mr. Henry Stubbs, Deceased, July ^. 1678. Published at
the Desire of his Widow, Mrs. D. S.
KNowing that I must shortly put off this my Earthly Tabernacle, I make my Last
Will and Testament.

Imprimis, I commend my Soul into the Hands of God, wholly trusting in Jesus
Christ my dear Lord and Savior, through his All-sufficient Satisfaction, and
powerful Mediation, to be accepted, Ephesians. 1.6.

Item, I commit my Body to the Earth, from whence 'twas taken, in sure and
certain Hope of a Resurrection to Life Eternal, building upon that sure Word,
John 6.40.

Item, I leave my Fatherless Children to the Lord, who has promised to be a
Father to the Fatherless, Ps. 68.5. And to preserve them alive, Jer. 49.11.
Commanding them to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19.

Item, I ^xhort my Widow to trust in the Lord, of whose care she has had no
little Experience; and therefore should trust in him, Psalm. 9.10. And I desire
her to read often, Jer. 49.11. Psalm. 68.5. Heb. 13.5.

Item, The Congregations to which I have been formerly a Preacher, and that
with which I now am by a special Hand of Providence, I commend to God, and the
Word of his Grace, which is able to build them up, and to give them an
Inheritance amongst all them which are sanctified, Acts 20.32. beseeching them
by the Lord Jesus, That as they ahve received of me how they ought to walk, and
please God; so they would abound more and more, 1 These. 4.1.

Item, And for my Kindred, according to the Flesh, my Hearts Desire and Prayer
to God for them is, That they may be saved, Romans 10.1.

Item, And for all those yet living, and who have seriously and earnestly
desired my Prayers; my earnest Request to God for them is, That it would please
him to do for them all as the Marter shall require, 1 Kings 8.59.

Item, And for my Brethren in the Ministry, my Prayer is, That they may take
heed to themselves, and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made
them Overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own
Blood, Acts 20.28.

Item, And for the People, my Prayer is, That they may obey them that have the
Rule over them, Heb. 13.17.

Item, And for Professors of Religion, my Prayer is, That they may walk worthy
of God, unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every Good Work, Col. 1.10,
11.

Item, And for the King, my Prayer is, That Mercy and Truth may preserve him,
Prove. 26.28. And for Him, and all that are in Authority, my Prayer is, That
they may so lead their own Lives, that the People under them may lead quiet and
peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.

Item, And for the whole Land of my Nativity, my humble Prayer to the Lord of
all Grace and Mercy is, That the Power and Purity of the Gospel, together with
a Learned and Faithful Ministry to dispense the same, may be continued and
preserved therein.

The Last Words of those Eminent Persons who fell in the Defense of the
Protestant Religion, and the English Liberties, both in London and the West of
England, from the Year 1678. to this time.
IN the two last Reigns, many of the Flower of our Nobility and Gentry, either
lost their Lives or Estates, or Liberties, or Country; whilst a Crew of
Parasites triumphed and fluttered in their Ruins. To see a Russel die meanly
and ignobly in the Flower of his Age; an Essex or a Godfry sacrificed to the
insatiable Ambition and Revenge of their Enemies, who yet not content with
their Lives, would like the Italian stab on after Death; and though they could
not reach their Souls, endeavor to damn their Memories. These, and too many
other such melancholy Instances would be ready to make a short-sighted Man
exclaim with Hercules in the Tragoedian, That Virtue is but an empty Name, or
at least could only serve to make its Owners more sensibly unhappy.

But although such Examples might a little work on a weaker Virtue, that which is
more confirmed and solid can more easily resist it. It Is not impatient nor
uneasy, but still believes that Heaven is awake, that the Iron Hands of
Justice will at length overtake the Offenders, and by their Destruction
vindicate the Honor and Innocence of those whom they have ruined. It considers
any Riddles in Providence, as a curious piece of Optics, which, if judged of
either before it is finished, or by piece meal, here an Eye, and there another
distorted Feature, appears not only unpleasing, but really dreadful; which yet
if viewed when it is complete, and taking all the Features together, makes a
Figure sufficiently regular and lovely.

Who almost could have imagined, without some such Reflections as these, that
those brave Men we have seen for some Years past, picked out, and out off one
after another with as much Scandal and Obloquy as could be thrown upon 'em by
the ungenerous Malice of their Enemies; when the very Attempt to clear their
Reputation has been made almost Capital, and involved those who had Courage
enough to attempt it in little less Mischief than what they themselves endured:
That ever these Phoenixes should rise again, and flourish in their Ashes! That
so many great Pens should already have done some of 'em Justice, and the World
as much to all the rest! And with how much more Joy, if 'twere possible, would
those Heroes have received their Crowns, could they have foreseen their Deaths
would have tended so far to work up the Nation to such a just Resentment, as
would at last have so great an Influence, as we find it had, on our late
glorious deliverance. We shall therefore here under this Chapter, add the Last
Words, and what is Remarkable, in the Deaths of those Eminent Persons who fell
in Defense of the Protestant Religion, and the English Liberties, both in
London, and the West of England, from the Year 1678. to this Time.

1. Sir Edmundbury Godfrey declared some Days before his Death, That he
believed in his Conscience he should be the first Martyr. Two Anagrams there
were made on this brave Gentleman, which for the peculiar luckiness of 'em, it
may not be ungrateful to the Reader, to have 'em inserted.

Sir EDMVNDBVRY GODFREY, Anagram. I FIND MURDERED BY ROGUES. Another. BY ROME'S
RUDE FINGER DIE!

He was the first Martyr for our holy Protestant Religion: We shall address
what has been written on this Subject, not only to Posterity, but to all the
sober unprejudiced Men of the present Age, and so dismiss it, and go on to the
rest for whom he only made way, after we have presented you with one of the
best pieces of Wit tht the Age has yielded on Sir Edmund's Death. It Is a part
of that ingenious Poem, called Bacchanalia.

Well Primrose! my our Godfrey's Name on thee
Like Hyacinth inscribed be!
On thee his Memory flourish still,
Sweet as thy Flower, and lasting as thy Hill.
Whilst blushing Somerset, to her
Eternal Shame, shall this Inscription wear;
"The Devil's an Ass; for Jesuits on this spot
"Broke both the Neck of Godfrey, and the Plot.
2. Mr. COLLEGE.
NO body can doubt, but that 'twas now very much the Interest of the Papists to
get off, if possible, that foul Imputation of a Plot which stuck so deep upon
'em; which had been confirmed by Sir Edmund's Murder, Coleman's
never-to-be-forgotten Letters, Arnold's Assassination, and a great deal of
Collateral Evidence, which fell in unexpectedly, many of those who gave it
being utterly unacquainted with the first Discoverers. After several
unfortunate Attempts they had made to this purpose; after the Living had
perjured themselves, and the Dying done worse, to support their desperate
Cause; after Attempts to blast and ruin some of the Evidence, and buy off
others of 'em, in both which, public Justice took notice of, and punished 'em;
being of a Religion that sticks no Villainy to serve an Interest, and certainly
the most indefatigable and firm People in the World, when they set about any
Design, especially where Diana is concerned, not being yet discouraged, they
resolved to venture upon one Project more, which proved but too successful, to
the Loss of the bravest and best Blood in the Kingdom; and that was to Brand
all those who were the steddiest Patriots, and so their greatest Enemies, of
what Rank soever they were, with the odious Character of Persons disaffected to
the Government, or, in the old Language, Enemies to Caesar: They pretended to
persuade the World, that after all this great noise of a Popish Plot, 'twas
only a Presbyterian one lay at the bottom.

Things being thus, what can any Man of Modesty say to Mr. Colledge's
Protestations over and over, both in Prison, and at his Death, that he was
perfectly innocent of what he died for? [ I did deny in them, (say he, that is,
before the Council) and do deny it upon my Death: I never was in any manner of
Plot in my days; nor ever had any such Design as these Men have sworn against
me, I take God to witness, as I am a dying Man, and on the Terms of my
Salvation, I know not one Man upon the face of the Earth which would have stood
by me.] And lower, [I knew not of any part of what they swore against me, till
I heard it sworn at the Bar. Again, [ All the Arms we had was for our Defense,
in case the Papists should have made any Attempt by way of Massacre, etc. God
is my Witness this is all I know.] And in his solemn Prayer, and some of his
almost very last Words, ['Tis thee, O God, I trust in -- I disown all
Dispensations, and will not go out of the World with a Lie in my Mouth.] And
just after to the People, [From the sincerity of my Heart, I declare again,
That these are the very Sentiments of my Soul, as God shall have Mercy upon me.]

Thus died Mr. College, whose Blood, as he himself desired it might,
sufficiently spoke the Justice of his Cause, who seemed in his Speech to have
some Prophetic Intimations, that his Blood would not be the last, as indeed it
was not, but rather a Praelude to that which followed, the Edge of the Law
being now turned against all those who dared defend it.

He has one Daughter yet living, whose Gratitude and Generosity to those who
were kind to her under the Misfortunes of her Family, is at present the Wonder
and Entertainment of the Court of England, and whose brave Soul speaks her the
true Child of such a Father.

His CHARACTER.
How great and undaunted his Courage was, both his Trial and Death testify. He
was very vigorous and earnest, almost to a Fault, in his Undertakings. But
certainly there are so few who err on that hand, that we may without Flattery
account this his warm Zeal for his Country, if it did a little exceed, a happy
as well as a very pardonable Error. He was extraordinary ingenious in his own
Trade, and employed amongst great Persons for his dexterity therein. He had an
entire Love for the City of London, and stood up for its Honor and Privileges
as highly as any Man living, He had a Soul so very great and generous, that
many who knew him well, have said, considering his Education, they wondered how
he came by it. He was a Man of very good sound Sense, considerably more than
those of his Rank generally have, which he had much improved in his latter time
by Conversation with Persons of Honor and Quality. In fine, he lived
sufficiently beloved by those who knew, and did not fear him; and died lamented
by his Friends, and admired and esteemed by his very Enemies.

Some time after his Death, his Picture was sold about Town. Under it were
these Lines engraven: By Irish Oaths, and wrested Laws I fell
A Prey to Rome, a Sacrifice to Hell.
My guilty Blood for speedy Vengeance cries,
Hear, hear and help, for Earth my Suit denies.


3. ARTHVR Earl of Essex.
THat Party, and those Persons who were engaged to manage the Designs
beforementioned, were now entered on the most compendious way of introducing
what they desired, as well as avoiding what their own Consciences, and all the
World knew they deserved.

My Lord of Essex was a Person, whom 'twas, no doubt, the highest Interest of
the Popish Faction to have gotten out of the way, even though there had been no
such extraordinary Reason as has been mentioned. He had large Interest, a
plentiful Estate, a great deal of Courage, understood the World, and the
Principles and Practices of the Papists as well as any Man, having been of
several Secret Committees in the Examination of the Plot, on which very reason
there was as much necessity for his dying as Sir E. B. Godfrey's. He was
besides all this, they very well knew, of Inflexible Honesty, and so true a
greatness of Mind, they could no more expect to gain him, than Heaven it self
to be on their side.

As for the immediate Subject of his Death, the manner and circumstances
thereof -- It must first be granted, and a very reasonable demand it is, that
for the present only supposing he was murdered by the Papists, they would, we
may be sure, make it their business to render the manner of it as dark as the
Hell in which 'twas contrived.

But whatever this courageous honest Gentleman suffered from their Spite and
Malice, he bore all with handsome, and truly English Resolution. As he before
his Imprisonment, and since, was indefatigably diligent in getting up the
bottom of this foul Business; all Englishmen must own, he has deserved the
Love and Honor of his Country, who was not discouraged from acting even in the
worst of times, against a whole enraged Faction.

His CHARACTER.
It must be confessed, it is a bold and dangerous thing to attempt the Character
of one of the greatest Men which our Age has produced, especially for one who
had not the Honor of any Personal intimacy with him. All that is to be done is
from what has been already said, and what other Memoirs are left of him, to
endeavor at something so like him, that any one who sees it, may say, 'twas
meant for the Picture of the Great Essex, how infinitely soever it must of
necessity be short of its Original.

The first thing then Remarkable in him, and which alone would sufficiently
distinguish him, is, That he was a Person of strict Morals, and severe Piety;
and that in the midst of a Court and Age not very Famous for either. Nor did
this degenerate into Superstition or Weakness. He was a refined Politician,
without what some will say it is impossible to be so, and that is Dissimulation.
When Affronts were offered him, he did not, as others, dissemble 'em, but, like
himself only scorn and conquer 'em; even though of the highest Nature, and which
generally pierce deepest into Persons of his Figure and Character. He was, as
all the rest here commemorated, a firm Lover of his Country and Religion, the
true Character of a true Englishman; and engaged on their sides against the
then Duke of York, and other Ministers, not from any mean Pique, or little
discontented Humor, which he was very much above; but merely from the true
Respect he had for them, and a sense of that imminent Danger they were in,
which his piercing Judgment and long Experience made him more sensible of, and
his Courage and Virtue more concerned at, than others; not only those who fat
unconcerned Spectators, or shared in their Ruins; but even then most of them
who were engaged with him in the same Common Cause of their Defense and
Preservation. Nothing of such an impatience, or eagerness, or black Melancholy
could be discerned in his Temper or Conversation, as is always the Symptom or
Cause of such Tragical Ends, as his Enemies would persuade us he came to.

Lastly, What may be said of most of the rest, does in a more especial and
eminent manner agree to the Illustrious Essex; and than which nothing greater
can be said of Mortality, He lived an Hero, and died a Martyr.

Upon the Execrable Murder of the Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Essex.
MOrtality would be too frail to hear
How ESSEX fell, and not dissolve with fear;
Did not more generous Rage take off the blow,
And by his Blood, the steps to Vengeance show.
The Tower was for the Tragedy designed,
And to be slaughtered, he is first confined:
As fettered Victims to the Altar go.
But why must Noble ESSEX perish so?
Why with such fury dragged into his Tomb,
Murdered by slaves, and sacrificed to Rome?
By stealth they kill, and with a secret stroke
Silence that Voice which charmed when ever it spoke.
The bleeding Orifice over flowed the Ground,
More like some mighty Deluge, than a Wound.
Through the large space his Blood and Vitals glide,
And his whole Body might have past beside.
The reeking Crimson swelled into a Flood,
And streamed a second time in Capel's Blood.
He Is in his Son again to Death pursued,
An instance of the highest Ingratitude.
Then they malicious Stratagems employ,
With Life, his dearer Honor to destroy,
And make his Fame extinguish with his Breath;
An Act beyond the Cruelties of Death.
Here Murder is in all its shapes complete,
As Lines united in their Center meet,
Formed by the blackest Politics of Hell;
Was Cain so devilish when his Brother fell?
He that contrives, or his own Fate desires,
Wants Courage, and for fear of Death expires;
But mighty ESSEX was in all things brave,
Neither to Hope, nor to Despair, a Slave.
He had a Soul to Innocent, and Great,
To fear, or to anticipate his Fate:
Yet their exalted Impudence and Guilt,
Charge on himself the precious Blood they spilt.
So were the Protestants some Years ago
Destroyed in Ireland without a Foe.
By their own barbarous Hands the Madmen die,
And Massacre themselves they know not why:
Whilst the kind Irish howl to see the Gore,
And pious Catholics their Fate deplore.
If you refuse to trust Erroneous Fame,
Royal Mac-Ninny will confirm the same.
We have lost more in injured Capel's Heir,
Than the poor Bankrupt Age can e're repair.
Nature indulged him so, that there we saw
All the choice strokes her steady hand could draw.
He the Old English Glory did revive,
In him we had Plantagenets alive.
Grandeur, and Fortune, and a vast Renown
Fit to support the luster of a Crown.
All these in him were potently conjoined,
But all was too ignoble for his Mind.
Wisdom and Virtue, Properties Divine,
Those, God-like ESSEX, were entirely thine.
In his great Name he is still preserved alive,
And will to all succeeding Times survive.
With just Progression, as the constant Sun
Does move, and through its bright Ecliptic run.
For whilst his Dust does undistinguished lie,
And his blessed Soul is soared above the Sky,
Fame shall below his parted Breath supply.
4. WILLIAM, Lord RVSSEL.
THE next who fell under their Cruelty, and to whose Death Essex's was but the
Prologue, was my Lord Russel, without all Dispute one of the finest Gentlemen
that ever England bred, and whose Pious Life and Virtue was as much Treason
against the Court, by affronting them with what was so much hated there, as any
thing else that was sworn against him.

The Last Speech and Carriage of the Lord Russel, upon the Scaffold, etc.
ON Saturday, July the 21st. 1683. about Nine in the Morning, the Sheriffs went
to Newgate, to see if the Lord Russel was ready; and in a little time, his
Lordship came out, and went into his Coach, taking his Farewell of his Lady, the
Lord Cavendish; and several other of his Friends, at Newgate. In the Coach were
Dr. Tillotson, and Dr. Burnet, who accompanied him to the Scaffold built in
Lincoln's- Inn-Fields, which was covered all over with Mourning. Being come
upon the Scaffold, his Lordship bowed to the Persons present; and turning to
the Sheriff, made this following Speech.

Mr. Sheriff, I expected the Noise would be such, that I should not be much
heard. I was never fond of much speaking, much less now; therefore I have set
down in Paper all that I think fit to leave behind me. God knows how far I was
always from Designs against the King's Person, or of altering the Government:
And I still pray for the Preservation of Both, and of the Protestant Religion.
Mr. Sheriff, I am told, that Captain Walcot, Yesterday, siad something
concerning my Knowledge of the Plot: I know not whether the Report be true, or
not.

Mr. Sheriff. I did not hear him name your Lordship.

Writer. No, my Lord, your Lordship was not named by any of them.

Lord Russel. I hope it is not; for, to my knowledge, I never saw him, nor
spoke with him in my whole Life; and, in the Words of a dying Man, I profess I
know of no Plot, either against the King's Life, or the Government. But I have
now done with this World, and am going to a better. I forgive all the World
heartily; and, I thank God, I die in Charity with all Men; and I wish all
sincere Protestants may love one another, and not make way for Popery by their
Animosities. I pray God forgive them, and continue the Protestant Religion
amongst them, that it may flourish so long as the Sun and Moon endures. I am
now more satisfied to die, than ever I have been.

Then kneeling down, his Lordship prayed to himself; after which, Dr. Tillotson
kneeled down, and prayed with him; which being done, his Lordship kneeled down
and prayed a second time to himself, then pulled off his Whig, put on his Cap,
took off his Crevat and Coat, and bidding the Executioner, after he had lain
down a small moment, do his Office without a Sign. He gave him some Gold: Then
embracing Dr. Tillotson and Dr. Burnet, he laid him down with his Neck upon the
Block. The Executioner missing at his first stroke, though with that he took
away his Life, at two more severed the Head from the Body. The Executioner held
up the Head to the People, as is usual in cases of Treason, etc. Which being
done, Mr. Sheriff ordered his Lordship's Friends or Servants to take the Body,
and dispose of it as they pleased, being given them by His Majesty's Favor and
Bounty.

His Body was conveyed to Cheneys in Buckinghamshire, where 'twas buried among
his Ancestors. There was a great Storm, and many loud Claps of Thunder the day
of his Martyrdom. An Elegy was made on him immediately after his Death, which
seems by what we have of it, to be writ with some Spirit, and a great deal of
Truth and Good Will; only this Fragment on it could be retrieved, which yet may
not be unwelcome to the Reader.

It Is done -- he is crowned, and one bright Martyr more,
Black Rome, is charged on thy too bulky score.
All like himself he moved, so calm, so free,
A general Whisper questioned -- Which is he?
Decked like a Lover, though pale Death's his Bride,
He carne, and saw, and overcame, and died.
Earth wept, and all the vainly pitying Crowd:
But Heaven his Death in Thunder groaned aloud.
His CHARACTER.
For his Character, if we'll believe the best Men, and those who knew him best,
it is one of the most advantageous the Age, or indeed, our Nation has yielded.
Those are great words which Mr. Leviston Gower speaks of him on his Trial, but
yet not a Syllable too big for his Merit, though they are very expressive of it.
-- That he was one of the best Sons, the best Fathers, the best Husbands, the
best Masters, the best Friends, and the best Christians. By other, That he was
a most Virtuous, Prudent, and Pious Gentleman. -- A Man of that Virtue, that
none who knew him could think him guilty of such a Conspiracy. -- A Man of
great Honor, and too Prudent to be concerned in so vile and desperate a
Design. -- A Person of great Virtue and integrity. -- One, whom those he had
long conversed with, never heard utter so much as a word of Indecency against
the King.] And others of the highest Quality, who had been often in his
Company, say, That they had never heard any thing from him, but what was
Honorable, Just, and Loyal.

His Person was tall and proper; his Temper even and aggreable, and such as
rendered his Virtues even more lovely than they did him. His Piety and Devotion,
as unaffected, and yet as remarkable as his Love to the Church of England. The
True Church of England, as he himself calls it, not those Tumors and Wens that
grow upon it, and pretended to be not only part but all of it in our late bad
Times; to whose Heighths and Extravagancies he thinks it no shame in his Speech
to confess he could never rise. He was of a Noble Courage, which he did not
express by Quarrels or Duelling, but serving his Country at Sea in the most
dangerous Wars, and at Land in the Parliament, in more dangerous Councils and
Debates. He was there a true Englishman -- still the same; you knew where he
would be, for he never moved. A strenuous Asserter and Defender of his
Country's Religion and Rights against all Opposers, and that in a Lawful and
Parliamentary Method. He spoke little there, but always very home, and much to
the purpose -- And that was as true a Character of him formerly recited, as if
it had come from a better Man, That every one knew the Lord Russel to be a
Person of great Judgment, and not very lavish of Discourse. Lastly, which will
give no small heightening to his Character, He had Mr. Johnson to his Chaplain.

An Abstract of the late Noble Lord Russel's Speech to the Sheriffs; as also of
a Paper delivered by him to them at the Place of his much-lamented Execution on
July 21. 1683.
IN his Speech to the Sheriffs, he tells them, That for fear of not being well
heard, he had couched what he had to say upon that sad occasion in the Paper he
delivered them; only he Protest his Innocence of any Designs against the King's
Person, or the then Government, and Prays for the Preservation of both, and of
the Protestant Religion; and in short, declares, that he forgives all the
World, and wishes that all True Protestants may love one another, and not make
way for Popery by their Animosities.

In the Paper, He first declares himself composed for Death, and weaned from
this World: Then he affectionately thanks God, as in general, so in particular,
for his advantageous Birth, and Religious Education, of which in that important
occasion, he found such happy and powerful Effects as kept him up against the
fear of Death, and all other Discomposures, and armed him with such Assurances
in God's Love and Mercy, as made the most joyful of the visibly saddest Moments
of his Life.

He professes to die as he had lived, a sincere Protestant of the Church of
England, though he never could come up to the heighths of some; wishes more
Moderation both in Churchmen and Dissenters, and that the Common Danger of
Popery might move them to lay aside their Differences, and all Persecuting
Inclinations, as more unseasonable then, than at any other time.

He declares, he had a Notion of Poperey, as of an Idolatrous and Bloody
Religion, and thought himself bound to Act in his Station against it,
notwithstanding the Power of the Enemies he was sure to meet with on that
account, etc. But yet he professes he never thought of doing any thing against
it basely or inhumanely, against the Maxims of Christian Religion, or the Laws
and Liberties of this Kingdom, for his sincerity, in which, he appeals to God,
renouncing all Passion, By-End, or Ill Design, as also all Designs of changing
the Government, which was in his Opinion, the best in the World, and for which,
as well as his Country, which he valued above his Life, he was ever ready to
venture it: Disclaims all thoughts against the King's Life, denying even the
Lord Howard to have said any thing tending to prove it.

Frays sincerely for the King and Nation, and wishes they may be mutually happy
in one another; that the King may be truly a Defender of the Faith; that the
Protestant Religion and Kingdom may flourish under Him, and He be happy in both
Worlds.

As to his share in the Prosecution of the Popish Plot, he declares he acted
sincerely in it, as really believing, as he still did, the truth of such a
Conspiracy, and disclaims his knowledge of any Practices with the Witnesses,
which he protests against as abominable, and disowns Falsehood or Cruelty ever
to have been in his Nature.

He persists in his Opinion, that Popery was breaking in upon the Nation, and
grieves to see Protestants Instrumental to it; declares his fears of the
Sufferings the Protestant Religion was like to undergo, and bewails the public
and shameless Impiety that abounded, and modestly admonishes all Persons, and
particularly his Friends, well-wishers to the Protestant Cause, that were
defective, to live up to its Principles. Then he declares his Submission to
God's Pleasure, freely forgives his Enemies, and desires his Friends to seek no
Revenge for his Blood.

After which, he looks back, and gives some little touches concerning his past
behavior, and the manner of his Treatment at his Trial.

He confesses, he moved much for the Bill of Exclusion, as the only effectual
Remedy to secure both the King's Life, the Protestant Religion, and the Frame
of the Government, he thinking none of them could be safe so long as there was
any hopes of a Popish Successor; and that the Limitations proposed to bind the
Duke were effectual Remedies against those Fears, because the Nation could
never be easy and safe under a King without a Prerogative: But yet imputes his
present Sufferings to the Revengeful Resentments some Persons retained for his
Earnestness in that matter.

Next, as to his Conspiring to seize the Guards, he disowns that ever he was
concerned in any such Design, or ever heard talk of any such thing as designed,
but only one, as of a thing feazible, against which likewise he warmly declared
himself, and said, the consequence of it was so like to end in Massacring the
Guards in cold Blood, that he could not but abhor the thoughts of it, as
approaching too near the Popish Practice, at which the Duke of Monmouth taking
him by the hand, cried out affectionately, That he saw they were both of a
Temper; he adds on that occasion, that he always observed in that Duke, an
abhorrence to all base things.

He proceeds to show how he went to the Meeting at Mr. Shepherd's, at the Duke
of Monmouch's earnest Request, chiefly to endeavor to prevent any such
disorderly Proceedings as the Duke feared would be otherwise put on by some hot
Men, whose rash courses he did accordingly most vigorously oppose, and yet was
condemned only for not discovering them, though he endeavored to reform them,
because he would not stoop to so mean a thought, as that of going about to save
his Life by accusing others for Crimes that they only talked of, and that, as
we may partly gather from his Discourse, he had effectually dissuaded them from
too; so that his Intention was good, and his part in that Transaction, even in
the strictest sense of Law, but a Misprision of Treason, and therefore he
declares, he cannot but think the Sentence of Death past against him to be very
hard, and he by a strange fetch, brought within the compass of the Statute of
Treason, of Edward the Third.

He moreover adds, That he had so convincing a sense of his own Innocence in
that Case, that he would not betray it by flight, though much pressed to it. He
next excuses his saying so little at his Trial, saying, he hoped it looked more
like Innocence than Guilt: Adding, that he was advised not to confess Matter of
Fact too plainly, because it would certainly have brought him within the Guilt
of Misprision; and so he thought it better to say little, than by departing
from the Ingenuity he had always practiced, by using little Tricks and
Evasions, to make the last and solemnest part of his Life so notably different
from the preceding course of it, as such a Conduct would have made it. He
farther subjoyns, that he never pretended great Readiness in Speaking, and
advises those Gentlemen of the Law that have it, to use it more
conscientiously, and not to run Men down, and impose on Easy and Willing
Juries by Strains and Fetches, etc. the Killing unjustly by Law, being the
worst of Murders. He then, as in several other places, repeating his wishes,
that the Rage and Revenge of some Men, and the Partiality of Juries, may be
stopped with his Blood; and so, after a small hint, how by the Importunity of
his Dearest and most Virtuous Lady, and some other Dear Friends, he had been
prevailed upon, against his Inclinations, to Address, though ineffectualy, for
his Life, he concludes with a fresh Protestation of his Innocence, and a Devout
Prayer to God, suitable to that sad Occasion.

5. Captain WALCOT.
CAptain Walcot and his Fellow Sufferers, in order of time, should have gone
first, he being convicted before my Lord Russel, and executed the Friday, as he
on Saturday. But my Lord Russel's Fate having so immediate a dependence on the
Earl of Essex's, and all the Plot hanging on him; especially they two making
the greatest Figure of any who suffered on this occasion; it looked more proper
and natural to begin with them, and reserve the other to this place. Captain
Walcot was a Gentleman of a considerable Estate in Ireland, but more remarkable
for the rare Happiness of having Eight Children all at once living, and most of
all, for his Love to his Country, which cost him his Life.

An Abstract of Captain Walcot's Speech.
CAptain Walcot denied any Design of killing the King, or of engaging the
Guards, whilst others killed him; And said, That the Witnesses invited him to
Meetings, where some thing were discoursed of, in order to the asserting our
Liberties and Properties; which we looked upon to be violated and invaded: --
That They importuned and perpetually solicited him, and then delivered him up
to be hanged -- That They combined together to swear him out of his Life, to
save their own; and that they might do it effectually, They contrived an
Untruth. -- That he forgave them, though guilty of his Blood; But, withal,
earnestly begged, That they might be observed, that Remarks might be set upon
them, whether their End be Peace: And he concluded (with what made Sir Roger
L'Estrange a great deal of Sport, but yet Heaven has made it good) That when
God has a Work to do, he will not want Instruments.

With him was tried Rouse, who was charged with such a parcel of mad Romance,
as was scarce ever heard of; and one would wonder how Perjury and Malice, which
use to be sober sins, could even be so extravagant as to hit on it. He was to
seize the Tower, pay the Rabble, uncaese the Aldermen, to be Play Master, and
Flea-Master General, and a great deal more to the same Tune. In his Defense, he
says no great Matter, but yet what looks a Thousand times more like Truth than
his Accusation; That the Tower Business was only Discourse of the feasibleness
of the thing, (as Russel's about the Guards) but without the least intent of
bringing it to Action; That all he was concerned in any real Design, he had
from Lee, and was getting more out of him, with an intention to make a
Discovery. But it seems Lee got the whip-hand of him; they were both at a kind
of Halter-Combat; Rouse's foot slipped, and Lee turned him over, and saved his
own Neck.

His Dying Words.
Mr. Rouse declared, That he was told, that They did not intend to spill one
drop of Blood; and affirmed, that Lee (the Witness against him did (by his
Evidence) make him the Author of the very Words, that came out of his the said
Lee 's own Mouth.

A Brief Extract of Captain Walcot's Prayer.
O Lord, our God, Thou art a God of present help in time of Trouble, a God,
that have promised to be with thy People in the Fire, and in the Water. O Lord,
we pray Thee, that thou will afford thy Presence to thy poor Suffering Servants
at this time; O Lord, thy Servant that speaks does confess, that the
Iniquties at his heels have justly overtaken him: O do thou bathe each of our
Souls in that Fountain set open for sin and Uncleanness. O do thou enable every
one of us, from the inward Evidence of thy Spirit, to say with thy Servant Job,
That we know and are assured that our Redeemer lives. O give us some inward
Tastes of those Heavenly Joys that we hope through the Mercy of Jesus Christ, in
a little time to have a more full Fruition of. O Lord, do thou speak Peace to
every one of our Consciences; though we lie under a Sentence of Death from Man,
we beg that we may have a Sentence of Life Eternal from our God; and though we
meet Thee, O Lord, in a Field of Blood, we beg that Thou will come to meet us
in a Field of Mercy. O Lord, though we have been Prodigals, we desire to return
unto our Father's House, where there is Bread enough. O enable us to come unto
Thee as Children to their Parents. Lord put to thy helping Hand, Lord teach us
truly to leave no Sin unrepented of in any one of our Hearts. And O Lord, we
beg that with us thou will give us leave to recommend unto thy Care our Poor
Wives and Children: Thou have promised to be the Father of the Fatherless, and
the Husband of the Widow; and thou have commanded us to cast the Care of them
upon Thee. O do thou make Provision for them, an enable them to bear this
severe stroke with Patience. O Lord, we also beseech thee in the behalf of
these Poor Kingdoms wherein we are, that Thou will be merciful to them, prevent
Divisions among them, heal all their Breaches, compose their Differences, make
all that are thine of one Heart and Mind in the things of Thee our God. Lord,
favor us with the Mercy, assure us of thy Love, stand by us in the difficult
Hour, take us into thine own Care, cause thy Angels to attend us, to convey our
Souls as soon as they are divided from our Bodies, into Abraham's Boso^. All
which we beg for the sake of thy Son Jesus Christ, in whom, O Lord, this little
time do thou give us Hearts to give Thee all Glory, Honor, and Praise, now and
for evermore, Amen. Sweet Jesus, Amen.

6. Mr. HONE.
Hone was accused, and owns himself Guilty of a Design to Kill the King and the
Duke of York, or one, or neither, for it is impossible to make any Sense of him.
When they came to suffer, Walcot read a Paper, in which was a good rational
Confession of his Faith; then comes to the Occasion of his Death, for which, he
says, He neither blames the Judges, Jury, nor Council, but only some Men, that
in reality were deeper concerned than he, who combined together to swear him
out of his LIfe, to save their own, and that they might do it effectually,
contrived an Untruth, etc. He forgives the World and the Witnesses; gives his
Friends Advice to be more Prudent than he had been; prays that his may be the
last Blood spilt on the Account; wishes the King would be merciful to others;
says he knew nothing of Ireland, and concludes with praying God to have Mercy
upon him. -- He had then some Discourse with Cartwright, wherein he tells him,
That he was not for contriving the Death of the King, nor to have had a Hand
in it; and being urged with some Matters of Controversy, tells him, He did not
come thither to dispute about Religion, but to die Religiously.

7. Mr. ROVSE.
ROuse comes next, gives an Account of his Faith, professing to die of the
Church of England, tells his former Employment and Manner of Life, acknowledges
he heard of Clubs and Designs, but was never at 'em, and a perfect Stranger to
any thing of that Nature. Gives a Relation of what past between him and his
Majesty on his Apprehension. Talks somewhat of Sir Thomas Player, the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and accommodating the King's Son, as he calls it, though not while
the King reigned. Then falls upon Lee, and the Discourse they had together, who
as he says, swore against him on the Trial those very Words he himself had used
in pressing him to undertake the Design. Speaks of a Silver Ball which he
proposed to be thrown up on Black Heath, and after some Discourse with the
Ordinary, gives the Spectators some good Counsel. They they all Three singly
prayed; and then the Sentence was executed upon them.

8. ALGERNOON SIDNEY, Esquire;
THe next Victim to Popish Cruelty and Malice, was Colonel Algernoon Sidney, of
the ancient and noble Name and Family of the Sidneys, deservedly famous to the
utmost Bounds of Europe; who, as the ingenious Mr. Hawles observes, was merely
talked to Death, under the Notion of a Commonwealth's Man, and found Guilty by
a Jury who were not much more proper Judges of the Case, than they would have
been had he writ in Greek or Arabic. He was arraigned for a Brnach of this
Plot, at Westminster, the 17th. of November, 1683. where, though it cannot be
said the Grand Jury knew not what they did, when they found the Bill against
him, since no doubt they were well instructed what to do; yet it must, that
they found it almost before they knew what 'twas, being so well resolved on the
Case, and agreed on their Verdict, that had he been Indicted for Breaking-up an
House, or Robbing on the Highway, 'twas doomed to have been Billa vera, as
much as 'twas now.

An Abstract of the Paper delivered to the Sheriffs on the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, December 7. 1683. by Algernoon Sidney, Esquire, before his
Execution.
FIrst having excused his not speaking, as well because it was an Age that made
Truth pass for Treason for the Proof of which, he instances his Trial and
Condemnation, and that the Ears of some present were too tender to hear it, as
because of the Rigor of the Season, and his Infirmities, etc. Then after a
short Reflection upon the little said against him by other Witnesses, and the
little Value that was to be put on the Lord Howard's Testimony, whom he charges
with an infamous Life, and many palpable Perjuries, and to have been biased
only by the Promise of Pardon, etc. and makes, even though he had been liable to
no Exceptions, to have been but a single Witness: He proceeds to answer the
Charge against him from the Writings found in his Closet by the King's
Officers, which were pretended, but not Lawfully evidenced to be his, and
pretends to prove, that had they been his, they contained no condemnable
matter, but principles, more safe both to Princes and People too, than the
pretended high-flown Plea for Absolute Monarchy, composed by Filmer, against
which, they seemed to be levelled; and which, he says, all intelligent Men
thought were founded on wicked Principles, and such as were destructive both to
Magistrates, and People too. Which he attempts to make out after this manner.

First, says he, if Filmer might publish to the World, That Men were born under
a necessary indispensible Subjection to an Absolute King, who could be
restrained by no Oath, etc. whether be came to it by Creation, Inheritance,
etc. nay, or even by Usurpation, why might he not publish his Opinion to the
contrary, without the breach of any known Law? Which Opinion he professes
consisted in the following Particulars.

1. That God had left Nations at the liberty of Modelling their own Governments.

2. That Magistrates were instituted for Nations, and not E contra.

3. That the Right and Power of Magistrates was fixed by the standing Laws of
each Country.

4. That those Laws sworn to on both sides, were the matter of a Contract
between the Magistrate and People, and could not be broken without the Danger
of dissolving the whole Government.

5. The Usurpation could give no Right; and that King had no greater Enemies
than those who asserted that, or were for stretching their Power beyond its
Limits.

6. That such Usurpations commonly effecting the Slaughter of the Reigning
Person, etc. the worst of Crimes was thereby most gloriously Rewarded.

7. That such Doctrines are more proper to stir up Men to destroy Princes, than
all the Passions that ever yet swayed the worst of them, and that no Prince
could be safe if his Murderers may hope such Rewards, and that few Men would be
so gentle, as to spare the best Kings, if by their Destruction, a wild Usurper
could become God's Anointed, which he says was the scope of that whole
Treatise, and asserts to be the Doctrine of the best Authors of all Nations,
Times and Religions, and of the Scripture, and so owned by the best and wisest
Princes, and particuarly by Lewis XIV. of France, in his Declaration against
Spain, Anno 1667. and by King James of England, in his Speech to the
Parliament, 1603. and adds, that if the Writer had been mistaken, he should
have been fairly refuted, but that no Man was ever otherwise punished for such
Matters, or any such things referred to a Jury, etc. That the Book was never
finished, etc. nor ever seen by them whom he was charged to have endeavored by
it to draw into a Conspiracy: That nothing in it was particularly or
maliciously applied to Time, Place, or Person, but distorted to such a sense by
Innuendo's as the Discourses of the Expulsion of Tarquin, etc. and particularly
of the Translation made of the Crown of France, from one Race to another, had
been applied by the then Lawyers Innuendo's to the then King of England; never
considering, adds he, that if such Acts of State be not allowed Good, no Prince
in the World has any Title to his Crown; and having, by a short Reflection,
shown the Ridiculousness of deriving Absolute Monarchy from Patriarchal Power,
he appeals to all the World, whether it would not be more Advantageous to all
Kings, to own the Deerivation of their Power to the Consent of willing Nations,
than to have no better Title than Force, etc. which may be overpowered.

But notwithstanding the Innocence and Loyalty of that Doctrine, he says, He
was told he must die, or the Plot must die, and complains, that in order to the
destroying the best Protestants of England, the Bench was filled with such as
had been blemishes to the Bar; and Instances how against Law, they had advised
with the King's Council about bringing him to Death, suffered a Jury to be
packed by the King's Sollicitors, and the Undersheriff, admitted Jury men no
Freeholders, received Evidence not valid, refused him a Copy of his Indictment,
or to suffer the Act of the 46th. of Edw. 3. to be read, that allows it, had
overruled the most important Points of Law, without hearing, and assumed to
themselves a Power to make Constructions of Treason, though against Law, Sense,
and Reason, which the Stat. of the 25th. of Edw. 3. by which they pretended to
Try him, was reserved only to the Parliament; and so praying God, to forgive
them, and to avert the Evils that threatened the Nation, to sanctify those
Sufferings to him, and though he fell a Sacrifice to Idols, not to suffer
Idolatry to be established in this Land, etc. He concludes with a Thanksgiving,
that God had singled him out to be a Witness of his Truth, and for that Good
Old Cause in which from his Youth he had been engaged, etc.

His EPITAPH.
ALgernoon Sidney fills this Tomb,
An Atheist by declaiming Rome;
A Rebel bold by striving still
To keep the Laws above the Will,
And hindering those would pull them down,
To leave no Limits to a Crown.
Crimes damned by Church and Government.
Oh whither must his Soul be sent!
Of Heaven it must needs despair,
If that the Pope be Turn-key there;
And Hell can never it entertain,
For there is all Tyrannick Reign,
And Purgatory's such a Pretense,
As never deceived a Man of Sense;
Where goes it then? where't ought to go,
Where Pope and Devil have naught to do.
His CHARACTER.
There Is no need of any more than reading his Trial and Speech, to know him as
well as if he stood before us. That he was a Person of extraordinary Sense, and
very close thinking, which he had the Happiness of being able to express in
Words as manly and apposite as the Sense included under 'em. He was owner of as
much Virtue and Religion, as Sense and Reason; though his Piety lay as far from
Enthusiasm as any Man's. He feared nothing but God, and loved nothing on Earth
like his Country, and the just Liberties and Laws thereof, whose Constitutions
he had deeply and successfully inquired into. To sum up all, He had Piety
enough for a Saint, Courage enough for a General or a Martyr, Sense enough for
a Privy-Counsellor, and Soul enough for a King; and in a word, if ever any, he
was a perfect Englishman.

9. Mr. JAMES HOLLOWAY.
MR. Holloway declared, That Mr. West proposed the Assassination, but none
seconded him -- That he could not perceive that Mr. Ferguson knew any thing of
it; and HOlloway said, It was our Design to shed no Blood. He being
interrogated by Mr. Ferguson's Friend, Mr. Sheriff Daniel, whether he knew
Ferguson; he answered, That he did know him, but knew him to be against any
Design of killing the King.

10. Sir THOMAS ARMSTRONG.
HE had been all his Life a firm Servant and Friend to the Royal Family, in
their Exile and afterward: He had been in Prison for 'em under Cromwell, and in
danger both of Execution and Starving; for all which they now rewarded him. He
had a particular Honor and Devotion for the Duke of Monmouth, and pushed on
his Interest on all Occasions, being a Man of as undaunted English Courage, as
ever our Country produced.

In his Paper he thus expressed himself, That he thanked Almighty God, he found
himself prepared for Death, his Thoughts set upon another World, and weaned
from this; yet he could not but give so much of his little time as to answer
some Calumnies, and particularly what Mr. Attorney accused him of at the Bar.

That he prayed to be allowed a Trial for his Life according to the Laws of the
Land, and urged the Statute of Edward 6. which was expressly for it; but it
signified nothing, and he was with an Extraordinary Roughness condemned and
made a precedent; though Holloway had it offered him, and he could not but think
all the World would conclude his Case very different, else why refused to him?

That Mr. Attorney charged him for being one of those that was to kill the
King; He took God to witness, that he never had a Thought to take away the
King's Life, and that no Man ever had the Impudence to propose so barbarous and
base a thing to him; and that he never was in any Design to alter the
Government.

That if he had been tried, he could have proved the Lord Howard's base
Reflections upon him, to be notoriously false -- He concluded, that he had
lived and now died of the Reformed Religion, a Protestant in the Communion of
the Church of England, and he heartily wished he had lived more strictly up to
the Religion he believed: That he had found the great Comfort of the Love and
Mercy of God, in and through his blessed Redeemer, in whom he only trusted, and
verily hoped that he was going to partake of that fullness of Joy which is in
his pesence, the Hopes whereof infinitely pleased him. He thanked God he had no
repining, but cheerfully submitted to the Punishment of his Sins. He freely
forgave all the World, even those concerned in taking away his Life, though he
could not but think his Sentence very hard, he being denied the Laws of the
Land.

On the Honorable Sir Thomas Armstrong, Executed June 20. 1684.

Had thou abroad found Safety in thy Flight,
The Immortal Honor had not flamed so bright.
Thou had been still a worthy Patriot thought;
But now thy Glory's to Perfection brought.
In Exile, and in Death, to England true:
What more could Brutus or just Cato do?
11. Alderman CORNISH.
TO make an end of this Plot altogether, 'twill be necessary once more to
invert the Order in which things happened, and though Mr. Cornish suffered not
till after the Judges returned from the West, as well as Bateman after him, yet
we shall here treat of 'em both, and so conclude this Matter.

Cornish on his Trial is said to have denied his being at the Meeting, and
discoursing with the Duke of Monmouth: Which they would have us believe Shepherd
swears he was, though not a Syllable of it appears. [ He had been there several
times, Shepherd says, but was not of their Consult, knew nothing of their
Business, nor can he be positive whether 'twas the Duke of Monmouth he came to
speak with that Evening.] But supposing in two or three Years time, and on so
little Recollection, Cornish's Memory had slipped in that Circumstance, what is
that to Shepherd's Evidence against the very Root of Rumsey's, which hanged the
Prisoners?

In spite of all he was found Guilty, and Condemned, and even that Christian
serenity of Mind and Countenance wherewith 'twas visible he bore his Sentence,
turned to his Reproach by the Bench.

He continued in the same excellent Temper whilst in Newgate, and gave the
World a glaring Instance of the Happiness of such Persons as live a pious Life,
when they come to make an end on^^, let the way thereof be never so violent.
His Carriage and Behavior at his leaving Newgate, was as follows.

Some Passages of Henry Cornish, Esquire; before his Sufferings.
COming into the Press-yard, and seeing the Halter in the Officer's Hand, he
said, Is this for me? the Officer answered, Yes; he replied, Blessed be God,
and kissed it; and after said, O blessed be God for Newgate, I have enjoyed God
ever since I came within these Walls; and blessed be God who has made me fit
to die. I am now going to that God that will not be mocked, to that God that
will not be imposed upon, to that God that knows the Innocence of his poor
Creature. And a little after, he said, Never did any poor Creature come unto
God with greater Confidence in his Mercy, and Assurance of Acceptance with
him, through Jesus Christ, than I do; but it is through Jesus Christ, for there
is no other way of coming to God but by him, to find Acceptance with him: There
is no other Name given under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but the Name of
Jesus. Then speaking to the Officers, he said, Labor every one of you to be
fit to die, for I tell you, you are not fit to die: I was not fit to die my
self, till I came in hither; but, O blessed be God! he has made me fit to die,
and has made me willing to die! In a few Moments I shall have the Fruition of
the Blessed Jesus, and that not for a day, but for Ever! I am going to the
Kingdom of God, to the Kingdom of God! where I shall enjoy the Presence of God
the Father, and of God the Son, and of God the Holy Spirit, and of all the Holy
Angels! I am going to the general Assembly of the Firstborn, and of the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect! O that God should ever do so much for me! O
that God should concern himself so much for poor Creatures, for their
Salvation! Blessed be his Name! For this was the Design of God from all
Eternity, to give his only Son to die for poor miserable Sinners. Then the
Officers going to tie his Hands, he said, What, must I be tied then? Well, a
brown Thread might have served the turn: You need not tie me at all, I shall not
stir from you; for,

I thank God, I am not afraid to die. As he was going out, he said, Farewell
Newgate, Farewell all my Fellow Prisoners here; the Lord comfort you, the Lord
be with you all.

Thus much for his Behavior in the way to his Martyrdom. The Place of it was
most spitefully and ignominiously ordered, almost before his own Door, and near
Guildhall, to scare any good Citizen from appearing vigorously in the Discharge
of his Duty for his Countrey's Service, by his Example. If any thing was
wanting in his Trial, from the have of it, for the clearing his Innocence, he
sufficiently made it up in solemn Asseverations thereof on the Scaffold. [God
is my Witness, says he, the Crimes laid to my Charge were falsely and
maliciously sworn against me by the Witnesses: For I never was at any Consult,
nor any Meeting where Matters against the Government were discoursed of.] He
adds, [I never heard or read any Declaration tending that way.] Again, [As to
the Crimes for which I suffer, upon the Words of a dying Man, I Am altogether
Innocent.] Lower he adds, [He died as he had lived, in the Communion of the
Church of England, in whose Ordinances he had been often a Partaker, and now
felt the blessed Effects thereof in these his Agonies.]

He was observed by those who stood near the Sledge, to have solemnly, several
times, averred his absolute Innocence of any Design against the Government, and
particularly that which he died for.

There was such a terrible Storm the Day of his Death, as has scarce been known
in the Memory of Man, and will never be forgot by those who were in it; ten or
a dozen Ships being foundered, or stranded in one Road, and a vast many more in
other Places. And as Heaven then did him Justice, and vindicated his Innocence,
so Earth also has done it; the Judgment against him being Reverst by that
Honorable, Ever-memorable Parliament, which, under God and our King, has
settled the Happiness both of this Age and Posterity.

His CHARACTER.
HE was a Person of as known Prudence as Intregrity, a good Christian, a
complete Citizen, a worthy Magistrate, and a zealous Church of England Man. He
was so cautious and wise, that he was noted for it all through those worst of
times, and often proposed as an Example to others of hotter and more imprudent
Tempers; nor could the least Imputation be fixed on him of hearing or
concealing any unlawful or dangerous Discourses, any other ways than by plain
force of Perjury, being known to have shunned some Persons, whom he, as well as
some other prudent Men, suspected to have no good Designs, and to be indu'd
with no more Honesty than Discretion, as it afterward proved. But he was
designed to glorify God by such an End a^ all his Care could not avoid, which
he submitted to with Bravery rarely to be met with, unless among those who
suffered for the same Cause in the same Age; or their Predecessors, Queen
Mary's Martyrs. There was seen the same Tenor of Prudence and Piety through all
the Actions of his Life, though most conspicuous in the last glorious Scene of
it. There was such a firmness in his Soul, such vigor, and almost extatick
Joy, and yet so well regulated, that it shined through his Face, almost with as
visible Rays as those in which we use to dress Saints and Martyrs, with which;
both at his Sentence and Execution, he refreshed all his Friends, and at once
dazzled and confounded his most bitter Enemies.

12. Mr. CHARLES BATEMAN.
THE next, and last, was Mr. Bateman the Surgeon, a Man of good Sense, good
Courage and good Company, and a very large and generous Temper, of considerable
Repute and Practice in his Calling: A great Lover and Vindicator of the
Liberties of the City and Kingdom, and of more Interest than most of his
Station. He was sworn against by Rouse's Lee, and Richard Goodenough, upon the
old Stories of seizing the Tower, City, and Savoy.

'Twas urged, That there was Three Years between the Fact pretended, and Lee's
Prosecution of him, which, though they had but one Witness, could have brought
him to Punishment, which would have been judged sufficient by any, but those
who would be content with nothing but Blood. For Goodenough, he was but one
Witness, and pardoned only so far, as to qualify him to do Mischief. However,
he was found Guilty, and died as much like a Christian, and with as great a
Presence of Mind as most of the others.

The Last Words of those which suffered in the West of England, and other
Places, chiefly under Jeffrey's insulting Cruelty.
ONE thing there is very observable in most, if not all of those who laid down
their Lives in Defense of the Protestant Religion, both in England and
Scotland, that, besides that extraordinary Divine Courage and Cheerfulness with
which they died, they had Expressions plainly boading that great Deliverance
which Providence has since that miraculously accomplished for these Kingdom.
'Twould be endless to give almost all the innumerable Instances of it: Mr.
Nelthrop says, [God had in his wonderful Providence made him and others
Instruments, not only in what was already fallen out, but he believed, for
hastening some other great Work, he had yet to do in these Kingdoms.] Mrs.
Gaunt says, [God's Cause shall revive, and he would plead it at another rate than
yet he had done, against all its malicious Opposers.] And speaks yet more
strangely of those then uppermost, and likely to be so, [ That though they were
seemingly fixed, and using their Power and Violence against those they had now
got under 'em, yet unless they could secure Jesus Christ, and all his Holy
Angels, they should never do their Business, but Vengeance would be upon 'em,
'e're they were aware.] Capt. Ansley, whose Speech is as pretty a meat thing,
as close, and Christian, and courageous, as perhaps any that ever was made by
Man in his Condition, after he had said, [He did not repent what he had done,
but if he had a thousand Lives, would have engaged 'em all in the same Cause;]
adds just after, [Though it has pleased the wise God, for Reasons best known to
himself, now to blast our Designs, yet he will deliver his People by ways we
know not, nor think of.] Rumbold said just the same. Mr. Hewling says, [I
question not, but in his own time, God will raise up other Instruments to carry
on the same Cause they died for, for his own Glory.] Mr. Lark, [That he was
confident God would Revenge their Bloods.] Now it will be very harsh to say,
all these, and several more to the same purpose, were nothing but Enthusiasm,
since spoken by Persons of all Sexes and Ages, in twenty different Places, in
the most calm and serene Tempers, and the Persons not wild or fanciful; and
their Words miraculously made good by the Event, which shows God honored 'em
with being Prophets as well as Martyrs.

To proceed to the Persons who suffered in this Cause here, and in the West,
and other Places, chiefly under Jeffrey's Insulting Cruelty. His dealing with
'em is not to be paralleled by any thing but the new French Dragoons, or the
old Cutthroats and Lords Chief-Justices of the poor Albigenses or Waldenses at
Merindol and Cutrices. Had the Great Turk sent his Janisaries, or the Tartar
his Armies among 'em, they would escaped better. Humanity could not offend so far to
deserve such Punishment as he inflicted. A certain Barbarous Joy and Pleasure
grinn'd from his Brutal Soul through his Bloody Eyes, when ever he was
Sentencing any of the poor Souls to Death and Torment, so much worse than Nero,
as when that Monster wished he had never learnt to Write, because forced to set
his Name to Warrants for Execution of Malefactors. Jeffreys would have been
glad if every Letter he writ had been such a Warrant, and every Word a Sentence
of Death. He observed neither Humanity to the Dead, nor Civility to the Living.
He made all the West an Aceldama; some Places quite depopulated, and nothing to
be seen in 'em but forsaken Walls, unlucky Gibbets, and Ghostly Carcasses. The
Trees were laden almost as thick with Quarters as Leaves; the Houses and
Steeples covered as closed with Heads, as at other times frequently in that
Country with Crows or Ravens. Nothing could be liker Hell than all those Parts,
nothing so like the Devil as be. Caldrons hizzing, Carkesses boiling, Pitch and
Tar sparkling and glowing, Blood and Limbs boiling and tearing, and mangling,
and he the great Director of all; and in a word, discharging his Place who sent
him, the best deserving to be the late King's Chief Justice there, and
Chancellor after, of any Man that breathed since Cain or Judas.

Some of the more Principal Persons who fell under his Barbarcus Sentence, it is
thought worth the while to treat distinctly and particularly of, throning the
rest together after 'em. And the first whom we shall make special Remarks on,
are

1. The HEWLINGS.
IF any one would see true Pure Popish Mercy, let 'em look on these two
Gentlemen, the only Sons of their virtuous and sorrowful surviving Parents; the
Comforts, Props, and Hopes of their Name and Family, carefully educated,
virtuously disposed both of them; after all repeated Applications, if but for
one of their Lives, barbarously Executed. A particular Care was taken by their
Father in their Education, forming their Minds by his own Example, and constant
Instructions and Prayers, as well as other Pains of Ingenuous Masters, to the
strictest Rules of Piety and Virtue. Nor was their Pious and very tender
Mother, less careful in that particular.

The Elder, Mr. Benjamin Hewling, had Tutors in the Mathematics, and other
parts of Philosophy; a course of which he went through successfully enough, and
so as to render him as complete in his Mind, as Nature had formed his Body:
After which he went to Holland, as his Brother, Mr. William Hewling, from
whence this last returned with the Duke. Both of 'em had Commands in the Army;
the Elder had a Troop of Horse, the Younger was a Lieutenant of Foot, and
discharged their Places with much more Conduct and Bravery, than could be
expected from such young Soldiers, being entirely satisfied in the Cause they
fought for, since 'twas no less than the Interest of all that was dear to 'em
in this World, or the other. The Eldest had particularly signalized himself in
several Skirmishes, and was sent with a Detachment of his own Troop, and two
more, to Myn-head, in Somersetshire, to bring Cannon to the Army, at the very
instant the Duke engaged the King's Forces at fatal Sedgmore, and came not up
till after the Field was entirely lost; to whose Absence, with so considerable
a Party of the Duke's Horse, and the Most resolved Men of all he had, the Loss
of the Day was principally owing. Finding all things in Disorder, and the Rout
beyond recovering, he was forced to disperse his Troops, every one shifting as
they could for themselves. He and his Brother kept together, where, what befell
'em after, their Friends have given an exact Account, which is here following
inserted.

An Account of the Behavior of, Mr. William and Benjamin Hewlings, before and
at their Execution; with several Letters to diverse of their Relations.
THe gracious dealings of God, manifested to some in dying Hours, have been of
great Advantage to those living that heard the same, giving them an occasion
thereby to reflect on their own State, and to look after the things of their
Peace, before they be hid from their Eyes; as also a great Encouragement to
strengthen the Faith of those that have experienced the Grace of God to them.

To that end it is thought necessary, by Parents especially, to preserve to
their Children t hat remain, those blessed Experiences that such have had,
which God has taken to himself.

Here therefore is presented a true Account of the admirable appearances of God
toward two young Men; Mr. Benjamin Hewling, who died when he was about 22
Years of Age, and Mr. William Hewling, who died before he arrived to 20 Years.
They engaged with the Duke of Monmouth, as their own Words were, for the
English Liberties and the Protestant Religion, and for which Mr. William
Hewling was Executed at Lyme the 12th. of September, 1685. and Mr. Ben. Hewling
at Taunton, the 30th. of the same Month; and however severe Men were to them,
yet the blessed Dispensation of God toward them was such, as has made good
his Word, That out of the Mouths of Babes he has ordained Strength, that he
may still the Enemy and the Avenger. Then, Reader, would you see Earthly Angels
(Men that are a little too low for Heaven, and much too high for Earth) would
you see poor frail Creatures trampling this World under their Feet, and with an
holy, serene Smiling at the Threats of Tyrants, who are the Terrors of the
Mighty in the Land of the Living? Would you see shackled Prisoners behave
themselves like Judges, and Judges stand like Prisoners before them? Would you
see some of the rare Exploits of Faith in its highest Elevation, immediately
before it be swallowed up in the Beatifical Vision? To conclude, would you see
the Heavenly Jerusalem pourtrayed on Earth? Would you hear the melodious Voices
of ascending Saints in a ravishing Consort ready to join with the Heavenly
Chorus in their delightful Hallelujahs? Then draw near, come and see! If thou
be a Man of an Heavenly Spirit, here is pleasant and suitable Entertainment for
thee; and after thou have conversed a while these excellent Spirits, it may be
thou will Judge as I do, That dead Saints are sweeter Companions (in some
respects) for thee to converse with, than those that are living: And when thou
shall see the magnificent Acts of their Faith, their Invincible Patience, their
flaming Love to Christ, their strange contempt and undervaluings of the World,
their plainness and simplicity in the Profession of the Gospel, their fervent
and brotherly Love to each other, their ravishing Prospects (as it were on the
top of Mount Pisgah) of the Heavenly Canaan, their Swan-like Songs, and Dying
Speeches. And, Reader, You know the first Lisping of little Children, and last
Farewels of Dying Saints, are always most sweet and Charming: Those Fore tastes
of the Rivers' of Pleasure, the transporting Glimpses they had of the Crown of
Glory; I say, when you see and read these Exemplary Truths, wonder not that the
Pious Hewlings longed so vehemently to be in a better World, though they were
to pass through a Thousand Deaths, or the Fiery Trial to it. [But to come to
our intended matter.]

After the dispersing of the Duke's Army, they fled and put to Sea, but were
driven back again, and with the hazard of their Lives got on shore, (over
dangerous Rocks) where they saw the Country filled with Soldiers; and they
being unwilling to fall into the hands of the Rabble, and no way of defense or
escape remaining to them, they surrendered themselves Prisoners to a Gentleman,
whose House was near the place they landed at, and were from thence sent to
Exeter Gaol the 12th. of July, where remaining some time, their Behavior was
such, that (being visited by many) caused great Respect toward them, even of
those that were Enemies to the Cause they engaged in; and being on the 27th. of
July put on Board the Swan Frigate, in order to their bringing up to London;
their Carriage was such, as obtained great Kindness from the Commander, and all
other Officers in the Ship; and being brought into the River, Captain
Richardson came and took them into his Custody, and carried them to Newgate,
putting great Irons upon them, and put them apart from each other, without
giving Liberty for the nearest Relation to see them, notwithstanding all
Endeavors and Entreaties used to obtain it, though in the Presence of a Keeper;
which though it did greatly increase the Grief of Relations, God, who wisely
orders all things for good to those he intends Grace and Mercy to, made this
very Restraint, and hard Usage a blessed Advantage to their Souls, as may
appear by their own Words, when after great Importunity and Charge, some of
their near Relations had leave to speak a few words to them before the Keeper;
To which they replied, They were contented with the Will of God, whatever it
should be. Having been in Newgate three Weeks, there was Order given to carry
them down into the West, in order to their Trial; which being told them, they
answered, They were glad of it; and that Morning they went out of Newgate,
several that beheld them, seeing them so cheerful, said, Surely they had
received their Pardon, else they could never carry it with that Courage and
Cheerfulness. Although this must be observed that from first to last, whatever
hopes they received from Friends, they still thought the contrary, never being
much affected with the hopes of it, nor cast down, nor the least discouraged at
the worst that Man could do. In their Journey to Dorchester, the Keepers that
went with them, have given this Account of them; That their Carriage was so
Grave, Serious, and Christian, that made them admire to see and hear what they
did from such Young Men.

A near Relation that went into the West to see the issue of things, and to
perform whatever should be necessary for them, gives the following Account:

At Salisbury, the 30th, of August, I had the first Opportunity of Converse
with them: I found them in a very excellent Composure of Mind, declaring their
Experience of the Grace and Goodness of God to them in all their Sufferings, in
supporting, and strengthening, and poviding for them, turning the hearts of all
in whose hands they had been, both at Exon, and on Shipboard, to show pity and
favor to them; although since they came to Newgate, they were hardly used, and
now in their Journey loaded with heavy Irons, and more inhumanely dealt with.
They with great cheerfulness professed, That they were better, in a more happy
Condition than ever in their Lives, from the sense they had of the Pardoning
Love of God in Jesus Christ to their Souls, wholly referring themselves to
their wise and gracious God to choose for them Life or Death; Expressing
themselves thus: Any thing, what pleases God, what he sees best so be it: We
know he is able to deliver, but if not, blessed be his Name; Death is not
terrible now, but desirable. Mr. Benjamin Hewling particularly added, As for
the World, there is nothing in it to make it worth while to live, except we may
be serviceable to God therein. And afterward said, 'Oh! God is a strong
Refuge, I have found him so indeed.

The next Opportunity I had was at Dorchester, where they both were carried,
there remaining together four days: By reason of their strait Confinement, our
Converse was much interrupted; but this appeared, that they had still the same
Presence and Support from God, no way discouraged at the approach of their
Trial, nor of the event of it, whatever it should be.

The 6th. of September, Mr. Benjamin Hewling was ordered to Taunton to be tried
there: Taking my leave of him, he said, Oh! Blessed be God for Afflictions; I
have found such happy Effects, that I would not have been without them for all
this World.

I remained still at Dorchester, to wait the Issue of Mr. William Hewling, to
whom, after Trial, I had free Access, whose Discourse was much filled with
Admiring of the Grace of God in Christ, that had been manifested toward him,
in calling him out of his Natural State, he said, God by his Holy Spirit did
suddenly seize upon his Heart, when he thought not of it in his retired Abode
in Holland, as it were secretly whispering in his Heart, See ye my Face,
enabling him to answer his gracious Call, and to reflect upon his own Soul,
showing him the Evil of Sin, and Necessity of Christ, from that time carrying
him on, to a sensible adherence to Christ for Justification and Eternal Life.
He said, Hence he found a Spring of Joy and Sweetness, beyond the Comforts of
the whole Earth. He further said, He could not but admire the wonderful
Goodness of God, in so Preparing him, for what he was bringing him to, which
then he thought not of, giving him hope of Eternal Life before he called him to
look Death in the face, so that he did cheerfully resign his Life to God before
he came, having sought his Guidance in it; and that both then and now, the
Cause did appear to him very Glorious, notwithstanding all he had suffered in
it, or what he further might. Although for our Sins God has withheld these
good things from us. But he said, God had carried on his blessed Work in his
soul, in and by all his Sufferings; and whatever the Will of God were, Life or
Death, he knew it would be best for him.

After he had received his Sentence, when he returned to Prison, he said,
Methinks I find my Spiritual Comforts increasing, ever since my Sentence. There
is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; it is God that justifies,
who shall condemn?

When I came to him the next Morning (when he had received News that he must
die the next day, and in order to it, was to be carried to Lyme that day) I
found him in a more excellent raised Spiritual Frame than before: He said, he
was satisfied God had chosen best for him; he knows what the Temptations of
Life might have been; I might have lived and forgotten God, but now I am going
where I shall sin no more. Oh! it is a blessed thing to be free from sin, and to
be with Christ. Oh! the Riches of the Love of God in Christ to Sinners. Oh! how
great were the Sufferings of Christ for me beyond all I can undergo? How great
is that Glory to which I am going? It will soon swallow up all our Sorrow here.

When he was at Dinner, just before his going to Lyme, he dropped many abrupt
Expressions of his inward Joy, such as these: Oh! the Grace of God, the Love of
Christ; Oh, that blessed Supper of the Lamb, to be for ever with the Lord! He
further said, When I went to Holland, you knew not what Snares, Sins, and
Miseries I might fall into, or whether ever we should meet again: But now you
know whither I am going, and that we shall certainly have a most joyful meeting.

He said, Pray give my particular Recommendations to all my Friends, with
acknowledgments for all their Kindness. I advise them all to make sure of an
Interest in Christ, for he is the only Comfort when we come to die.

One of the Prisoners seemed to be troubled at the manner of the Death they
were to die; to whom he replied, I bless God I am reconciled to it all.

Just as he was going to Lyme, he writ these few Lines to a Friend, being
hardly suffered to stay so long.

I AM going to Launch into Eternity, I hope and trust in the Arm of my Blessed
Redeemer, to whom I commit you and all my dear Relations; my Duty to my dear
Mother, and Love to all my Sisters, and the rest of my Friends.

William Hewling.

As they passed through the Town of Dorchester to Lyme, multitudes of People
beheld them, with great Lamentations, admiring at his Deportment at his parting
with his Sister.

As they passed upon the Road between Lyme and Dorchester, his Discourse was
exceeding Spiritual, (as those declared who were present) taking occasion from
every thing to speak of the Glory they were going to. Looking out on the
Country as he passed, he said, This is a Glorious Creation, but what then is
the Paradise of God, to which we are going? It Is but a few hours, and we shall
be there, and for ever with the Lord.

At Lyme, just before they went to die, reading John 14.18. He said to one of
his Fellow Sufferers, Here is a sweet Promise for us: I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come unto you. Christ will be with us to the last. One
taking leaving of him, he said, Farewell, till we meet in Heaven; Presently I
shall be with Christ: Oh! I would not change conditions with any in this World;
I would not stay behind for Ten Thousand Worlds.

To another, that asked him how he did now? He said, Very well, he blessed God.
And farther asking him, if he could look Death in the face with Comfort now it
approached so near? He said, Yes, I bless God I can with great Comfort; God
has made this a good Night to me, my Comforts are much increased since I left
Dorchester: Then taking leave of him, said, Farewell, I shall see you no more.
To which he replied, How! see me no more? Yes, I hope to meet you in Glory. To
another that was by him to the last, he said, Pray remember my dear Love to my
Brother and Sister, and tell them, I desire they would comfort themselves that
I am gone to Christ, and we shall quickly meet in the Glorious Mount Sion above.

Afterward he prayed for about three quarters of an hour with the greatest
fervency, exceedingly blessing God for Jesus Christ, adoring the Riches of his
Grace in him, in all the Glorious Fruits of it toward him, Praying for the
Peace of the Church of God, and of these Nations in particular, all with such
eminent Assistance of the Spirit of God, as convinced, astonished, and melted
into Pity the Hearts of all present, even the most malicious Adversaries,
forcing Tears and Expressions from them; some saying, They knew not what would
become of them after Death; but it was evident he was going to great Happiness.

When he was just going out of the World, with a joyful Countenance he said,
Oh! now my Joy and Comfort is, that I have a Christ to go to; and so sweetly
resigned his Spirit to Christ, the 12th. of September, 1685.

An Officer who had showed so malicious a Spirit as to call the Prisoners
Devils, when he was Guarding them down, was now so convinced, that he after
told a Person of Quality, That he was never so affected, as by his cheerful
Carriage, and fervent Prayer, such as he believed was never heard, especially
from one so young; and said, I believe, had the Lord Chief Justice been there,
he could not have let him die.

The Sheriff having given his Body to be buried, although it was brought from
the Place of Execution without any notice given, yet very many of the Town, to
the Number of about 200, came to accompany him; and several Young Women of the
best of the Town, laid him in his Grave in Lyme Churchyard, the 13th. of
September, 1685.

After which, his Sister writ this following Letter to her Mother.
ALthough I have nothing to acquaint my Dear Mother withal, but what is most
afflictive to Sense, both as to the Determination of God's Will, and as to my
present Apprehension concerning my Brother Benjamin, yet remaining; yet there
is such abundant Consolation mixed in both, that I only wanted an Opportunity to
pay this Duty; God having wrought so Glorious a Work on both their Souls,
revealing Christ in them, that Death is become their Friend. My Brother William
having already with the greatest Joy declared, to those that were with him to
the last, That he would not change Conditions with any that were to remain in
this World; and he desired that his Relations would comfort themselves, that he
is gone to Christ.

My Brother Benjamin expects not long to continue in this World, and is
exceeding willing to leave it when God shall call, being fully satisfied that
God will choose that which is best for him and us all; by these things God does
greatly support me; and I hope you also, my dear Mother, which was and is my
Brothers great desire; there is still room for Prayer for one; and God having
so answered, though not in kind, we have Encouragement still to wait on him.

Honored Mother, Your Dutiful Daughter, Hannah Hewling.


When I came to Taunton to Mr. Benjamin Hewling, he had received the News of
his Brother's being gone to die with so much comfort and joy, and afterward of
the continued goodness of God increasing it to the end. He expressed to this
effect, We have no cause to fear Death, if the Presence of God be with us;
there is no evil in it, the sting being taken away; it is nothing but our
Ignorance of the Glory that the Saints pass into by Death, which makes it
appear dark for our selves or Relations, if in Christ: What is this World, that
we should desire an abode in it? It Is all vain and unsatisfying, full of sin
and misery. Intimating also his own cheerful expectations soon to follow,
discovering then, and all along great seriousness, and sense of Spiritual and
Eternal things, complaining of nothing in his present Circumstances, but want
of place of Retirement to converse more uninterruptedly with God and his own
Soul, saying, That this lonely time in Newgate was the sweetest in his whole
Life. He said, God having some time before struck his Heart (when he thought of
the hazard of his Life) to some serious Sense of his past Life, and the great
consequences of Death and Eternity, showing him, that they were the only happy
Persons that had secured their Eternal states: The folly and madness of the
ways of sin, and his own Thraldom therein, with his utter inability to deliver
himself; also the necessity of Christ for Salvation: He said, it was not
without Terror and Amazement for some time, the sight of unpardoned sin, with
Eternity before him. But God wonderfully opened to him the Riches of his
Free Grace in Christ Jesus for poor Sinners to flee to, enabling to look alone
to a crucified Christ for Salvation: He said, this blessed Work was in some
measure carried on upon his Soul, under all his business and hurries in the
Army; but never sprung forth so fully and sweetly till his close Confinement in
Newgate. There he saw Christ and all Spiritual Objects more clearly, and
embraced them more strongly; there he experienced the blessedness of a
reconciled State, the Excellency of the ways of Holiness, the delightfulness of
Communion with God, which remained with very deep and apparent impressions on
his Soul, which he frequently expressed with Admiration of the Grace of God
toward him.

He said, Perhaps my Friends may think this Summer the saddest time of my Life;
but I bless God it has been the sweetest and most happy of it all; nay, there
is nothing else worth the name of happiness. I have in vain sought satisfaction
from the things of this World, but I never found it; but now I have found Rest
for my Soul in God alone.

O how great is our Blindness by Nature, till God open our Eyes, that we can
see no Excellency in Spiritual things, but spend our Precious Time in pursuing
Shadows, and are deaf to all the Invitations of Grace, and Glorious Offers of
the Gospel! How just is God in depriving us of that we so much slighted and
abused! Oh! his Infinite Patience and Goodness, that after all, he should yet
sanctify any Methods to bring a poor sinner to himself: Oh! Electing Love,
distinguishing Grace; what great cause have I to admire and adore it!

He said, What an amazing Consideration is the Suffering of Christ for sin, to
bring us to God; his Suffering from wicked Men was exceeding great; but alas,
what was that to the Dolours of his Soul, under the infinite Wrath of God? This
Mystery of Grace and Love is enough to swallow up our thoughts to all Eternity.

As to his own Death, he would often say, He saw no reason to expect any other;
I know God is infinitely able to deliver, and I am sure will do it, if it be
for his Glory, and my Good; in which, I bless God, I am fully satisfied; it is
all my desire that he would choose for me, and then I am sure it will be best,
whatever it be; for truly, unless God have some Work for me to do in the World
for his Service and Glory, I see nothing else to make Life desirable: In the
present state of Affairs, there is nothing to cast our Eyes upon but Sin,
Sorrow, and Misery: And truly, were things never so much according to our
desires, it is but the World still, which will never be a resting place. Heaven
is the only state of Rest and Happiness; there we shall be perfectly free from
Sin and Temptation, and enjoy God without interruption for ever.

Speaking of the Disappointment of their Expectations in the Work they had
undertaken, he said, with reference to the Glory of God, the Prosperity of the
Gospel, and the delivery of the People of God, We have great cause to lament
it; but for that outward Prosperity that would have accompanied it, it is but of
small moment in it self; as it could not satisfy, so neither could it be
abiding; for at longest, Death would have put an end to it all: Also adding,
nay parhaps, we might have been so foolish, as to have been taken with that
part of it, with the neglect of our Eternal Concerns; and then I am sure our
present Circumstances are incomparably better.

He frequently expressed great concern for the Glory of God, and Affection to
his People, saying, If my Death may advance God's Glory, and hasten the
Deliverance of his People, it is enough; saying, It was a great comfort to him,
to think of so great a Privilege as an Interest in all their Prayers.

In his Converse particularly valuing and delighting in those Persons where he
saw most Holiness shing; also great Pity to the Souls of others, saying, That
the remembrance of our former Vanity may well cause Compassion to others in
that state. And in his Converse prompting others to Seriousness, telling them,
Death and Eternity are such weighty Concerns, that they deserve the utmost
intention of our Minds; for the way to receive Death cheerfully, is to prepare
for it seriously; and if God should please to spare our Lives, surely we have
the same reason to be serious, and spend our remaining days in his Fear and
Service.

He also took great care that the Worship of God, which they were in a Capacity
of maintaining there, might be duly performed; as Reading, Praying, and Singing
of Psalms, in which he evidently took great delight.

For those three or four days before their Deaths, when there was a general
Report that no more should die; he said, I don't know what God has done beyond
our expectations; if he does prolong my Life, I am sure it is all his own, and
by his Grace I will wholly devote it to him.

But the 29th. of September, about Ten or Eleven at Night, we found the
deceitfulness of this Report, they being then told they must die the next
Morning, which was very unexpected, as to the suddenness of it; but herein God
glorified his Power, Grace, and Faithfulness, in giving suitable Support and
Comfort by his blessed Presence, which appeared upon my coming to him at that
time, finding him greatly composed; he said, Though Men design to surprise, God
does, and will perform his Word, to be a very present help in trouble.

The next Morning when I saw him again, his Cheerfulness and Comfort were much
increased, waiting for the Sheriff with the greatest sweetness and serenity of
Mind; saying, Now the Will of God is determined, to whom I have referred it,
and he has chosen most certainly that which is best.

Afterward with a smiling Countenance he discoursed of the Glory of Heaven,
remarking with much delight the third, fourth, and fifth Verses of the 22d. of
the Revelations; And there shall be no more Curse; But the Throne of God, and
of the Lamb, shall be in it, and his Servants shall serve him, and they shall
see his Face, and his Name shall be in their Foreheads; and there shall be no
Night there, and they shall need no Candle, nor Light of the Sun, and they
shall Reign for ever and ever. Then he said, Oh, what a happy State is this!
shall we be loath to go to enjoy this! Then he desired to be read to him, 2 Cor.
5. For we know that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a Building of God, a House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens; to
the tenth or eleventh Verses. In all, his Comforts still increasing, expressing
his sweet Hopes, and good Assurance of his Interest in this Glorious
Inheritance, and being now going to the Possession of it; seeing so much of
this happy Change, that he said, Death was more desirable than Life; he had
rather die than live any longer here. As to the manner of his Death, he said,
When I have considered others under these Circumstances, I have thought it very
dreadful, but now God has called me to it, I bless God I have quite other
apprehensions of it; I can now cheerfully embrace it as an easy Passage to
Glory: And though Death separates from the Enjoyments of each other here, it will
be but for a very short time, and then we shall meet in such Enjoyments as now
we cannot conceive, and for ever rejoice in each others Happiness. Then reading
the Scriptures, and musing with himself, he intimated the great Comfort God
conveyed to his Soul in it; saying, O, what an invaluable Treasure is this
blessed Word of God? In all Conditions here is a store of strong Consolation.
One desiring his Bible, he said, No, this shall be my Companion to the last
moment of my Life. Thus Praying together, Reading, Meditating, and Conversing
of Heavenly things, they waited for the Sheriff, who, when he came, void of all
Pity or Civility, hurried them away, scarce suffering them to take leave of
their Friends. But notwithstanding this, and the doleful Mourning of all about
them, the Joyfulness of his Countenance was increased. Thus he left his Prison,
and thus he appeared in the Sledge, where they sat about half an hour, before
the Officers could force the Horses to draw; at which they were greatly
enraged, there being no visible obstruction from weight of way. But at last the
Mayor and Sheriff hall'd them forward themselves, Balaam-like, driving the
Horses.

When they came to the Place of Execution, which was surrounded with
Spectators, many that waited their Coming with great Sorrow, said, That when
they saw him and them come with such Cheerfulness and Joy, and Evidence of the
Presence of God with them, it made Death appear with another Aspect.

They first embraced each other with the greatest Affection; then two of the
elder Persons praying audibly, they joined with great seriousness. Then he
defired leave of the Sheriff to pray particularly, but he would not grant it,
only asked him, if he would Pray for the King? He answered, I Pray for all Men.
He then requested they might sing a Psalm; the Sheriff told him, It must be
with the Ropes about their Necks; which they cheerfully accepted, and sung with
such Heavenly Joy and Sweetness, that many present sai^^, It both broke and
rejoiced their hearts.

Thus in the experience of the delightfulness of Praising God on Earth, he
willingly closed his Eyes on a vain World, to pass to that Eternal Employment,
Sept. 30. 1685.

All present of all sorts were exceedingly affected and amazed. Some Officers
that had before insultingly said, Surely these Persons have no thoughts of
Death, but will find themselves surprised by it; after said, That they now saw
he and they had something extraordinary within that carried them through with
such Joy. Others of them said, That they were so convinced of their Happiness,
that they would be glad to change Conditions with them. All the Soldiers in
general, and all others, lamenting exceedingly, saying, That it was so sad a
thing, to see them cut off; they scarce knew how to bear it.

Some of the most malicious in the Place, from whom nothing but Railing was
expected, said, (as they were carried to their Grave in Taunton Church,
voluntarily accompanied by most of the Town) That these Persons had left a
sufficient Evidence, that they were now glorified Saints in Heaven. A great
Officer in the King's Army has been often heard to say, That if you would learn
to die, go to the Young Men of Taunton.

Much more was uttered by them, which showed the Blessed and Glorious frames of
their hearts (to the Glory of Divine Grace) but this is what occurs to Memory.

Mr. Benjamin Hewling, about two hours before his Death, writ this following
Letter, which showed the great composure of his Mind.

Mr. Hewling's last Letter a little before his Execution.
Taunton, Sept. 30. 1685. Honored Mother,
THat News which I know you have a great while feared, and we expected, I must
now acquaint you with; That notwithstanding the Hopes you gave in your two last
Letters, Warrants are come down for my Execution, and within these few hours I
expect it to be performed. Blessed be the Almighty God that gives comfort and
support in such a day; how ought we to magnify his holy Name for all his
Mercies, that when we were running on in a course of sin, he should stop us in
our full Career, and show us that Christ whom we had pierced, and out of his
Free Grace enable us to look upon him with an Eye of Faith, believing him able
to save to the utmost all such as come to him. Oh admirable long-suffering and
Patience of God! that when we were dishonouring his Name, he did not take that
time to bring honor to himself by our destruction. But he delights not in
the death of a sinner, but had rather he should turn to him and live: And he
has many ways of bringing his own to himself. Blessed be his Holy Name, that
through Affliction he has taught my heart in some measure to be conformable to
his Will, which works Patience, and Patience works Experience, and
Experience Hope, which makes not ashamed. I bless God I am not ashamed of the
Cause for which I lay down my Life; and as I have engaged in it, and fought for
it; so now I am going to Seal it with my Blood. The Lord still carry on the
same Cause which has been long on foot; and though we die in it, and for it, I
question not but in his own good time he will raise up other Instruments more
worthy to carry it on to the Glory of his Name, and the Advancement of his
Church and People.

Honored Mother, I know there has been nothing left undone by you, or my
Friends, for the saving of my Life, for which I return my hearty
Acknowledgments to your self and them all; and it is my dying Request to you and
them, to Pardon all undutifulness (...) unkindness in every Relation. Pray give
my Duty to my Grandfather and Grandmother, Service to my Uncles and Aunts, and
my dear Love to all my Sisters; to every Relation and Friend a particular
Recommendation. Pray tell 'em all how Precious an Interest in Christ is when we
come to die, and advise them never to rest in a Christless Estate. For if we
are his, it is no matter what the World do to us; they can but kill the Body,
and blessed be God the Soul is out of their reach, for I question not but their
Malice wishes the Damnation of that, as well as the Destruction of the Body;
which has too evidently appeared by their deceitful and ^^tering Promises. I
commit you all to the Care and Protection of God, who has promised to be a
Father to the Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow, and to supply the want of
every Relation. The Lord God of Heaven be your Comfort under these Sorrows, and
your Refuge from those Miseries we may easily foresee coming upon poor
England, and the poor dist^e^^ed People of God in it. The Lord carry you
through this Vale of Tears with a resigning submissive Spirit, and at last
bring you to himself in Glory; where I question not but you will meet your
dying Son.

Ben. Hewling.


Their CHARACTERS.
THey were both of very sweet and obliging Tempers, as has appeared in their
History, it being a very hard matter for their worst Enemies, when they once
knew 'em well, not to Honor and Love 'em. Mr. Benjamin, the Elder, reconciled
the Lamb and the Lion exactly. In the Field he seemed made only for War, and
any where else, for nothing but Love. He, without Flattery, deserved to be
called a very fine Man, of a lovely Proportion, extremely well made, as
handsome a Mien, and good an Air, as perhaps few in England exceeded him. His
Picture is pretty like him.

The Younger, Mr. William, somewhat taller, and more slender; his Face fresh
and lively, as his Spirit, being Master of an extraordinary vivacity and
briskness of Temper. Both of 'em Virtuous, Pious and Courageous far above their
Years, and indeed, seemed to be Men too soon, one of 'em not being Twenty, the
Eldest but Two and twenty, when they died; verifying that common Observation,
That whatever is perfect sooner than ordinary, has generally a shorter Period
prefixed it, than what is more base and ignoble.

2. Mr. CHRISTOPHER BATTISCOMB.
HE was another young Gentleman, of a good Family, and very great Hopes, and of
a fair Estate, which lay in Dorsetshire, somewhere between Dorchester and Lyme.
He had studied some time at the Temple, and having Occasions in the Country,
about the Time of my Lord Russel's Business, he was there seized, on Suspicion
of being concerned in it, and clapped into the County Gaol at Dorchester; where he
behaved himself with that Prudence, and winning Sweetness, and showed so much
Wit, and innocent pleasantry of Temper, as extremely obliged both all his
Keepers and Fellow Prisoners, and even Persons of the best Quality in that
Town. They knew how to value such a Gentleman as Mr. Battiscomb, and made him
such frequent Visits in the Prison, till the Place it self was so far from
being Scandalous, that there was generally all the Conversation, and where you
might be sure to meet the best Company in the Town of both Sexes. Mr.
Battiscomb had the Happiness not to be displeasing to the fair Sex, who had as
much Pity and Friendship for him as consisted with the Rules of Decency and
Virtue; and perhaps their Respect for him did not always stop at Friendship,
though it still preserved the other Bounds inviolable. Pity is generally but a
little way from Love, especially when the Object of it is any thing
extraordinary. But after he had been there some time, and nothing could be
proved against him which could any ways affect him, he was at length, almost
unwillingly delivered from this sort of happy Slavery; And when the Duke
landed, appeared with him, and served him with equal Faith and Valor, till the
Rout at Sedgmoor, when he fled with the rest, and got up as far as Devonshire,
where he was seized in a Disguise, and brought to his old Palace, the Prison at
Dorchester.

He behaved himself there the second time in the same courteous obliging manner
as he did at the first, though now he seemed more thoughtful, and in earnest than
before, as knowing nothing was to be expected but speedy Death; though his
Courage never droopt, but was still the same, if it did not increase with his
Danger. At his Trial, Jeffreys railed at him with so much eagerness and
barbarity, that he was observed almost to foam upon the Bench. He was very
angry with him, because he was a Lawyer, and could have been contented all such
as he should be hanged up without any Trial; and truly, 'twas no great Matter,
whether he or the rest had had that Formality or no. Mr. Battiscomb was as
undaunted at the Bar, as in the Field, or at Execution. How he demeaned himself
in Prison, before his Death, take this following Account verbatim, as 'twas
written by his Friends.

The Account given of him by his Relations.
HE was observed to be always serious and cheerful, ready to entertain
Spiritual Discourse, manifesting Affection to God's People and his Ordinances;
he seemed to be in a very calm Indifference to Life or Death, referring himself
to God to determine it, expressing his great Satisfaction as to some
Opportunities of Escape that were slipped, saying, That truly he sometimes
thought the Cause was too good to flee from suffering in it, though he would use
all lawful Means for his Life; but the Providence of God having prevented this,
he was sure it was best for him, for he said, he blessed God he could look into
Eternity with Comfort. He said, with respect to his Relations and Friends, to
whom his Death would be afflictive, That he was willing to live, if God saw
good; but for his own part, he thought Death much more desirable. He said, I
have enjoyed enough of this World, but I never found any thing but Vanity in
it, no Rest or Satisfaction. God, who is an Infinite Spiritual Being, is the
only suitable Object for the Soul of Man, which is spiritual in its Nature, and
too large to be made happy by all that this World can afford, which is all but
sensual: Therefore, methinks, I see no reason why I should be unwilling to
leave it by Death, since our Happiness can never be perfected till then, till
we leave this Body, where we are so continually clogged with Sin and Vanity,
frivolous and foolish Trifles. Death in it self is indeed terrible, and natural
Courage is too low to encounter it; nothing but an Interest in Christ can be
our Comfort in it, he said, which Comfort I hope I have; intimating much
advantage to his Soul by his former Imprisonment.

The Day he went from Dorchester to Lyme, after he had received the News of his
Death the next Day, he was in the same serious Cheerfulness, declaring still
the same Apprehension of the Desirableness of Death, and the great Supports of
his Mind under the Thoughts of so sudden passing through it alone from the Hope
of the Security of his Interest in Christ; taking leave of his Friends with
this Farewell, Though we part here, we shall meet in Heaven. Passing by (...)
Estate, going to Lyme, he said, Farewell Temporal Inheritance, I am now going to
my Heavenly, Eternal One. At Lyme, the Morning that he died, it appeared that
he had the same Supports from God, meeting Death with the same cheerfulness.
When he was mounting the Ladder, he smiled, and said: I am not afraid of this;
I am going to a better Place, from a poor and miserable World, to a Celestial
Paradise, a Heavenly Jerusalem. I might have chosen whether I would have
undergone this Death, if I had hearkened to the L. C. J. but it was upon such
unworthy Terms, that should I have accepted of my Pardon, it would have been
troublesome to me. I die a true Protestant; I am in Charity with all Men. God
preserve this Nation from Popery. The Lord bless you all. So taking his leave
of them he knew, after Prayer he lanched into Eternity.

His CHARACTER.
All that knew or saw him, must own Mr. Battiscomb was very much a Gentleman;
not that thin sort of Animal that flutters from Tavern to Playhouse; and back
again, all his Life, made up of Wig and Crevat, without one dram of Thought in
his Composition; but one who ha^ solid Worth, well dressed and set out to the
World. His Body made a very handsome and creditable Tenement for his Mind; and
it had been pity it should have lived in any other. He wa^ pretty tall, well
made, I think inclining to Black; not altogether unlike Mr. Benjamin Hewling as
He has been thought to resemble the Duke of Monmouth. He was Witty, Brave,
exactly Honorable, Pious, and Virtuous; and if ever that Character belonged to
any Man, it did eminently to Mr. Battiscomb, That he lived universally beloved,
and died as generally lamented.

3. Mr. WILLIAM JENKYNS.
HIS Father was sufficiently known, and his Circumstances hard enough, being
seized only for his Opinion, and clapped up close in Newgate; where the
Inconvenience of the Place, and want of the Exercise he formerly enjoyed,
quickly killed him, as he used to say before his Confinement, 'twould certainly
do if ever it happened. Thus was he requited by that very Person for whom, with
Mr. Love, he ventured his Life so deeply, and so hardly escaped with it. 'Twas
his inhumane Treatment which edged and animated his Son; and the Revenge of his
Father's Blood may be presumed to have gone very far, in pushing him on to
engage his Life and Fortune in this Undertaking, he having given Funeral Rings
for his Father, with this Poesy, William Jenkyns, murdered in Newgate. He was
his Father's only Son, who had taken care to have him educated suitable to his
ingenuous Birth and Inclinations: He improved sufficiently in all useful
Learning, and was now about One or Two and twenty. He, and several young
Gentlemen, rode down from London, a little before the Duke landed, and were
taken on Suspicion, and laid up in Ilchester Gaol, till the Duke himself came
and relieved them. He continued in his Army till the Rout, when, if I mistake
not, he got to Sea, and was forced back again with the Hewlings, or some
others. He was condemned at the bloody Assizes in Dorchester.

A Friend discoursing to him at Dorchester, about his Pardon, and telling him
the doubtfulness of obtaining it, he replied: Well, Death is the worst they can
do; and, I bless God, that will not surprise me; for I hope my great Work is
done. At Taunton being advised to govern the Airyness of his Temper, telling
him, it made People apt to censure him, as inconsiderate of his Condition; to
which he answered: Truly, this is so much my natural Temper, that I cannot tell
how to alter it; but, I bless God, I have, and do think seriously of my eternal
Concerns. I do not allow my self to be vain, but I find cause to be cheerful,
for my Peace is made with God, through Jesus Christ my Lord. This is my only
ground of Comfort and Cheerfulness, the Security of my Interest in Christ; for
I expect nothing but Death, and without this, I am sure Death would be most
dreadful; but having the good Hope of this, I cannot be melancholy. When he
heard of the triumphant Death of those that suffered at Lyme, he said, This is
a good Encouragement to depend upon God. Then speaking about the mangling of
their Bodies, he said: Well, the Resurrection will restore all with great
Advantage; the 15th. Chapter of the First of Corinthians is Comfort enough for
all Believers. Discoursing much of the Certainty and Felicity of the
Resurrection, at another time, he said. I will (as I think I ought) use all
lawful Means for the saving of my Life; and then if God please to forgive me my
Sins, I hope I shall as cheerfully embrace Death. Upon the Design of Attempting
an Escape he said, We use this means for the preserving our Lives; but if God
is not with us, it will not effect it. It (...) Business first to seek to him
for Direction and Success, if he sees good, with resigning our Lives to him;
and then his Will be done. After the Disappointments, when there was no
prospect of any other Opportunity, he spoke much of the Admirableness of God's
Providence in those things that seem most against us, bringing the greatest
Good out of them. For, said he, we can see but a little way; God is only wise
in all his Disposals of us: If we were left to choose for our selves, we should
choose our own Misery. Afterward discoursing of the Vanity and unsatisfyingness
of all things in this World, he said, It is so in the enjoying; we never (...)
our Expectations answered by any thing in it; and when Death comes, it puts an
end to all things we have been pursuing here: Learning and Knowledge (which are
the best Things in this World) will then avail nothing; nothing but an Interest
in Christ is then of any worth. One reading to some of his Fellow Prisoners,
Jer. 42.12. I will show mercy unto you, that he may have mercy upon you, and
cause you to return to your own Land; he said, Yes, we shall; but not in this
World, I am persuaded. September the 29th. at Night, after he heard he must die
the next Morning, he was exceedingly composed and cheerful, expressing his
Satisfaction in the Will of God. The next Morning he was still more spiritual
and cheerful, discovering a very sweet Serenity of Mind in all that he said and
did. Whilst he was waiting for the Sheriff, reading the Scriptures, Meditating
and conversing with those about him of Divine Things, amongst other things,
said be, I have heard much of the Glory of Heaven, but I am now going to behold
it, and understand what it is. Being desired to disguise himself, to attempt an
Escape, he said, No, I cannot tell how to disturb my self about it, and
methinks it is not my Business, now I have other things take up my Thoughts: If
God saw good to deliver me, he would open some other Door; but seeing he has
not, it is more for the Honor of his Name we should die, And so be it. One
saying to him, that most of the Apostles died a violent Death, he replied, Nay,
a greater than the Apostles; our Lord himself died, not only a shameful, but a
painful Death. He further said, This manner of Death has been the most
terrible thing in the World to my Thoughts; but, I bless God, now am I neither
afraid nor ashamed to die. He said, The parting with my Friends, and their
Grief for me, is my greatest Difficulty; but it will be but for a very short
time, and we shall meet again in endless Joys, where my dear Father is already
entered, him shall I presently joyfully meet. Then musing with himself a while,
he, with an extraordinary seriousness, sung these two Verses of one of
Herbert's Poems: Death is still working like a Mole,
Digging my Grave at each remove,
Let Grace work so on my Soul,
Drop from above.
Oh come! for thou do know the way,
Or if to me thou will not move,
Remove me where I need not say,
Drop from above.


He then read the 53d. of Isaiah, and said, He had heard many blessed Sermons
from that Chapter, especially from the 16th. Verse, All we like Sheep have gone
astray; we have turned every one to his own way, but the Lord has laid on him
the Iniquities of us all: Seeming to intimate some Impress made on his Soul
from them, but was interrupted. Then he said, Christ is all. When the Sheriff
came, he had the same cheerfulness and serenity of Mind, in taking Leave of his
Friends, and in the Sledge, which seemed to increase to the last, (as those
present have affirmed) joining in Prayer, and in singing a Psalm with great
appearance of Comfort and Joy in his Countenance, insomuch that some of his
Enemies (that had before censured his Cheerfulness for unthoughtfulness of his
Danger, and therefore expected to see him much surprised) now professed they
were greatly astonished, to see such a young Man leave the World, and go
through Death as he did.

His CHARACTER.
He was a very promising and ingenious young Gentleman. He had a great deal of
ready Wit, and an extraordinary Briskness and Gaity. He was a very good
Scholar, had run through a course of Philosophy; but his particular Inclination
was to the Mechanical part of it, wherein he had a very happy Genius, and
performed many pretty things. He wrote very good clean Latin. He was
indifferent tall, pretty thin, a fair Complexion, his Nose a little inclining
to one side, being hurt in his Infancy. He led a sober, virtuous Life, and died
a happy Death at Taunton, September the 30th. 1685.

4. Lady LISLE.
HAD those Persons who suffered about Monmouth's Business, fell only into the
hands of Cannibals, some of 'em, at least, had escaped better than they did
from Jeffreys. These more tame and civil Creatures would have spared the old
and withered, though they had devoured the young and tender. But no Age, no
Sex, made any difference here; and as those who were just come into the World,
Children and Girls of ten or a dozen Years old, were refused Pardon, so those
who were half out of it, would not be suffered to tumble into the Grave entire,
though, as Juvenal says of Priam, they had scarce Blood enough left to tinge the
Knife of the Sacrificers An Instance of this, was my Lady Lisle, of such an
Age, that she almost slept on her very Trial, condemned for as small a matter
as has been known, by one of those dormant Laws, made only in terrorem, but
hardly ever executed, only for corresponding with Nelthrop, an outlawed Person,
and, as was pretended, giving him Shelter at her House, and Hicks, who brought
him thither. For Mr. Hicks, he was not then convicted, nor in any Proclamation;
and so it is a question, whether she could, even in rigor of Law, deserve Death
on his account. For Nelthrop, he himself says in his last Speech, [That he was
wholly a Stranger to that worthy Lady; neither did she, as he verily believes,
know who he was, or his Name, till he was taken.] For this she was found
Guilty, and lost her Head at Winchester. Her Case was thought so hard, that the
Honorable Court of Parliament have now reverst her Judgment. At her Death she
made the following Speech.

The Last Speech of the Lady Alicia Lisle.
GEntlemen, Friends and Neighbors, it may be expected that I should say
something at my Death; and in order thereunto, I shall acquaint you, That my
Birth and Education was both near this Place, and that my Parents instructed me
in the Fear of God, and I now die of the Reformed Protestant Religion; That if
ever Popery should return into this Nation, it would be a very great and severe
Judgment; That I die in Expectation of the Pardon of all my Sins, and of
Acceptance with God the Father, by the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
he being the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes: I
thank God, through Jesus Christ, that I do depart under the Blood of
Sprinkling, which speaks better things than that of Abel; God having made
this Chastisement an Ordinance to my Soul. I did once as little expect to come
to this Place on this Occasion, as any Person in this Place, or Nation;
therefore let all learn not to be high-minded, but fear. The Lord is a
Sovereign, and will take what way he sees best to glorify himself in, and by
his poor Creatures; and I do humbly desire to submit to his Will, praying to
him, That I may possess my Soul in Patience. The Crime that was laid to my
Charge, was for Entertaining a Nonconformist Minister and others in my House;
the said Minister being sworn to have been in the late Duke of Monmouth's Army;
but I have been told, That if I had denied them, it would not at all have
affected me; I have no Excuse but Surprise and Fear, which I believe my Jury
must make use of to excuse their Verdict to the World. I have been also told,
That the Court did use to be of Counsel for the Prisoner; but instead of
Advice, I had Evidence against me from thence; which though it were only by
hearsay, might possibly affect my Jury; my Defense being but such, as might be
expected from a weak Woman; but such as it was, I did not hear it repeated
again to the Jury; which, as I have been informed, is usual in such Cases.
However, I forgive all the World, and therein all those that have done me
wrong; and in particular, I forgive Colonel Penruddock, although he told me,
that he could have taken these Men before they came to my House. And I do
likewise forgive him, who desired to be taken away from the Grand Jury to the
Petty Jury, that he might be the more nearly concerned in my Death. As to what
may be objected in reference to my Conviction, that I gave it under my Hand,
that I had discoursed with Nelthrop; that could be no Evidence against me,
being after my Conviction and Sentence. I do acknowledge His Majesty's Favor,
in Revoking my Sentence; I pray God to preserve him, that he may long Reign in
Mercy, as well as Justice; and that he may Reign in Peace; and that the
Protestant Religion may flourish under him. I also return thanks to God, and
the Reverend Clergy, that assisted me in my Imprisonment.

ALICIA LISLE.

5. Mr. RICHARD NELTHROP.
HIS Name is often enough met with in West's and Rumsey's Plot, and good reason
too, he being not near to answer for himself. As to what he was Accused,
Outlawed, and Executed for, his being concerned in a Design for the
Assassination of the King and Duke; he Solemnly avers, as may be seen in his
Speech, [That he was always highly against it, and detested any such thing, was
never in the least concerned in it, neither in Purse or Person; never knew of
any Arms bought for that intent, nor did believe there was any such Design.] He
writ one Letter to his Parents, here inserted, together with his Last Speech at
his Execution the 30th. of October, 1685. At Two in the Morning he wrote the
Letter to his Parents, etc. Wherein he speaks much of his Brother, and
Fellow-Sufferer, This Pious and courageous Man, Mr. Ayloff, suffered in London
about the same time that Mr. Nelthrop did.
Mr. Ayloff, if I mistake not, whom he says, [He could embrace with more Joy in
the Field of Suffering, than ever he could have done, had he met him in the
Field, crowned with Victory and Laurels.]

Mr. Richard Nelthrop's Letter to his Parents, Brothers, and Sister.
Dearest Parents, and ever-loving Brothers, and tender hearted and beloved
Sister,
THrough the Infinite Goodness of God, the nearer I approach my End, the more
Joy and Comfort I find in my Suffering Estate, (that I may so call it:) I can
through Mercy say, that I have found more true Delight and Content this Night,
than in all the Days and Nights of my whole Life; and I hope the Lord will
continue it, that his Name may be glorified by me the meanest and poorest of
all his Servants, but through Free Grace Faithful unto the end: My Soul is
ravished, I can hardly write, and my Comforts are more unspeakable than my
Terrors were. I did this Evening see my dearest Brother and Companion; his Face
was to me as that of an Angel, and he gave me that Comfort, that I cannot but
say, my Love to him is beyond what I ever had to my dearest Relations. When
God, comes, every thing has a Beauty and Luster upon it; here is an Answer of
Prayers, and such an Answer, as, dearest Relations, must engage you all to be
constant in the performance of that Duty, which, like Jacob's Ladder, though it
stand upon the Earth, yet it reaches up to Heaven: Here Is the Love of God made
manifest to a poor Sinner at the last hour, like the Thief upon the Cross, he
that never new before what the Love of God was to his Soul, finds it now filled
with it, and running over. Now bless the Lord, O my Soul! yea, all that is
within me, Bless his holy Name for this Dispensation. Now Light appears out of
Darkness in the Face of Jesus; now all Worldly Joy and Comforts seem to me (as
they are) things not hard to part with; Father, Mother, Brothers, Sister, Wife,
Children, House, and Lands, are (as my dear Savior says) to be parted with
for him, or we are not worthy of him: I bless his Name, I find no reluctance to
do it; he has brought me to his Footstool, and I can say heartily, the Will
of the Lord be done in this matter. I never before but saw a Beauty in Worldly
Comforts, but now those seem so faded by the greater Luster and Beauty that I
see in God in Christ Jesus, that I am astonished where I have been wandering all
my days, spending my Time and my Money for that which is not Bread. O strive to
get a taste of this Love of God in Christ Jesus! and it will perfectly wean you
from this deceitful, foolish World. What is worldly Honor and Riches! O, set
not your hearts upon them, but get a Treasure in Heaven, that your hearts may
be there also. O, lose no time! for if you ever knew the sweetness of it, you
would never be at rest till you found him whom your Soul loved; it will be
more, yea, infinitely more than all worldly Enjoyments can afford you, though in
their greatest Perfection; it will make your Life sweet, and your Death most
comfortable: It is the Bread which this World knows not of, and therefore
makes little or no Enquiry after it. Dearest Relations, whilst you and my
other dear Friends are like Aaron and Hur, holding up the Hands of Moses, I am,
through Grace, getting Victory over the Amalekites. I ^n embrace my dear and
beloved Brother and Companion with more Joy in the Field of Suffering, than
ever I could have done, had I met him crowned with the Laurels of Victory: Oh
the Mercy to die with such a Friend, and such a valiant Soldier of Jesus, who
has kept his Garments clean. I now begin to pity you that stay behind, who
have many Temptations to conflict with; for a little, yea, a very little time,
and my Warfare will be accomplished; and if God continue his Love and Influence
upon my Soul, it will be both short and sweet. I have little of this World
about me, I leave you all the Legacy of what was ever dearest to me, the best
of Wives, and five poor Children, who must pass through an evil and sinful
World; but I have committed them to God, who has commanded to cast our
Fatherless Children and Widows upon him. Dear Parents, Brothers, Sister, all
adieu, my time draws on, my Paper is finished, and your dying Child and Brother
recommends you all to him who is All-sufficient, to the God of Peace, that
brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the Sheep,
through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, who will make you Perfect in
every good Work to do his Will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in
his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

RICHARD NELTHROP.
From the Palace of Newgate, October. 30. 1685. Two of the Clock in the Morning.

Mr. Nelthrop's Last Speech.
THE great and inexpressible trouble and distraction I have been under since I
came into Trouble, especially since my close Confinement in Newgate, has so
broken my Reason, that for many Weeks last past, till the day my Sentence was
passed, I have not had any composure of Mind, and have been under the greatest
trouble imaginable: Since my dearest Wife has had the Favor granted her of
coming to me, I am at present under great composedness of Mind, through the
Infinite Goodness of the Lord. As to what I stand Outlawed for, and am now
sentenced to die, I can with comfort Appeal to the great God, before whose
Tribunal I am to appear, that what I did was in the simplicity of my heart,
without seeking any private Advantage to my self; but thinking it my Duty to
hazard my Life for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and English
Liberties, which I thought invaded, and both in great danger of being lost. As
to the Design of Assassinating the late King, or his present Majesty, it always
was a thing highly against my Judgment, and which I always detested; and I was
never in the least concerned in it, neither in Purse nor Person, nor ever knew
of any Arms bought for that intent, nor did I believe there was any such
Design, or ever heard of any disappointment in such an Affair, or Arms, or
Time, or Place, save what after the Discovery of the General Design, Mr. West
spoke of, as to Arms bought by him: And as to my self, I was in the North when
the late King was at New Market; and the first News I had of the Fire, was at
Beverly in Yorkshire. As to my coming over with the late Duke of Monmouth, it
was in prosecution of the same ends; but the Lord in his Holy and Wise
Providence has been pleased to blast all our Undertakings; though there seemed
to be a very unanimous and zealous Spirit in all those that came from beyond
the Seas. And as to the Duke of Monmouth's being declared King, I was wholly
Passive in it, I never having been present at any public Debate of that
Affair, and should never have advised it, but complained of it to Col. Holmes
and Captain Patchet. I believe the Lord Gray and Mr. F -- the chief Promoters
of it. As to the Temptation of being an Evidence, and bringing either into
trouble or danger of his Life the meanest Person, upon the Account for which I
suffer, I always abhorred and detested the thoughts of it, both when in and out
of danger, and advised some very strongly against it; except when under my
Distraction in Prison, that amongst other Temptations did violently assault me;
but through the goodness of my dearest God and Father, I was preserved from it,
and indeed was wholly incapable, and could never receive the least shadow of
comfort from it, but thought Death more eligible, and was some time before, out
of my distracted and disquieted condition, wholly free from it; though not
without other Temptations far more Criminal in the sight of Men. I bless the
Father of all Mercies, and God of all Consolations, that I find a great
Resignedness of my Will to his, finding infinitely more comfort in Death, than
ever I could place in Life, though in a condition that might seem honorable,
every hour seeing the Will of God in ordering this Affair more and more cleared
up to me. God has given, God has taken, blessed be his holy Name, that has
enabled me to be willing to suffer, rather than to put forth my hand to
Iniquity, or to say a Confederacy with those that do so. I am heartily and
sincerely troubled for what has happened, many man's Lives being lost, and many
poor distressed Families ruined; the Lord Pardon what of sin he has seen in
it. He in his wonderful Providence has made me and others concerned,
Instruments, not only for what is already fallen out, but I believe, for
hastening some other great Work he has to do in these Kingdoms; whereby he
will try and purge his People, and winnow the Chaff from the Wheat; the Lord
keep those that are his, Faithful unto the end.

I die in Charity with all the World, and can readily and heartily forgive my
greatest Enemies, even those that have been Evidences against me; and I most
humbly beg the Pardon of all that I have in the least any way injured; and in a
special manner humbly ask Pardon of the Lady Lisle's Family and Relations, for
that my being succored there one Night with Mr. Hicks, brought that worthy
Lady to suffer Death: I was wholly a Stranger to her Ladyship, and came with
Mr. Hicks; neither did she (as I verily believe) know who I was, or my Name,
till I was taken: And if any other have come to any loss or trouble, I humbly
beg their Pardon; and were I in a condition, I would, as far as I was able,
make them a requital.

As to my Faith, I neither look nor hope for Mercy, but only in the Free Grace
of God, by the Application of the Blood of Jesus, my dearest and only Savior,
to my poor sinful Soul. My distresses have been exceeding great as to my
Eternal State but through the infinite goodness of God, though I have many sins
to answer for, yet I hope and trust, as to my particular, that Christ came for
this very end and purpose, to relieve the Oppressed, and to be a Physician to
the Sick. I come unto thee, O blessed Jesus; refuse me not, but wash me in
thine own Blood, and then present me to thy Father as Righteous! What though my
Sins be as Crimson, and of a Scarlet Dye? Yet thou can make them as white as
Snow. I see nothing in my self but what must utterly ruin and condemn me; I
cannot answer for one Action of my whole Life, but I cast my self wholly upon
thee, who art the Fountain of Mercy, in whom God is reconciling himself to the
World, the greatest of Sins and Sinners may find an All Sufficiency in thy
Blood to cleanse them from all sin. O dearest Father of Mercy, look upon me as
Righteous in and through the imputed Righteousness of thy Son; he has paid
the Debt by his own Offering up himself for sin, and in that thy Justice is
satisfied, and thy Mercy is magnified. Grant me thy Love, O dearest Father,
assist me, and stand by me in the needful hour of Death, give thy Angels charge
over my poor Soul, that the Evil One may not touch nor hurt it. Defend me from
his Power, deliver me from his Rage, and receive me into thine Eternal Kingdom,
in and through the alone Merits of my dearest Redeemer, for whom I praise thee:
To whom with thy self and holy Spirit be ascribed all Glory, Honor, Power,
Might, and Dominion, for ever and for ever. Amen.

Dear Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit, Amen. R. NELTHROP.
Newgate, October. 29. 1685.
6. Mrs. GAVNT.
ONE of the great Reasons why Mrs. Gaunt was burnt, was, it is very possible,
because she lived at Wapping; the honest Seamen and hearty Protestants
thereabouts, being such known Enemies to Popery and Arbitrary Government, that
the Friends of both, gave all who oppose it, the Name of Wappingers, as an
odious Brand and Title. She was a good, honest, charitable Woman, who made it
her business to relieve and help whoever suffered for the forementioned Cause,
sparing no Pains, refusing no Office to get them Assistance, in which she was
the most Industrious and Indefatigable Woman living. Among others whom she had
thus relieved, who were obnoxious Persons, was one Burton, whom with his Wife
and Family, she had kept from starving, for which (may the very Name of them be
registered with Eternal Infamy) they swore against her, and took away her Life:
Though, she says in her Speech, there was but one Witness against her as to any
Money she was charged to give him, and that he himself an Outlawed Person, his
Outlawry not yet reversed, he not being Outlawed when she was with him, and hid
him away. That which she writ in the Nature of a Speech, has a great deal of
Sense and Spirit.

Were my Pen qualified to represent the due Character of this Excellent Woman,
it would be readily granted, That she stood most deservedly entitled to an
Eternal Monument of Honor in the hearts of all sincere Lovers of the Reformed
Religion. All true Christians (though in some things differing in Persuasion with
her) found in her an Universal Charity and sincere Friendship, as is well known
to many here, and also to a multitude of the Scotch Nation, Ministers and
others, who for Conscience Sake were, formerly thrust into Exile. These found
her a most refreshing Refuge. She dedicated her self with unwearied Industry to
provide for their Supply and Support, and therein (I do incline to think) she
out-stripped every individual Person if not the whole Body of Protestants in
this great City.) Hereby she became exposed to the implacable Fury of Bloody
Papists, and those blind Tools who co-operated to promote their accursed
Designs. And so there appeared little difficulty to procure a Jury (as there
were well-prepared Judges) to make her a Sacrifice as a Traitor to the State.
Her Judges, the King's Counsel, the Solicitor-General, the Common Sergeant,
etc. rackt their Inventions to draw Burton and his Wife to charge Mrs. Gaunt
with the knowledge of his being in a Plot, or in the Proclamation; but nothing
of that could be made out, nor is here any sort of Proof that Mrs. Gaunt
harbored this ungrateful Wretch, or that she gave him either Meat or Drink, as
the Indictment charges her; but notwithstanding that, her Jury brought her in
Guilty.

The Sentence was executed upon this Excellent Woman upon Friday then
following, being the 23d. of October, 1685. when she left her Murderers the
following Memorial.

Newgate, 22d. of October, 1685.
Mrs. Gaunt's Speech, written the Day before her Sufferings.
NOT knowing whether I should be suffered, or able, because of weaknesses that
are upon me through my hard and close Imprisonment, to speak at the Place of
Execution; I writ these few Lines to signify, That I am well reconciled to the
way of my God toward me, though it be in ways I looked not for; and by
terrible things, yet in Righteousness; having given me Life, he ought to have
the disposing of it, when and how he pleases to call for it; and I desire to
offer up my All to him, it being but my reasonable Service; and also the first
Terms that Jesus Christ offers, That he that will be his Disciple, must forsake
all, and follow him; and therefore let none think hard, or be discouraged at
what has happened unto me; for he does nothing without cause, in all he has
done to us, he being Holy in all his ways, and Righteous in all his works; and
it is but my Lot in common with poor desolate Sion at this day. Neither do I
find in my heart the least regret for what I have done in the Service of my
Lord and Master Jesus Christ, in succouring and securing any of his poor
Sufferers, that have showed favor to his Righteous Cause^ which Cause, though
now it be fallen and trampled upon as if it had not been anointed, yet it shall
revive, and God will plead it at another rate than ever he has done yet, and
reckon with all its Opposers and malicious Haters: And therefore let all that
love and fear him, not omit the least Duty that comes to hand, or lies before
them, knowing that now it has need of them, and expects they shall serve him.
And I desire to bless his Holy Name, that he has made me useful in my
Generation, to the Comfort and Relief of many desolate Ones, and the Blessing
of those that are ready to perish has come upon me, and helped to make the
Heart of the Widow to sing. And I bless his Holy Name, that in all this,
together with what I was charged with, I can approve my Heart to him, that I
have done his Will, though it does cross Man's Will, and the Scriptures that
satisfy me, are, Isaiah 16.4. Hide the Outcasts, bewray not him that
wandereth. And, Obad. 13.14. Thou should not have given up those of his that
did escape in the day of his distress. But Man says, You shall give them up, or
you shall die for it. Now who to obey, Judge ye. So that I have cause to
rejoice and be exceeding glad, in that I suffer for Righteousness sake, and
that I am accounted worthy to suffer for Well-doing, and that God has accepted
any Service from me, which has been done in Sincerity, though mixed with manifold
Infirmities, which he has been pleased for Christ's sake to cover and forgive.
And now as concerning my Fact, as it is called, alas! it was but a little one,
and might well become a Prince to forgive; but he that shows no Mercy, shall
find none: And I may say of it in the Language of Jonathan, I did but taste a
little Honey, and lo I must die for it. I did but relieve an unworthy, poor,
distressed Family, and so I must die for it. Well, I desire in the Lamb-like
Gospel Spirit, to forgive all that are concerned, and to say, Lord, lay it not
to their Charge; but I fear he will not: Nay, I believe when he comes to make
Inquisition for Blood, it will be found at the Door of the furious Judge; who,
because I could not remember things, through my dauntedness at Burton's Wife
and Daughter's Vileness, and my Ignorance, took advantage thereat, and would
not hear me, when I had called to mind that which, I am sure, would have
invalidated their Evidence; though he granted something of the same nature to
another, yet denied it to me. My Blood will also be found at the door of the
unrighteous Jury, who found me Guilty upon the single Oath of an Out-lawed Man;
for there was none but his Oath about the Money, who is no legal Witness,
though he be pardoned, his Outlawry not being recalled; and also the Law
requires two Witnesses in point of Life: And then, about my going with him to
the Place mentioned, 'twas, by his own Words, before he was Out-lawed; for
'twas two Months after his absconding; and though in a Proclamation, yet not
High Treason, as I have heard; so that I am clearly murdered by you. And also
Bloody Mr. A. who has so insatiably hunted after my Life; and though it is no
Profit to him, through the ill will he bore me, left no stone unturned, as I
have ground to believe, till he brought it to this; and showed favor to
Burton, who ought to have died for his own Fault, and not bought his Life with
mine; and Capt. R. who is cruel and severe to all under my Circumstances, and
did at that time, without all Mercy or Pity, hasten my Sentence, and held up my
Hand, that it might be given; all which together, with the Great One of all, by
whose Power all these, and a multitude more of Cruelties are done, I do
heartily and freely forgive, as against me; but as it is done in an implacable
Mind against the Lord Christ, and his Righteous Cause and Followers, I leave it
to him who is the Avenger of all such Wrongs, who will tread upon Princes as
upon Mortar, and be terrible to the Kings of the Earth: And know this also,
that though ye are seemingly fixed, and because of the Power in your Hand, are
writing out your Violence, and dealing with a despiteful hand, because of the
old and new Hatred; by impoverishing and every way distressing of those you
have got under you; yet unless you can secure Jesus Christ, and all his Holy
Angels, you shall never do your Business, nor your Hands accomplish your
Enterprises; for he will be upon you e're you are aware; and therefore, O that
you would be wise, instructed, and learn, is the Desire of her that finds no
Mercy from you,

ELIZABETH GAVNT.
POSTSCRIPT.
SUch as it is, you have it from her, who has done as she could, and is sorry
she can do no better; hopes you will pity and cover weakness, shortness, and
any thing that is wanting; and begs that none may be weakened or humbled at the
lowness of my Spirit; for God's Design is to humble and abase us, that he alone
may be exalted in this Day; and I hope he will appear in the needful time, and
it may be, reserves the best Wine till last, as he has done for some before
me: None goes to Warfare at his own Charge, and the Spirit blows, not only
where, but when it lists; and it becomes me, who have so often grieved,
quenched, and resisted it, to wait for and upon the Motions of the Spirit, and
not to murmr; but I may mourn, because through want of it, I honor not my
God, nor his blessed Cause, which I have so long ^^ed and delighted to love;
and repent of nothing about it, but that I served him and it no Latter.



7. The Earl of ARGYLE.
^^E must now take a step over into Scotland, that poor Country, which has been
harrass'd and tired for these many Years, to render them perfect Slaves, that
they might help to enslave (...) prevent which, and secure the Protestant
Religion, which 'twas grown impossible (...) but by Arms; this good Lord
embarked from Holland about the same time with the Duke, (...) in Scotland with
what Forces he could make, to which were added some others who (...); which,
after several Marches, and Counter-Marches, were at length led into a Boggy
sort of a place, on pretense, or with intention to bring him off from the other
Army then upon the Heels of 'em, where they all lost one another, dispersed and
shifted for themselves; the Earl being taken by a Countryman, and brought to
Edinburgh, where he suffered for his former unpardonable Crime -- requiring
Care should be taken of the Protestant Religion, and explaining his taking the
Test conformable thereto; for the Legality of which, he had the Hands of most
of the eminent Lawyers about the City. He suffered at Edinburgh, the 30th. of
June, 1685. His Speech has a great deal of Piety and Religion, nor will it be
any Disgrace to say, 'twas more like a Sermon. -- It Is as follows.

The Earl of A^gyle's Last Speech, June 30. 1685.
JOB tells us, Man that is born of a Woman is of few days, and full of trouble;
and I am a clear Instance of it. I shall not now say any thing of my Sentence,
or Escape about three Years and a half ago; nor of my Return, lest I may
thereby give Offense, or be tedious: Only being to end my Days in your
presence, I shall, as some of my last Words, assert the Truth of the Matter of
Fact, and the Sincerity of my Intentions, and Professions that are published.

That which I intend mainly now to say, is, To express my humble, and (I thank
God) cheerful Submission to his Divine Will, and my Willingness to forgive all
Men, even my Enemies; and I am heartily well satisfied there is no more Blood
spilt, and I shall wish the Stream thereof may stop at me: And that (if it
please God) to say, as to Zerubbabel, Zech. 4.6. Not by might, nor by power,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts.

I know Afflictions spring not out of the Dust: God did wonderfully deliver and
provide for me, and has now by his special Providence brought me to this Place;
and I hope none will either Insult, or stumble at it, seeing they ought not;
for God Almighty does all things well, for good and holy Ends, though we do not
always understand it. Love and Hatred is not known by what is before us,
Eccles. 9.1. and 8.11, 12, 13.

Afflictions are not only foretold, but promised to Christians; and are not
only tolerable, but desirable.

We ought to have a deep Reverence and Fear of God's Displeasure; but withal, a
firm Hope and Dependence on him for a blessed Issue, in compliance with his
Will; for God chastens his own, to refine them, and not to ruin them, whatever
the World may think, Heb. 12.3. to 12. Prove. 3.11, 12. 2 Timothy 1.8. 2 Timothy 2.11,
12. Matthew. 10.18. to 40. Matthew. 16.24. to 28.

We are to imitate our Savior in his Sufferings, as 1 Pet. 2.23. and 1 Pet.
4.16. to 20.

We are neither to despise our Afflictions, nor to faint under them; both are
extremes.

We are not to suffer our Spirits to be exasperated against the Instruments of
our Trouble; for the same Affliction may be an effect of their Passion, and yet
sent by God to punish us for Sin: Though it is a Comfort when we may say to them,
with David, Psalm. 59.3. Not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord.

Nor are we, by fraudulent, pusillanimous Compliances in wicked Courses, to
bring Sin upon our selves: Faint Hearts are ordinary false Hearts, choosing Sin
rather than Sufferings, and a short Life with eternal Death, before temporal
Death and a Crown of Glory: Such seeking to save a little, loses all; and God
readily hardens them to proceed to their own Destruction. How many, like
Hazael, 2 Kings 8.13. run to Excesses they never thought they were capable of!
Let Rulers and others read seriously, and weigh Prove. 1.10. to 20. 2 Chr. 28.6.
to 17. Prove. 24.11, 12. and 28.10. And avoid what is Bad, and follow what is
Good.

For me, I hope by God's strength to join with Job, chap. 13. 15. and the
Psalmist, Psalm. 22.4. and 167. and shall pray, as Psalm. 74.19. to 24. and Psalm.
122.6. to 9. and Luke 1.74, 75. and shall hope, as Psalm. 94.14, 15.

I do freely forgive all that directly or indirectly have been the Cause of my
being brought to this Place, first or last; and I pray God forgive them. I pray
God send Truth and Peace in these Three Kingdoms, and continue and increase the
glorious Light of the Gospel, and restrain the Spirit of Profanity, Atheism,
Superstition, Propery, and Persecution, and restore all that have back-slidden
from the Purity of their Life or Principles; and bless his whole People with
all Blessings, spiritual and temporal, and put an end to their present Trials.

And I entreat all People to forgive me wherein I have offended, and concur
with me to pray, That the Great, Good, and Merciful God would sanctify my
present Lot, and for Jesus Christ his sake Pardon all my Sins, and receive me
to his Eternal Glory.

It is suggested to me, That I have said nothing of the Royal Family; and it
remembers me, that before the Justices at my Trial about the Test, I said, That
at my Death I would pray, That there should never want one of the Royal Family
to be a Defender of the True, Ancient, Apostolic, Catholic, Protestant Faith;
which I do now: And that GOD would enlighten and forgive all of them that are
either lukewarm, or have shrunk from the Profession of it. And in all Events,
I pray God may provide for the Security of his Church, that Antichrist, nor the
Gates of Hell may never prevail against it.

8. Colonel RVMBOLD.
AT the same Place died Colonel Richard Rumbold, June 26. 1685. Two or three
Passages there are worth Remarks in his Speech and Trial, as Arguments of his
Sense and Courage. [For this Cause, he says, were every Hair of his Head and
Beard a Life, he would joyfully sacrifice 'em all.] That [he was never
Antimonarchical in his Principles, but for a King and Free Parliament; the King
having Power enough to make him Great, and the People to make 'em happy.] That
[he died in the Defense of the just Laws and Liberties of the Nations.] That
[none was marked by God above another; for no Man came into the World with a
Saddle on their Backs, nor others Booted and Spurred to ride upon it.] And being
asked if he thought not his Sentence dreadful? answered, [He wished he had a
Limb for every Town in Christendom.]

The Last Speech of Colonel Richard Rumbold, at the Market-Cross of Edinburgh;
with several Things that passed at his Trial, June 26. 1685.
ABout Eleven of the Clock he was brought from the Castle of Edinburgh, to the
Justices Court, in a great Chair, on Men's shoulders; where at first he was
asked some Questions, most of which he answered with silence; at last said, He
humbly conceived, it was not necessary for him to add to his own Accusation,
since he was not ignorant they had enough already to do his Business; and
therefore he did not design to fret his Conscience at that time with answering
Questions. After which, his Libel being read, the Court proceeded in usual
manner; first asking him, If he had any thing to say for himself before the
Jury closed? His Answer was, He owned it all, saving that part, of having
Designed the King's Death; and desired all present, to believe the words of a
Dying Man; he never directly, nor indirectly intended such a Villainy; that he
abhorred the very thoughts of it; and that he blessed God, he had that
Reputation in the World, that he knew none that had the Impudence to ask him
the Question; and he detested the thoughts or such an Action; and he hoped all
good People would believe him, which was the only way he had to clear himself;
and he was sure that this Truth should be one day made manifest to all Men. He
was again asked, If he had any Exception against the Jury? He answered, No, but
wished them to do as God and their Consciences directed them. Then they
withdrew, and returned their Verdict in half an hour, and brought him in
Guilty. The Sentence followed; For him to be taken from that Place to the next
Room, and from thence to be Drawn on a Hurdle, betwixt Two and Four of the
Clock, to the Cross of Edinburgh, the Place of Execution, and there to be
Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered. He received his Sentence with an undaunted
Courage and Cheerfulness. Afterward he was delivered into the Town-Magistrates
Hands; they brought to him two of their Divines, and offered him their
Assistance upon the Scaffold; which he altogether refused, telling them, That
if they had any good Wishes for him, he desired they would spend them in their
own Closets, and leave him now to seek God in his own Way. He had several
Offers of the same kind by others, which he put off in like manner. He was most
serious and servent in Prayers the few hours he lived (as the Sentinels
observed, who were present all the while.) The Hour being come, he was brought
to the Place of Execution, where he saluted the People on all sides of the
Scaffold; and after having refreshed himself with a Cordial out of his Pocket,
he was supported by two Men, while he spoke to the People in these words:

GEntlemen and Brethren, It is for all Men that come into the World once to
Die, and after Death to Judgment; and since Death is a Debt that all of us must
pay, it is but a matter of small moment what way it be done; and seeing the
Lord is pleased in this manner to take me to himself, I confess, something hard
to Flesh and Blood, yet, blessed be his Name, who has made me not only
Willing, but Thankful, for his honoring me to lay down the Life he gave, for
his Name; in which, were every Hair in this Head and Beard of mine a Life, I
should joyfully Sacrifice them for it, as I do this: And Providence having
brought me hither, I think it most necessary to clear my self of some
Aspersions laid on my Name; and first, That I should have had so horrid an
Intention of Destroying the King and his Brother.

[Here he repeated what he had said before to the Justices on this Subject.]

It was also laid to my Charge, That I was Antimonarchical.

It was ever my Thoughts, That Kingly Government was the best of all, justly
executed: I mean such as by our Ancient Laws; that is, a King, and a Legal Free
Chosen Parliament. The King having, as I conceive, Power enough to make him
Great; the People also as much Property as to make them Happy; they being as it
were contracted to one another. And who will deny me, that this was not the
Just constituted Government of our Nation? How absurd is it then for Men of
Sense to maintain, That though the one Party of this Contract breaks all
Conditions, the other should be obliged to perform their Part? No; this Error
is contrary to the Law of God, the Law of Nations, and the Law of Reason. But
as Pride has been the Bait the Devil has catch most by, ever since the
Creation, so it continues to this day with us: Pride caused our first Parents
to fall from the blessed Estate wherein they were created; they aiming to be
Higher and Wiser than God allowed, which brought an Everlasting Curse on them
and their Posterity. It was Pride caused God to Drown the Old World. And it was
Nimrod's Pride in building Babel, that caused that heavy Curse of Division of
Tongues to be spread amongst us, at it is at this day; One of the greatest
Afflictions the Church of God groaneth under, That there should be so many
Divisions during their Pilgrimage here; but this is their Comfort, that the Day
draws near, whereas there is but One Shepherd, there shall be but One
Sheepfold. It was therefore in the Defense of this Party, in their Just Rights
and Liberties, against Popery and Slavery --

[At which words they beat the Drums:] To which he said,

They need not trouble themselves, for he should say no more of his Mind on
that Subject, since they were so disingenuous, as to interrupt a Dying Man,
only to assure the People, he adhered to the True Protestant Religion,
detesting the Erroneous Opinions of many that called themselves so; and I die
this day in the Defense of the Ancient Laws and Liberties of these Nations: And
though God, for Reasons best known to himself, has not seen it fit to honor
Us, as to make us the Instruments for the Deliverance of his People; yet as I
have lived, so I die in the Faith, that he will speedily arise for the
Deliverance of his Church and People. And I desire all of you to prepare for
this with speed. I may say, This is a deluded Generation, veiled with
Ignorance, that though Popery and Slavery be riding in upon them, do not
perceive it; though I am sure there was no Man born marked of God above
another; for none comes into the World with a Saddle on his Back, neither any
Booted and Spurred to Ride him; not but that I am well satisfied, that God has
wisely ordered different Stations for Men in the World, as I have already said:
Kings having as much Power as to make them Great, and the People as much
Property as to make them Happy. And to conclude, I shall only add my Wishes for
the Salvation of all Men, who were created for that end.

After ending these words, he prayed most fervently near three quarters of an
hour, freely forgiving all Men, even his greatest Enemies, begging most
earnestly for the Deliverance of Sion from all her Persecutors, particularly
praying for London, Edinburgh, and Dublin, from which the Streams run that Rule
God's People in these three Nations.

Being asked some hours before his Execution, If he thought not his Sentence
Dreadful? He answered, He wished he had a Limb for every Town in Christendom.

Thus Reader, having given thee a Faithful Account of the Behavior and Dying
Speeches, of the most Eminent Persons who suffered in Scotland, I shall return
again for London, where the last Person of Quality that suffered, was the Duke
of Monmouth, whose Expedition, Sufferings, and Dying Speech next follows.

9. JAMES Duke of MONMOUTH.
THE last Person with whom we shall conclude this Mournful Tragedy, and the
greatest in it, is the late James Duke of Monmouth; one indeed, who, if he had
been a little less, might have been at this time one of the greatest Men both
in England and the World. By reason of some Passages in his Life, not so
defensible, 'twas thought, at first, better to draw a Veil before that
unfortunate Prince, and say nothing at all of him. But what Allowances are made
for Custom and Education, God only knows. I remember a shrewd Answer given to
an Objection of this Nature, Where, said one, should he learn any better? But
however, where there has been any time to think soberly of past Actions, or
none of that Nature reiterated, Charity is obliged to judge favorably. And
besides, the good West-Country-men would be very angry if they should not find
their Master that they loved so well, and suffered so much for, among the rest
of these Noble Hero's. None can deny but he was a great General, a Man of
Courage and Conduct, and great Personal Valor, having signalized himself both
at Mons and Maestricht; so as to gain an high and just Reputation. He was all
along true and firm to the Protestant Interest in and out of Parliament, though
abhorring any base way of promoting it, as well as his Friend my Lord Russel.
This is intended as a Character rather, or very short Compendium, than any
History of his Life. He was all along the Peoples Darling, whose hearts were
entirely his by his Courtesy and Affability, as other Persons lost them by
their sourness and haughty Pride. After Russel's Death he went into Flanders,
whence had he prosecuted his Design, and gone, as it is said he intended, into
the Emperor's Service, how many Laurels might he have won, and how many more
would now have been growing for him? But his Fate was otherwise -- He came over
into England. After the defeat of his Army at Sedgemoor, he fled with the Lord
Gray, who was first taken, and he himself a little after brought up to London,
and on his Attainder in Parliament, beheaded on Tower Hill. It Is said, a
certain brave Old Officer, who then came over with him, and since with the
Prince, offered with a small Party of Horse, to have ventured through all the
Guards, and took him off the Scaffold. But they could not be got together; his
time was come. Providence had designed other things, that our Deliverance
should be more Just, and Peaceable, and Wonderful; and that the Glory thereof
should be reserved for His Sacred Majesty King William, Whom God grant long to
Reign.

The Last Speech and Carriage of the Duke of Monmouth upon the Scaffold.
THE late Duke of Monmouth came from the Tower to the Scaffold, attended by the
Bishop of Ely, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, Dr. Tenison, and Dr. Hooper; which
four the King sent him, as his Assistants, to prepare him for Death: The Duke
himself entreated all four of them to accompany him to the Place of Execution,
and to continue with him to the last. The two Bishops going in the Lieutenant's
Coach with him to the Bars, made Seasonable and Devout Applications to him all
the way; and one of them desired him not to be surprised, if they to the very
last upon the Scaffold, renewed those Exhortations to a particular Repentance,
which they had so often repeated before.

At his first coming upon the Scaffold, he looked for the Executioner; and
seeing him, said, Is this the Man to do the Business? Do the Work well.

Then the Duke of Monmouth began to speak, some one or other of the Assistants
during the whole time, applying themselves to him.

Monmouth. I shall say but very little; I come to die; I die a Protestant of
the Church of England. Assistants. My Lord, if you be of the Church of England,
you must acknowledge the Doctrine of Non-resistance to be true.

Mon. If I acknowledge the Doctrine of the Church of England in general, that
includes all.

Assist. Sir, it is fit to own that Doctrine particularly, which respects your
Case: Here he was much urged about that Doctrine of Non-resistance; but he
repeated in effect his first Answer. Then he began as if he was about to make a
premeditated Speech, in this manner.

Mon. I have had a Scandal raised upon me about a Woman, a Lady of Virtue and
Honor. I will name her; the Lady Henrietta Wentworth. I declare, That she is a
very Virtuous and Godly Woman. I have committed no sin with her; and that which
has passed betwixt us, was very Honest and Innocent in the sight of God.

Assist. In your Opinion, perhaps, Sir, as you have been often told; ( i. e. in
the Tower) but this is not fit Discourse in this Place.

Mr. Sheriff Gostlin. Sir, were you ever married to her? Mon. This is not a
time to Answer that Question. Sher. Gostlin. Sir, I hoped to have heard of your
Repentance for the Treason and Bloodshed which has been committed. Mon. I die
very Penitent.

Assist. My Lord, it is fit to be particular; and considering the Public Evil
you have done; you ought to do as much Good now, as possibly you can, by a
Public Acknowledgment.

Mon. What I have thought fit to say of Public Affairs, is in a Paper which I
have signed, I referr to my Paper. Assist. My Lord, there is nothing in that
Paper about Resistance; and you ought to be particular in your Repentance, and
to have it well grounded. God give you True Repentance. Mon. I die very
Penitent, and die with great Cheerfulness, for I know I shall go to God.
Assist. My Lord, you must go to God in his own way. Sir, be sure you be truly
Penitent, and ask Forgiveness of God, for the many you have wronged.

Mon. I am sorry for every one I have wronged, I forgive every Body; I have had
many Enemies, I forgive them all. Assist. Sir, your Acknowledgment ought to be
particular.

Mon. I am to die; pray, my Lord -- I referr to my Paper. Assist. They are but
a few words that we desire: We only desire an Answer to this Point.

Mon. I can bless God, that he has given me so much Grace, that for these two
Years last past, I have led a Life unlike to my former course, and in which I
have been happy.

Assist. Sir, was there no Ill in these two Years? In these Years, these great
Evils have happened; and the giving Public Satisfaction is a necessary part of
Repentance; be pleased to own a Detestation of your REBELLION. Mon. I beg your
Lordship that you would stick to my Paper. Assist. My Lord, as I said before,
there is nothing in your Paper about the Doctrine of Non-resistance. Mon. I
Repent of all things that a true Christian ought to Repent of. I am to die;
pray, my Lord -- Assist. Then, my Lord, we can only recommend you to the Mercy
of God; but we cannot Pray with that Cheerfulness and Encouragement, as we
should if you had made a particular Acknowledgment.

Mon. God be praised, I have Encouragement enough in my self; I die with a
clear Conscience, I have wronged no Man. Assist. How, sir, no Man! Have you not
been Guilty of Invasion, and of much Blood, which has been shed, and it may
be, of the loss of many Souls that followed you? You must needs have wronged a
great many. Mon. I do, Sir, own that, and am sorry for it. Assist. Give it the
true Name, Sir, and call it Rebellion.

Mon. What Name you please, Sir; I am sorry for Invading the Kingdom, and for
the Blood that has been shed, and for the Souls which may have been lost by my
means; I am sorry it ever happened. Mr. Sher. Vandeput. He says, he is sorry
for Invading the Kingdom.

Assist. We have nothing to add, but to renew the frequent Exhortations we have
made to you, to give some Satisfaction for the Public Injuries to the Kingdom.
There have been a great many Lives lost by this Resistance of your Lawful
Prince.

Mon. What I have done, has been very ill; and I wish with all my heart it had
never been: I never was a Man that delighted in Blood; I was very far from it;
I was as cautious in that as any Man was; the Almighty God knows how I now die,
with all the Joyfulness in the World. Assist. God grant you may, Sir; God give
you True Repentance. Mon. If I had not True Repentance, I should not so easily
have been without the fear of Dying: I shall die like a Lamb. Assist. Much may
come from Natural Courage. Mon. I do not attribute it to my own Nature, for I
am fearful as other Men are; but I have now no fear, as you may see by my Face;
but there is something within me that does it, for I am sure I shall go to God.

Assist. My Lord, be sure upon good grounds; do you Repent you of all your
sins, known, or unknown; confessed, or not confessed; of all the sins which
might proceed from Error in Judgment?

Mon. In general for all, I do with all my Soul. Assist. God Almighty of his
Infinite Me^^ forgive you. Here are great Numbers of Spectators, here are the
Sheriffs, they repres^^^ the Great City, and in speaking to them, you speak to
the Great City; make some Satisfaction by owning your Crime before them. -- He
was exhorted to Pray for the King; and was asked, whether he did not desire to
send some Dutiful Message to His Majesty, and to recommend his Wife and
Children to His Majesty's Favor.

M. What harm have they done? Do it if you please: I pray for him, and for all
Men.

Ass. (At his undressing) My Lord, you have been bred a Soldier; you will do a
generous Christian thing, if you please to speak to the Soldiers, and say, That
here you stand a sad Example of Rebellion, and entreat them and the People to
be Loyal and Obedient to the King.

M. I have said, I will make no Speeches; I will make no Speeches; I am come to
die.

Ass. My Lord, Ten Words will be enough. M. (Then calling his Servant, and
giving him something like a Tooth-pick Case) Here, said he, give this to the
Person to whom you are to deliver the other things. (To the Executioner:) Here
are Six Guinea's for you; pray do your Business well: Don't serve me as you did
my Lord Russel. I have heard, you struck him three or four times. Here (to his
Servant) take these remaining Guinea's, and give them to him if he does his
Work well.

Execut. I hope I shall.

M. If you strike me twice, I cannot promise you, not to stir.

During his undressing, and standing toward the Block, were used diverse
Ejaculations, and much of the 51st. Psalm, and particularly, Deliver me from
Blood guiltiness, O God, Thou God, etc. Then he lay down; and soon after he
raised himself upon his Elbow, and said to the Executioner, Prithee let me feel
the Ax. He felt the Edge, and said, I fear it is not sharp enough.

Execut. It is sharp enough, and heavy enough.

Then he lay down again. During this space, many pious Ejaculations were used
by those that assisted him, with great fervency. God accept your Repentance,
God accept your Repentance, God accept your imperfect Repentance; My Lord, God
accept your general Repentance; God Almighty show his Omnipotent Mercy upon
you: Father, into thy Hands we commend his Spirit, etc. Lord Jesus receive his
Soul.

Thus ended the Life of the late Duke of Monmouth, on Wednesday the 15th. of
July, 1685. on Tower Hill.

A Brief Abstract of the Paper left behind him.
I Repent in general of all my Sins, and am more particularly concerned for
what Blood has been spilt on my Account, and the rather, seeing the Issue is
such as I fear will prove of Fatal Consequence to the Reformed Protestant
Religion.

Instead of being counted Factious and Rebellious, the very opposing of Popery
and Arbitrary Power, now arising and appearing plain enough, would sufficiently
have protected my Cause; besides, several other most heinous and notorious
Crimes (such as the unhappy Fate of the Earl of Essex, and my Father of ever
blessed Memory, and others now covered over with Jesuitical Policy) should have
been detected and avenged.

I have lived, and shall now die in the Faith of this, That God will work a
Deliverance for his People; and then will be discovered the great, and horrid,
and scarcely to be paralleled Villainies our Enemies have been guilty of; but
now you see my case is desperate, yet know, that I die a Martyr for the People,
and shall rather pity the State, that their false and covetous Minds have
brought themselves and me to, than discover who are the Persons concerned in my
Overthrow; and I heartily forgive all that have wronged me, even those that
have been Instrumental in my Fall, earnestly praying for their Souls.

And I hope King James will show himself to be of his Brother's Blood, and
extend his Mercy to my Children, even as he was wont to his greatest Enemies,
they being not capable to Act, and therefore not conscious of any Offense
against the Government.

Argile and the Duke of Monmouth being now both safe in their Graves, King
James was so puffed up with a petty Victory over a few Clubmen, and so wrapped up
with a Conceit, that he had now conquered the whole Nation (so that now
believing himself impregnable) he resolves to be revenged upon the Western
People, for siding with his Capital Enemy, Monmouth; and to that purpose, sends
down his Executioner in Ordinary, Jefferies, not to decimate according to the
Heathen way of Mercy, but with the Besom of his Cruelties, to sweep the Country
before him; and Young and Old were hanged by Clusters, as if the Lord Chief
Justice had designed to raise the Price of Halters. After Ages will read with
Astonishment the Barbarous Usage of those poor People; of which, among many
Instances, this one may seem sufficient, whereby to take the Dimensions of all
the rest: That when the Sister of the two Hewlings hung upon the Chief
Justice's Coach, imploring Mercy on the behalf of her Brothers, the merciless
Judge, to make her let go, caused his Coachman to cut her hands and fingers
with the Lash of his Whip. Nor would he allow the Respite of the Execution but
for two days, though the Sister with Tears in her Eyes offered a Hundred Pounds
for so small a Favor. And whoever sheltered any of those forlorn Creatures,
were hurried to the Slaughterhouse with the same inexecrable Outrage, without
any consideration either of Age or Sex; witness the Execution of the Lady Lisle
at Winchester. As for Argile and the Duke, though they might die pitied, yet in
regard they had declared open Hostility, it was no more than they were to
expect upon ill Success.

The Christian Behavior, and Dying Speeches of some that were Condemned and
Executed in the West.
I Shall next proceed to give an Account of the Christian Behavior, and Dying
Speeches of some that were Condemned and Executed in the West -- And I shall
begin with

1. The Dying Speech and Behavior of Mr. Matthew. Bragg.
MR. Matthew Bragg was a Gentleman descended from an Ancient and good Family;
he was bred an Attorney, in which he practiced the Law. His Case being this: He
happened to be upon the Road Riding home to his House, being come from a
Gentleman's House, for whom he kept Courts. He, as before, being met with by a
Party of Horse belonging to the Duke of Monmouth, who were going to search the
House of a Roman Catholic for Arms, who lived two or three Miles from the
Place they met him; they required him to go with them, and show them the way,
he knowing the Country better than they did; he desired to be excused, telling
them, It was none of his Business, and besides, had no Arms. But his Excuses
signified nothing, they forced him amongst them, where they went. Being
Arraigned, and Pleading Not Guilty, he put himself on the Trial of God and his
Country, which found him and 28 more of 30, Guilty; the Lord Chief Justice
often saying, If any Lawyer or Parson came under his Inspection, they should
not escape: The Evidence against him was a Roman Catholic, and a Woman of ill
Fame, to whom the Lord Chief Justice was wonderfully kind: But his Evidence,
which were more than Twenty, to prove his Innocence, signified nothing; the
Jury being well instructed by my Lord Chief Justice. Being thus found Guilty,
Sentence as presently pronounced, and Execution awarded, notwithstanding all
the Interest that was made for him.

Thus being Condemned on Saturday, and ordered to be Executed on Monday, he
spent the residue of his little time very devoutly, and much becoming a good
Christian, and a true Protestant of the Church of England; all which availed
nothing with this Protestant Judge. He was frequently visited by a worthy
Divine of the Church of England, who spent much time with him, and received
great Satisfaction from him. The said Divine ^old me, That his Deportment,
Behavior, and Converse, was so much like an extraordinary Christian, that he
could not in the least doubt but this violent Passage would put him into the
fruition of Happiness. He wished and desired a little longer time, out of no
other Design, but thoroughly to repent him of his Sins, and make himself more
sensible of, and fit for to receive the Inheritance that is prepared for those
that continue in Well-doing to the end. When he came to the Place of Execution,
with great Courage and Resolution, being, as he said, prepared for Death, he
behaved himself very gravely and devoutly. Being asked, when he was on the
Ladder, whether he was not sorry for his being concerned in the Rebellion? He
replied, That he knew of none that he was Guilty of; and prayed them not to
trouble him; adding, He was not the first that was martyred: He was so much a
Christian as to forgive his Enemies. And after some private Devotions, he
suddenly was Translated, as we have all Hopes to believe, from Earth to Heaven.
The only Favor of this Protestant Judge, was to give his Body to his Friends,
in order to its Interment amongst his Ancestors.

2. The Behavior of Mr. Smith, Constable of Chardstock.
ANother eminent Person that suffered with him at the same time and place, was
one Mr. Smith, who was Constable of Chardstock, who having some Moneys in his
Hands that belonged to the Militia, which came to the knowledge of some of the
Duke's Friends, they obliged him to deliver it to them, which he was forced to
deliver; and for this was Indicted for High Treason, in assisting the Duke of
Monmouth. To which he pleaded Not Guilty. The Evidence against him were the
same with those that had been against Mr. Bragg. The said Mr. Smith informed
the Court and the Jury, what little Credit ought to be given to the Evidence.
The Lord Chief Justice thundered at him, saying, Thou Villain, methinks I see
thee already with a Halter about thy Neck; thou impudent Rebel, to challenge
these Evidences that are for the King. To which the Prisoner replied very
boldly, My Lord, I now see which way I am going, and right or wrong I must die;
but this I comfort my self with, That your Lordship can only destroy my Body;
it is out of your power to touch my Soul. God forgive your Rashness: Pray, my
Lord, know it is not a small matter you are about; the Blood of a Man is more
precious than the whole World. -- And then was stopped from saying any more.
The Evidences being heard, a strict Charge was given the Jury about him. To be
short, the Jury brought him in Guilty; so that he with the rest received the
Sentence of Death all together, and were Executed on Monday; but by particular
Order from my Lord, he was ordered to be first Executed. The Day being come for
Execution, being Monday, he, with a Courage undaunted, was brought to the
Place, where with Christian Exhortations to his Brethren that suffered with
him, he was ordered to prepare, being the first to be Executed; where he spoke
as follows.

CHristian Friends, I am now, as you see, launching into Eternity; so that it
may be expected I should speak something, before I leave this miserable World,
and pass through those Sufferings which are dreadful to Flesh and Blood; which
indeed shall be but little, because I long to be before a just Judge, where I
must give an Account, not only for the Occasion of my Sufferings, now, but for
Sins long unrepented of, which indeed has brought me to this dismal Place and
shameful Death. And truly, dear Countrymen, having ransacked my Soul, I cannot
find my small Concern with the Duke of Monmouth, does deserve this heavy
Judgment on me; but I know, as I said before, it is for Sins long unrepented
of. I die in Charity with all Men; I desire all of you to bear me witness, I
die a true Professor of the Church of England; beseeching the Lord still to
stand up in the Defense of it. God forgive my passionate Judges, and cruel and
hasty Jury; God forgive them, they know not what they have done. God bless the
King; and though his Judges had no Mercy on me, I wish he may find Mercy when
he stands most in need of it. Make him, O Lord, a nursing Father to the
Church; let Mercy flow abundantly from him, if it be thy Will, to those poor
Prisoners, to be hereafter tried; and, Lord, if it be thy holy Will, stop this
issue of Christian Bood, and let my guiltless Blood be the last spilt on this
account. Gentlemen, all Farewell: Farewell all the Things of the World. -- Then
singing some few Verses of a Psalm, and putting up some private Ejaculations to
himself, said, O Lord, into thy hands I commend my Spirit; and so submitted to
the Executioner, September the 7th. 1685.

3. The Behavior and Dying Speech of Mr. Joseph Speed of Culliton.
AT the same time and place, as he came near the Place of his Execution, he
spying his Countryman and Friend, called him, and said, I am glad to see you
here now, because I am not known in these Parts. being answered by his Friend,
I am sorry to see you in this Condition: He replies, It is the best Day I ever
saw; I thank God, I have not led my Life as Unchristian-like as many have done,
having since the Years of Sixteen, always had the Checks of Conscience on me,
which made me to avoid many gross and grievous Sins; my course of Life has
been well known to you, yet I cannot justify my self: All Men Err. I have not
been the least of Sinners, therefore cannot excuse my self; but since my
Confinement, I have received so great Comfort, in some Assurance of the Pardon
of my Sins, that I can now say, I am willing to die, to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, and say to Death, Where is thy Sting? and to Grave, Where is thy
Victory? -- Being asked by some rude Soldiers, Whether he was not sorty for the
Rebellion he was found Guilty of? He courageously replied, If you call it a
Rebellion, I assure you, I had no sinister Ends in being concerned; for my
whole Design in taking up Arms under the Duke of Monmouth, was to fight for the
Protestant Religion, which my own Conscience dictated to me, and which the said
Duke declared for, and had, I think, a lawful Call and Warrant for so doing,
and do not question, that if I have committed any Sin in it, but that it is
pardoned. Pray, Mr. Sheriff, let me be troubled no farther in answering of
Questions, but give me leave to prepare my self (those few Minutes I have left)
for another World, and go to my Jesus, who is ready to receive me. -- Then
calling to his Friend, who stood very near him, said, My dear Friend, you know
I have a dear Wife and Children, who will find me wanting, being somewhat
encumbered in the World; let me desire you, as a Dying Man, to see that she be
not abused; and as for my poor Children, I hope the father of Heaven will take
care of them, and give thern Grace to be Dutiful to their distressed Mother:
And so with my dying Love to all my Friends, when you see them, I take leave of
you, and them, and all the World, desiring your Christian Prayers for me to the
last moment. -- Then repeating some Sentences of Scripture, as, Colossians,
chap. 3. v. 1, 2. If you then, etc. and praying very fervently, said, I thank
God, I have Satisfaction; I am ready and willing to suffer Shame for his Name.
-- And so pouring forth some private Ejaculations to himself, and lifting up
his Hands, the Executioner did his Office. The Soldiers then present, said,
They never before were so taken with a Dying Man's Speech; his Courage and
Christian-like Resolution, caused many violent Men against the Prisoners, to
repent of their Tyranny toward them; some of whom in a short time died full of
Horror. And thus fell this Good Man, a true Protestant, and one that held out
to the end.

An Account of those that suffered at Bridport, and Lyme.
1. AT Bridport, one John Spark, who was a very Good Man, and behaved himself
with a great deal of Christian-like Courage to the end. Being asked, how he
could endure those Hardships he had undergone, since his being taken? Says he,
If this be all, it is not so much; but, my Friend, if you were to take a Journey
in those ways you were not acquainted with, you would (I hope) desire Advice
from those that had formerly used those ways, or lived near by them? Yes, says
he. Then said he, The ways of Affliction which I have lately traveled in, I
had Advice many a time from a Minister, who has often told his Congregation of
the troublesomeness of the Road, and of the difficulty of getting through; and
has given me, and Hundreds of others, to understand the Pits and Stones in the
way, and how to avoid them: He has been a Man used to those Roads many Years; I
have taken his Advice; I am got thus far on comfortably, and I trust shall do
so to the end. I am not afraid to fight a Duel with Death, if so it must be.
Now, I thank God, I can truly say, Oh Death! where is thy Sting? and, Oh Grave!
where is thy Victory? -- Two or three Days after his Sentence, he was drawn to
Execution, but was very rudely and opprobriously dealt with, to the Shame of
those that then had the Charge over him; their Rigor to him was more more like
Turks, than Christians. Being come to the Place of Execution, he prayed very
devoutly; but by the Rudeness of the Guards, there could be no Copy taken, to
be said to be true. He died very Courageously, and spoke to them in these
Words, (looking on the Soldiers) saying, Little do you think that this very
Body of mine, which you are now come to see cut in pieces, will one Day rise up
in Judgment against you, and be your Accuser, for your delight in spilling of
Christian Blood: The Heathens have far more Mercy. Oh it is sad, when England
must outstrip Infidels and Pagans! But pray take notice, Don't think that I am
not in Charity with you: I am so far, that I forgive you and all the World; and
do desire the God of Mercies to forgive you, and open your Hearts, and turn you
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Lord Jesus Christ:
And so Farewell. I am going out of the Power of you all: I have no dependence,
but upon my blessed Redeemer, to whom I commit my dear Wife and Children, and
all the World.

2. Colonel HOLMES.
THe next Place was Lime, where many of Note died; particularly, Colonel
Holmes, who was the first of those there executed, near the same Place where
they landed, when they came ashore with the Duke of Monmouth. Being brought to
the Place, after some difficulty; for the Horses that were first put into the
Sledge would not stir, which obliged those concerned to get others, which they
did from the Coachman, who had that Morning brought them to Town: When they
were put into the Sledge, they broke it in pieces; which caused the Prisoners
to go on foot to the Place of Execution. Where being come, as I told you
before, the Colonel began thus at the foot of the Ladder: He sat down with an
Aspect altogether void of Fear, but on the contrary, with a kind of smiling
Countenance, so began to speak to the Spectators to this purpoe: That he would
give them an Account of his first Undertaking in the Design, which was long
before in London; for there he agreed to stand by and assist the Duke of
Monmouth, when Opportunity offered; in order to which, he went to Holland with
him, and there continued until this Expedition, in which God had thought fit to
frustrate his and other Good Men's Expectations. He believed the Protestant
Religion was bleeding, and in a step toward. Extirpation, and therefore he,
with these his Brethren, that were to suffer with him, and Thousands more, had
adventured their Lives and their All to save it; but God Almighty had not
appointed 'em to be the Instruments in so glorious a Work: Yet notwithstanding,
he did verily believe, and doubted not, but that God would make use of others,
that should meet with better success, tho the way or means was not yet visible;
but of this he did not doubt. He also was satisfied of the Duke's Title; so
that matter did not afflict him, on account of his engaging on his Score. And
going on further with a Discourse of this nature, he was asked by a Person, why
he did not pray for the King? He, with a smiling Countenance, answered, I am
sorry you do not yet understand the Difference between Speaking and Praying.
And having ended his Discourse, he then prepared himself by Prayer for his
Dissolution, which was very devout and pious for half an Hour; which was as
follows.

Colonel Holme's Last Prayer.
MOst Glorious, most Great, and most Merciful God! there is none in Heaven or
in Earth that is like unto Thee: Heaven is thy Throne, and the Earth is thy
Footstool; Who shall say unto thee, What do thou? Here we are, poor
deplorable Creatures! come to offer up our last Prayers and Services unto thee.
We beseech thy favorable Ear to our Prayers, and the Comfort of thy Holy
Spirit, at this time. We praise and magnify thy Name, for all the
Dispensations of thy Providence toward us, especially for this thy Providence,
in bringing us to this Place, and at this time, to suffer Shame for thy Name:
Help and assist all of us to submit to thy Will patiently. Pardon all our Sins;
remove them out of thy Presence as far as the East is from the West, and accept
of us in the Merits of thy Son Jesus Christ. Thou who art the Searcher of
Hearts, and Tryer of Reins, let there not at the moment of Death be the least
spark of Sin in-dwelling in us, nor the Strivings of Flesh and Blood, that may
hinder us from a joyful Passage unto thee. Give us Patience also under these
Sufferings, and a Deliverance to all others from undergoing them; and in thy
good time work a Deliverance for poor England; let thy Gospel yet flourish
among them: Hasten the Downfall of antichrist; we trust the time is come.
Prevent, O Lord, this Effusion of Christian Blood; and, if it be thy Will, let
this be the last. Lord, bless this Town; let them, from the highest to the
lowest, set the Fear of God before their Eyes. Bless all sorts and conditions
of Men, in all Ranks and Qualities; pardon all their Sins, give them all true
Repentance, and the Grace of thy Holy Spirit. Fit and prepare us for the
cheerful fulfilling of thy Holy Will: Let the Comforter be still with us. Be
Merciful to all our Friends, and Relations, and Acquaintance. Forgive our
Enemies. Accept of our Thankfulness for all the Mercies and Favors afforded
us, and hear and graciously answer us in these our Requests, and what else thou
know needful and expedient for us; and all for our Redeemer, the Lord Jesus
Christ, his sake, who died for us, that we might reign with him for ever and
ever: To whom with Thee, and thy Blessed Spirit of Grace, be ascribed, as is
most due, all Honor, Glory, and Praise, both now and for ever.

After having ended his Prayer, he took occasion to speak to his suffering
Brethren, taking a solemn Leave of them, encouraging them to hold out to the
end, and not to waver, observing that this being a glorious Sun-shining Day, I
doubt not, though our Breakfast be sharp and bitter, it will prepare us, and
make us meet for a comfortable Supper, with our God and Savior, where all Sin
and Sorrow shall be wiped away. So embracing each of 'em, and kissing of them,
told the Sheriff, You see I am imperfect, only one arm; I shall want assistance
to help me upon this Tragical Stage: Which was presently done, and Execution
suddenly followed.

3. The Execution of Mr. SAMPSON LARK.
MR. Sampson Lark, who was a very Eminent, Pious Minister, and had lived in
that Town but a little before. Many Years he was there well acquainted, and all
People that knew him, had a Value for him; behaving himself with that Humility
and Circumspection, as no body could have any other Occasion but to value him.
He designed to have spoken somewhat on a Portion of Scripture, and was
beginning, having mentioned the Place he intended to speak upon, but was
interrupted, and told, the Work of the Day being great, they should want time.
So then he stopped, and replied, He could make Application where he should not
meet with Interruption; and so applied himself to Prayer, which he performed
with great Devotion and Zeal, for a quarter of an Hour, to the great
Satisfaction of the Auditors. And so taking leave of his suffering Brethren, he
mounted the Stage, which was to be the last Act he made in this World. Being on
the Ladder, he saw some of his Friends and Neighbors weeping and mourning for
him; to whom he spoke, Pray weep not for me; I am going to a Place of Bliss and
Happiness: Wherefore pray repair to your Houses, and e're you get thither, I
doubt not but I shall be, happy with my God and Savior, where all Tears shall
be wiped away, and nothing shall remain but Hallelujahs to all Eternity.

Leaving this Place, we proceed to other Parts of the Country, where, with the
like Butchery, were only five Executed, amongst whom was one

4. Mr. TYLER.
MR. Tyler, of Bristol, who had had Command in the Duke's Army, where he
behaved himself very stoutly to the last; after the Army was dispersed, he,
among others, was taken, received Sentence of Death at Dorchester, and here
brought for the completion of the same, and from thence we hope was translated
to Heaven. He spent his time between the Sentence and Execution very devoutly,
in confirming and strengthening those that were to be his Fellow Sufferers; and
made it his Business to bring them to a Willingness to submit to, and a
Preparedness for Death. The Day being come, and he brought to the Place of
Execution, he thus spoke, My Friends, You see I am now on the brink of
Eternity, and in a few Minutes shall be but Clay: You expect I should say
something, as is usual in such Cases. As to the Matter of Fact I die for, it
does not much trouble me, knowing to my self the Ends for which I engaged with
the Duke of Monmouth, were both Good and Honorable. Here being stopped; and
not suffered to proceed further, he then comforted his Fellow Sufferers,
desiring them to join with him in singing an Hymn, which he himself composed.

After the Hymn sung, he prayed devoutly, for half an Hour. After Prayer, he
gave great Satisfaction to all present, of his Assurance of Heaven, had many
weeping Eyes for him, and was much lamented in the Town, though a Stranger to the
Place. So unbuttoning himself, said to the Executioner, I fear not what Man can
do unto me: I pray thee do thy Work in Mercy, for I forgive thee with all my
Heart, and I also pray to God to forgive thee. Don't mangle my Body too much.
And so lifting up his Hands to Heaven, the Executioner did his Office.

5. WILLIAM COX.
THere was also one William Cox that died with him, who also died very
courageously, despising the Shame, in Hopes and Expectation of a future better
Estate. He, and his two Sons were some of the first that came to the Duke of
Monmouth, and all taken, and all condemned together. The Father only suffered,
the Sons by Providence were preserved. When he was going to Execution, he
desired leave to see his Sons, then in another Prison in the Town, to whom he
gave his Blessing; and though he was going to be Executed, yet had that
Satisfaction to hope, that God would preserve them; which was so.

An Account of those Executed at Sherborn.
1. AT Sherborn, in the same County, were Executed Twelve, who all died
Courageously, especially one Mr. Glisson, of Yeovel, in the County of Somerset:
His extraordinary Deportment and Carriage at the Place of Execution, was so
very confiderable, as gave great Satisfaction to his Friends, and Amazement to
his Enemies. He declared to the World, That he died a true Protestant, and had
not engaged with the Duke of Monmouth; but judged it high time to stand up for
the Defense of the same, though God Almighty had thought fit to frustrate his
Designs, and to bring him to that Place, to seal the same with his Blood.

2. JOHN SAVAGE; and, 3. RICHARD HALL.
ALso John Savage, and Richard Hall, of Culliton, in the County of Devon,
suffered at the same Time and Place. In their particular Conversation, they
valued those most that they saw most of Piety in, and pitied others that they
saw not so well prepared; saying, That the Remembrance of our Vanity may cause
Compassion toward such as were in such a Condition: Exhorting all to be
serious, and to consider their Latter End, which deserved the greatest
Attention of Mind; the way to die comfortably, being to prepare for it
seriously. At the Hour of Execution, their Cheerfulness and Comfort was much
increased, saying, Now the Will of God will be done, and he has most certainly
chosen that for us which is best; with many other suchlike Christian
Expressions, too tedious here to be inserted.

4. JOHN SPRAGVE; and, 5. WILLIAM CLEGG.
WE return now to Culliton, in the County of Devon, where John Sprague, and
William Clegg, both of that Town, were condemned at Exon, and there brought to
be Executed. Before they were brought into the Place, a Messenger came from the
Prisoners, with a Request to the Vicar of the Parish, to desire his Company and
Assistance in this their Extremity, and to Administer those Spiritual Helps
that were suitable to Men in their Circumstances. Accordingly the said Minister
came very readily, and did demand of them, What they had to desire of him? The
dying Persons answered, They desired his Prayers? Accordingly he prayed with
them a considerable space of time; and after that, he asked of them several
Questions, for to give him and the World satisfaction of the prepared Condition
they were in, in order to their launching into Eternity, especially about the
Doctrine of Non-Resistance. John Sprague very soberly and moderately replied,
but whether satisfactory or not, we leave to the Reader: He believed, That no
Christian ought to resist a lawful Power; but the Case being between Popery and
Protestantism, altered the Matter; and the latter being in danger, he believed
that it was lawful for him to do what he did, though God in his Providence had
thought fit to bring him to this Place of Execution. After reading a Chapter
out of the Corinthians, and singing a Psalm suitable to the Occasion, he very
vehemently and fervently recommended his Soul to the All-wise God by Prayer,
for near half an Hour, to the great Satisfaction of all that heard him. Then
his Wife and Children coming to him, weeping bitterly, he embraced them in his
arms, saying, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your Sins, for
that he had that quiet Satisfaction, that he was only going to be translated
into a state of Bliss and Happiness, where we should Sin and Sorrow no more,
but that all Tears should be wiped away, wishing them to be diligent in the
Service of God. Then recommending his Wife and Children to the Protection of
the Almighty God, who had promised to be a Husband to the Widow, and a Father
to the Fatherless, who was faithful, and able to make up their loss in him, in
that which should be better for them, than he could be; desiring God to be a
Refuge for them to fly to for security, and preservation from the Troubles that
seemed to threaten this poor Nation; the which if they did conscientiously
perform, though Death here made a separation, he doubted not of meeting them in
Heaven at last. And so the Executioner did his Office. During which time, his
Brother-sufferer, William Clegg, was all the time on his Knees, praying to
himself with a seeming Zeal; suddenly after which, his turn being come to
follow his Brother, he only told the People, That his Fellow-sufferer had
spoken what he thought was necessary, and they were also his Sentiments. And so
submitted to Execution.

An Account of those Executed at Axminster and Honiton.
1. AT Axminster one also was Executed, his Name Mr. Rose; he was a Gunner,
that landed with the Duke of Monmouth; he had a great Resolution, and not at
all startled with the fear of Death. He said, That he defied Death, and all
them that were the occasion of it. He was very courageous, and died so. He
spent some time in private Prayer, and was not allowed time, because there was
to be Execution at Honiton.

His Execution being over, we pass on to Honiton, where four were executed, one
of which was a Surgeon, his Name, if I do not mistake, was

2. Mr. POTT.
MR. Pott behaved himself with that extraordinary Christian Courage, that all
the Spectators were almost astonished, he being but Young, about Twenty; his
Prayers being fervent, his Expressions so pithy, and so becoming a Christian of
greater Age, that drew pity and compassion from all present; a rude Fellow,
just before he was to be executed, called for a Bottle of Wine, and so began
the King's Health to one of the Guard; which he perceiving, Poor Soul! said he,
Your Cup seems to be sweet to you, and you think mine is bitter; which indeed
is so to Flesh and Blood; but yet I have that assurance of the fruition of a
future Estate, that I doubt not but this bitter Potion will be sweetened with
the Sugar of the loving kindness of my dearest Savior, that I shall be
translated into such a State, where is fullness of Joy and Pleasure for evermore.

3 Mr. EVANS.
ONE Mr. Evans, a Minister, ought not to be omitted, who did all along in the
time of his Confinement in Prison, behave himself with that Devotion and
Strictness, that became a Christian of great Eminency, as indeed he was; he
spent much of his time in Preaching and Praying to his Fellow Prisoners,
exhorting them to hold out to the end; he at last, by appointment, being
condemned, was executed by himself; at which time and place he behaved himself
with great Courage and Devotion, and with a great willingness and cheerfulness,
he submitted to Execution.

4. Mr. SIMON HAMLING.
MR. Hamling was formerly an Inhabitant of Taunton, but of late Years had lived
two or three Miles from thence; he was a very honest, worthy, good Christian.
But to our purpose: Mr. Hamling living in the Country, hearing of the Duke of
Monmouth's being in Town, he there came to speak with his Son, who lived in the
Place; where being come, he gave him Advice, which was, That as he expected his
Blessing, and Countenance, he should not at all concern himself in the Matter,
but submit to the Will of God in all things. And having thus advised his Son,
he returns home; and two days after came again to Town on a Market Day with his
Wife, to buy Provisions for his Family, and returned to his House again. And
this was all the times he was in Town, whilst the Duke was there. But after the
Business was over, he was brought in one Suspicion, being a Dissenter, that was
Crime enough, except Coin appeared, to a Justice of that Town, who usually did
Commit or Dismiss as that appeared. This worthy Person was Arraigned at
Taunton, and pleaged Not Guilty. The Evidences were two profligate Rascals,
that had Encouragement from the Justice, they usually doing what he put them
on. The Prisoner had many to prove this Fact, and his Honesty; but this did not
avail, the Jury found him Guilty, with two more, who were presently Sentenced,
and next Morning executed, to be Examples to others. It is said, that the
Justice did make application to our Famous Protestant Judge, and hinted some
Mistake concerning him. To which, as I have been informed, he should Reply, You
have brought him on, if he be Innocent, his Blood be upon you. Mr. Hamling
behaved himself very worthily at the Place of Execution, and did at the last
declare his Crime to be the same as is abovementioned, and not otherwise. Thus
fell this Pious Christian; a Man, by all sober People that knew him, beloved;
and disrespected by none but loose Villains, which at last took away his Life.

5. The Behavior and Dying Words of Mr. Gatchill, Executed at Taunton.
THE said Mr. Gatchill was a Constable of the Hundred; he was surprised by a
Party of the Duke's, and showed a Warrant to bring in Provisions and other
Necessaries for the use of the Army, which if he had not obeyed, was threatened
to have his House burnt; so that he was obliged to do what he did for his own
Preservation. But this was not sufficient, for being found Guilty, he was
Executed. As he was drawn to Execution, he looked on the People, and said, A
Populous Town, God bless it. Just before he was Executed, he spoke, That the
Crime he was Accused of, and Condemned for, was High Treason; but he did not
know himself to be Guilty of it; and that what he did, he was forced to do. And
further said, I am so well known to you, that I do verily believe you have
Charity to think that what I speak is true. As for the Niceties of the Law, I
do not well understand them. And much more to the same effect he spoke. And so
after Prayer with his Suffering Brother, Mr. Simon Hamling, he was Executed.

6. There was also Executed at Taunton Mr. John Hucker, a very worthy Gentleman
of that Town. He had some ill Friends in the Duke's Army, that cast Aspersions
on him, as though he was the Person that was a Traitor to the Duke, by firing a
Pistol in Sedgmoor; but I have strictly examined many on that Point, and can
find it to be nothing but the worst of an Enemy'd Malice, to Wound him after
his Death in his Reputation, which he always valued highly when living. To be
short, he has left the Character amongst his Neighbors, of an honest Man, a
good Christian, and one that was true to the Interest of the Duke, and Sealed
it with his Blood.

Mr. John Hucker's Letter to his Friend, a little before his Execution.
I Was in hopes to have had Liberty to speak a few words at the Place of
Execution, till a few Minutes since; but now am persuaded the contrary:
Therefore excuse these abrupt Lines.

I bless God, I am now reconciled to this contemptible Death; it was long ere I
could; but now God has done it for me, and I thankfully submit to it from the
hands of the wise God, whom I have offended: And therefore desire to accept my
Punishment, knowing he does all things well without any wrong to his Creatures.

I had lately some Discourse with two Persons, whereof one was of Quality,
concerning the things laid to my Charge; I was told, that it was three things;
One was, That I was an Enemy to, or against the Protestant Religion; that I was
troublesome, and had acted vigorously in Elections of Members for Parliament;
and upheld the Meetings.

I own my self a Protestant, and die an Asserter of that Religion, and I pray
God I do prove a better Friend to it than those that have so industriously
endeavored the taking away my Life, and that they see it not when it is too
late.

As to the Meetings, I bless God I ever was at any of them, and that I was any
way Instrumental to the upholding of them, and am troubled that I have, I fear,
sinfully deprived my self of them; and do believe, if ever the Ordinances of
God were rightly administered, and the Gospel effectually preached, it was in
those Meetings that were held in Taunton; the Lord bless the Seed that was
there sown.

As to Elections of Members for Parliament, I judge it my Birthright; and
therefore was Industrious in it; but I hope never did (I am sure never
intended) troublesomness to any in it, but especially to my Superiors: I had
ever a venerable and due esteem of Magistrates, as the Ministers of God, and
they administering an Ordinance of God.

I also lie under a Reproach of being unfaithful to an Interest that I owned,
which I utterly deny and disown.

I pray God bless and forgive my violent Enemies, that have industriously
sought the taking away my Life. It Is the hearty Prayer of

JOHN HVCKER.
From Taunton-Castle, a little before he suffered, Sept. 30th. 1685.
7. Captain MADDERS.
CAptain Madders, at the time of the Duke's Landing, was a Constable at
Crewkern, in the County of Somerset, and so diligent and active for the King in
his Office, that when two Gentlemen of Lyme came there, and brought the News of
the Duke's Landing, and desired Horses to Ride Post to acquaiut His Majesty
therewith, he immediately secured Horses for them, the Town being generally
otherways bent, and assisted them so far as any called Loyal in those Times
could do, which was represented to the Lord Chief Justice, in expectation
thereby to save his Life. But an Enquiry being made about his Religion, and
returned by a very worthy Gentleman of those Parts, That he was a good
Protestant, an honest Man, had a very good Character amongst his Neighbors: O
then, says he, I Will hold a wager with you he is a Presbyterian, I can smell
them Forty Miles, then surely he must die. Being brought to the Place of
Execution, he was the last Man except one executed; and he behaved himself,
whilst the rest were executing, with great Zeal; and lifting up his Hands and
Eyes, would often say, Lord, make me so willing and ready to the last. And God
did hear his Prayers; for though he seemed to the Spectators to be somewhat
unwilling to die, yet at the last he died with as much Assurance and Christian
Resolution as any; for after his Public Prayer, he came once down the Ladder,
and prayed again privately, then mounted the Ladder again; The Sheriff saying,
Mr. Madders, if you please you may have more Liberty: He answered, No, I thank
you, Mr. Sheriff, now I am ready; I am willing, and desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ. Oh! you cannot imagine what Comfort and Refreshment I have
received in a few minutes; my Comforts are so great, that I cannot contain my
self. So blessing and praising of God, he was translated, as I hope (we have no
grounds to imagine the contrary) from Earth to Heaven, repeating Rev. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the
second Death has no Power.

8. The Dying Words of Captain Kidd, Executed at the same Time and Place.
THis Gentleman was the last executed at that time; as soon as Captain Madders
was turned off, he began to prepare to follow, and called to the Guards, and
those present, Do you see this (pointing up to Eleven that were dead before
him) do you think this is not dreadful to me, that Eleven of Twelve of us, that
but a few hours since came down together, are dead and in Eternity? And I just
going to follow them, and shall immediately be in the same condition. Says one
to him, It must be dreadful to Flesh and Blood. Says he, Well, Gentlemen, I
will assure you, I am so far concerned, that methinks I bethink their
Happiness, that they should be so long before me in Bliss and Happiness: But
I Will make haste to follow; I am satisfied this is the best day that ever I saw:
The day of a Man's Death is said to be better than the day of his Birth: And
truly so I find it as to my Flesh, for I shall be presently free from sin and
sorrow; I am satisfied God has done his best for me: I might have live and
forgotten God, but now I am going where I shall sin no more. It Is a blessed
thing to be free from sin, and to be with Christ: O how great were the
Sufferings of Christ for us, beyond all that I can undergo! how great is that
Glory to which I am going! Then taking his leave of the People then present, he
prayed some small time very devoutly, and with seeming great Joy and Comfort,
the Executioner did his Office.

9. The Last Speech of Dr. Temple of Nottingham, at the Place of Execution.
DOctor Temple was one of them that Landed with the Duke, and was his Chief
Physician and Surgeon; he lived in Nottingham, but minding to see other
Parts of the World, (as I have heard) goes for Holland, where he came
acquainted with the Duke of Monmouth, concerning which he thus spoke, just as
he was going off the Ladder.

Christian Friends, and dear Countrymen,

I Have somewhat to say, and not very much, before I depart from you, and shall
be seen no more. And, First, As to my Engagement with the Duke of Monmouth.
Secondly, How far I was concerned: And, Thirdly, I shall leave all of you to be
Judges in Matter of Fact: And so for the


First, As a Dying Man I now declare, That when I entered my self with the Duke
of Monmouth, to be his Surgeon, it was on no other Account but to serve him
in the West Indies; where I knew no other Design whatsoever, but to possess
himself of some of those Islands, until I had been at Sea two days, wherein one
privately told me, We are absolutely bound for England, and I should take it
from him it was true: It much surprised me, but knowing no way to avoid it, or
to get on shore, though it was at that time contrary to my Inclinations, if I
could have avoided it; I would not let others see that I had that
dissatisfaction within me. After our Landing at Lyme, I knew it was never the
nearer to attempt my Escape, the Country being so beset; on the other hand, if
the Duke of Monmouth did win the Day, I might have raised my Fortunes as high
as I could expect. These were the Arguments that Flesh and Blood did create in
my Breast for Self-prefervation. While I was with the said Duke, I did him as
much Service as I could, and faithfully: After it pleased God to disperse that
Army under his Command, I endeavored to secure my self, but by Providence was
taken at Honiton, from thence committed to Exon, and after removed to
Dorchester, where I received my Sentence, and am now, as you see, just going to
Execution: The Lord prevent all of you from such ignominious Deaths; and I
advise you all, that you never take any great thing in hand, but what you have
a Warrant for from the Lord: I assure you I had no satisfaction in this; but
this I am sure, that if I have done any thing amiss in it, it is pardoned: I
bless God I have that satisfaction, I die a Professor of the Church of England;
I desire Pardon of all those I have any ways wronged or abused, as I freely
forgive all those that have wronged or abused me; I am in Charity with all Men.
Lord have Mercy upon me, and give me strength to go through these Pains, and
give me full Assurance now at this last moment: Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

10. SAMVEL ROBBINS.
SAmuel Robbins of Charmouth in the County of Dorset, was Executed, or rather
Murdered, at Warham, in the said County. He received his Sentence of Death
with great Courage, and not at all dismayed, saying very often in Prison
before, If it pleased God to call him now (to glorify his Name by this
Providence of his) to Death, he should be ready; but (said he) I am as Innocent
of any thing I have done against any man that may deserve this Punishment, as
the Child now unborn. When he came to the Place of Execution, he very
cheerfully declared his Innocence to the Spectators, as before, and so Praying
very devoutly for some time, he was Executed.

11. Mr. CHARLES SPEAK.
HE happened to be at Illminster at the time of the Duke's being there, which
was the greatest Crime he was guilty of; the Validity of his Evidence I leave
to those in the West, which know how far it was carried that way. He was a fine
Courteous loving Gentleman; and notwithstanding his Youth, he acted the part of
an Old Christian Soldier at his Death, preparing himself to undergo those
Pains, saying very often, They were nothing to his Deserts from God Almighty;
but as for what I am accused of, and sentenced for, I hope you will believe I
am not so guilty, as my Judge and Accusers have endeavored to make me: If it
had pleased God, I should have been willing to have lived some time longer, but
God's time being come, I am willing, I will be contented to drink this bitter
Cup off. Being at the Place of Execution, the Crowd was so great, that I
suppose he was shorter than otherwise he would have been; but alas! how could
it be? For on every side of him, as well as up and down the Town, the
Inhabitants were weeping and bewailing him: Oh, it is the worst day that ever we
saw in this Town! Must this good Gentleman die here? Oh! yet save his Life, I
am ready to die for him, and the like, He prayed very heartily for near an
hour, and sung a Psalm, and so we hope was translated to Heaven, there to sing
everlasting Praises and Hallelujahs.

12. Mr. PARRET.
MR. Parret was executed at Taunton; if I mistake not, he said he was a
Londoner, and a Brewer. When he came to the Place of Execution, he seemed a Man
almost unconcerned at Death. After some time, he began to deliver himself
somewhat low in Voice to the People, and after rising by degrees, he seemed
more like a Minister in a Pulpit Preaching devoutly, than a Prisoner just going
to Execution; but I being then not well, could not tarry to see his End, But
the Character I had, was, That he desired all not to be faint-hearted because
of their fall, and to think that there was no hopes remaining. He said, He
verily believed God would yet work out Deliverance for them, and at the time
they were in the greatest Extremity, that would be God's Opportunity. Put your
whole trust, and confidence, and dependence on the Lord, and he will never
leave you, nor forsake you.

13. The Last Speech of Henry Boddy, Executed at Bath.
WHile he was in Prison, especially after Sentence, he behaved himself mighty
humble, meek, and was much in Meditation, which was observed by several
Divines, especially one who attended him to his last, his Name Mr. Simpson. His
poor Wife coming to see him at Wells and to make her Interest with some
Friends, if possible to save his Life; but finding it lost Labor, and that she
could by no means prevail, she died there for grief, before her Husband was
Executed, to his great grief. When he came to the Place of Execution, he
delivered himself to the People in these Words:

GOod People, I am come here to pay a Debt due to Nature, which every one, one
time or another, must pay, though not in this manner, or nature. I am condemned
as a Traitor and Rebel against my King, which were things I always hated and
abhorred; and therefore give me so much time as to deliver my self to you; and
what I say, I hope you will believe me at this time, being just going to give
an Account, not only for every idle word, but for all things I have done since
I have had a Being.

I was Born in Lyme-Regis in the County of Dorses, and bred up a Seaman from my
Infancy; I have had the Honor to serve His Majesty King Charles the Second, in
his Wars with the Dutch and French, diverse times. I always thought it to be the
Duty of every true Englishman to stand up in his Country's Quarrel with
Foreigners, to maintain our Ancient Privileges and Honor of our Nation. I
served him faithfully: And as for my Undertaking now with the late Duke of
Monmouth, for which I am now come to suffer Death; As for my Designs, I am sure
they were good, for I did believe him to be my Sovereign's Son and Heir; but if
otherwise, I have done amiss, and am sorry, and hope the Lord has pardoned it.
While I was in Arms, I am sure there is none can say, I have personally wronged
them. I desire all your Prayers for me to the last. I am no Orator, therefore
if you please (speaking to the Minister) do these last Spiritual Services for
me, as for to Pray with me, and for me. The Minister being much taken with him,
desired leave of the Sheriff to ask him some Questions; which being granted,
the Minister said unto him, I must make bold with you, but not to hold you too
long before I Pray, but to satisfy my self and the People on what ground you
stand; I mean, as concerning your everlasting state. Now, pray resolve me a few
things: First, Whether you do own that Doctrine of Non-resistance, owned by the
Church, That it is not Lawful on any Account whatsoever, to take up Arms
against the King? O Sir! as to that I answer, Could I have been satisfied he
had been my Lawful Prince, I should not have done it. But, said the Minister,
he is, and you are not to be Judge; except you own those things, some People
will hardly have Charity for you after you are dead. What matters that? said
he, would you have me, now you put me so close to it, to lie? No, I will not. I
say, if he was my Lawful King, I was misled in my Judgment, and have committed
a great Error; but, Lord, I hope thou have washed away all my sins, in and
through the Blood of my dear Redeemer, in whose alone Merits I hope for Mercy.
I desire to be asked no more Questions. Then the Minister prayed very devoutly
near half an hour; after which, lifting up his Hands and Eyes to Heaven, he
quietly submitted to Death.

14. Mr. John Hicks's Last Speech, 1685.
I Suppose the Spectators here present may expect I should speak something
before I leave this Sanguinary Stage and Passage through my Bloody Sufferings,
by which my Immortal Spirit will be speedily transported into an invisible and
eternal World, and I conclude, that they have different Resentments hereof.
Some resent them with much Joy, high Exultation, and Triumph, others with equal
Grief and Sorrow; that to the one I am a most pleasant Spectacle, that they
behold me with high complacency and delight; but to the other I am a mournful
and unpleasant one, and they behold me with no less pity and compassion.
Concerning the first, I can say, I freely and heartily forgive them, and
heartily pray that God would most mercifully and graciously prevent their
mourning through Misery, not only here, but eternally hereafter. Concerning the
other, I will say, Weep for your own sins, and for the sins of the Nation, for
the highest Rebellions that ever were committed against the great and eternal
God; lament bitterly for those sins that have been the meritorious Cause of the
late terrible Judgment, that which I fear will cause God to break in upon this
Nation with an overflowing Deluge of Judgments, which are far more tremendous
and dreadful. As for Sympathizing with me, in drinking this bitter Cup
appointed for me, I return you most humble and hearty thanks, earnestly
desiring God to come unto you, and fill your Souls with all Celestial
Comforts, and Spiritual Consolations. Something I must say to purge and clear
my self from a false Accusation laid to my Charge; as that I was engaged with
Col. Blood in Rescuing Col. Mason near Boston, when he was sent down with a
Guard from London to York, to be Tried for High Treason; and that I was the Man
that killed the Barber of that City; and that also I was with him when he stole
the Crown. Now, as I am a dying Man, and upon the very brink of a very
stupendous Eternity, (the truth and reality whereof I firmly believe) without
any Reservation, or the least Equivocation, I do declare in the Presence of the
All-seeing God, that Impartial Judge, before whom in a very little time I must
appear, I never saw nor conversed with Mr. Thomas Blood, from 1656, till after
he stole the Crown, which was in 71, or 72; nor was ever engaged with him in
any of his Treasonable Plots and Practices. It Is true, I being involved in
great trouble of another Nature, (of which I have given to the World a
Narrative, and which is notoriously known in the Country where I then lived, by
some that were Enemies to me for my Preaching) I was persuaded to apply my self
to Mr. Blood, to procure by his Intercession his late Majesty's Gracious
Favor: Accordingly he brought me into his Royal Presence; while I was there,
his Majesty carried it with great Clemency, without expressing one word of that
which I am now charged with. Mr. Blood continued with his Majesty a little
longer than I did; then he told me, that he had granted me a Pardon, which I
did thankfully accept of, knowing it would free me from all Penalties and
Troubles that I was obnoxious to, and were occasioned to me by my
Nonconformity. Then engaging him to take out my Pardon, he told me, That he got
it out with several others that had been engaged with him in several
Treasonable Designs and Actions; at which I was troubled, supposing it might be
imputed to me thereby; yet, God knows, I have often since reflected upon it
with great regret and dissatisfaction. If Mr. Blood did inform the late King,
to make himself the more considerable, and to bring as many of his Party as he
could to accept of their Pardons, that he might be rendered utterly incapable
of Plotting any further Mischief against his Government, or any other ways that
I was engaged with him in any of his Treasonable Attempts; I now appeal to God,
as a dying Man, concerning it, that he has done me an irreparable wrong. I
also in the same manner do declare, That I was never engaged with any Party in
Plotting, or Designing, or Contriving any Treason or Rebellion against the late
King; and particularly, that I was altogether unconcerned in, and unacquainted
with that for which my Lord Russel and others suffered, and as much a stranger
to any against the present King. And whereas it is reported of me, That at
Taunton I persuaded the late Duke of Monmouth to assume the Title of King; I do
once more selemnly declare, That I saw not the said Duke, nor had any Converse
with him till he came to Shipton-Mallet, which was Thirteen Days after he
landed, and several days after he had been at Taunton. And it is as false, that
I rid to and fro in the West, to stir up and persuade Men to go into his Army,
and Rebel against his present Majesty; for I was in the East Country when the
Duke landed, and from thence I went directly to him, when he was at
Shipton-Mallet, not one Man accompanying me from thence. But hitherto as I
lived, so now I die, owning and professing the true Reformed Christian
(commonly called the Protestant) Religion, which is founded on the pure written
Word of God only, and which I acknowledge likewise to be comprehended in the
Articles of the Doctrine of the Church. This Religion I have made a reasonable
and free choice of, and have heartily embraced, not only as it protests against
all Pagan and Mohammedan Religion, but against the Corruption of the Christian;
and I humbly and earnestly pray to God that by his Infinite Wisdom, and
Almighty Power, he will prevent not only the utter extirpation but diminution
thereof, by the height and influence of what is contrary thereto; and for that
end the Lord make the Professors of it to live up more to its Principles and
Rules, and bring their Hearts and Conversations more under the Government and
Power of the same. I die also owning my Ministry, Nonconformity, for which I
have suffered so much, and which does now obstruct the King's Grace and Mercy
to be manifested and extended to me: For as I chose it not constrainedly, so I
appeal to God as a dying Man, not moved from Sullenness or Humor, or Factious
Temper, or Erroneous Principles of Education, or from Secular Interests, or
Worldly Advantages, but clearly from the Dictates of my own Conscience, and as
I judged it to be the Cause of God, and to have more of Divine Truth in it than
that which is contrary thereto; so now I see no Cause to repent of it, nor to
recede from it; not questioning but God will own it at the last Judgment-day.
If no more had been required after the late King's Restoration to qualify
Ministers for Public Preaching, than was after the first Restoration from the
time of Charles the First, probably I might have satisfied my self therewith,
and not scrupled Conformity thereto; but the Terms and Conditions thereof by a
particular Law made in 1662. being not only new, but so strict and severe, that
I could never have satisfaction in my own Conscience, after all Endeavors used
for a Compliance therewith, and a Conformity thereto: To say nothing of the
Covenant, which I never took, but the giving my Assent and Consent, have been
too difficult and hard for me to comply with. And I very well remember, that
about Fourteen Years ago, entering into a Discourse with Mr. Patrick Held^re, an
Irishman, who was contemporary with me in Dublin, concerning Conformity, which
he much endeavored to persuade me to; I urged the severity of the
forementioned Conditions against it, and after some Debates and Reasons with
him, I told him, I did believe they were contrived and designed on purpose to
prevent our Public Preaching, and to keep us out of the Church: To which he
ingenuously replied, He judged it was so: For, said he; a Bishop in Ireland
(whose Name I have forgot) told me the very same.

But though I could not wade through and conquer this Difficulty, yet I censure
not those that did it; and I believe after all the hottest Disputes, and most
vehement Debates, and violent Contests between Conformist and Nonconformist,
there are of both Parties will be glorified in Heaven hereafter^ According to
the 29th. Article of the Church of England, a visible Church is a Congregation
(...) Faithful Men, in the which the pure Word of God is preached, the
Sacraments of the Lord duly administered, according to Christ's Ordinance, and
all those things that of necessity are requisite and necessary to Salvation; so
with such a Church have I held the most intimate Communion, and with such (did
I live) could hold it: I would not therefore be so incorporated with any
Church, as to exclude me from, and render me incapable of holding Communion was
other Churches; I was never strongly bound up to any Form of Ecclesiastical
Government, but that under which a pure and undefiled Religion does flourish,
and that which contains and really practices Holiness, and advances the Kingdom
of God in the World, that can I approve of, and willingly live under, were I to
live.

I did approve of the ancient and present Form of Civil Government English
Monarchy. I am fully satisfied with, and do also declare, That it is not
warrantable for any Subject to take up Arms against, and resist their Lawful
Sovereigns, and Rightful Princes: And therefore, had I not been convinced by
several things that I have read and heard, to believe that the late Duke of
Monmouth was the Legitimate Son of his Father, Charles the Second, I had never
gone into his Army, judging that without this, I could not be freed from the
guilt of Rebellion, which I always resolved to keep my self clear from: And
though his Father denied he was married to his Mother, I thought it might be
answered with this; That Kings and Princes, for State-Reasons, often cannot be
fathomed by their Subjects, affirming and denying things, which otherwise they
would not do, and make even their Natural Affections to truckle and stoop
thereto. I exhort all to abhor all Treasonable Plots, and Pretenses of all
Rebellion, with the highest Detestation, and to take the plain Text of Sacred
Scripture to walk by, in honoring and obeying, and living in subjection to
Rightful Kings, and not readily to receive, or suddenly to be impressed with
evil Reports and Defamations of them, also not rashly to be Propagators of the
same.

I desire God to forgive all mine Enemies, and to give me an heart to forgive
them, which are many, some mighty, and all most malicious: Particularly, Barter
of Lisael, who betrayed me, and proved such a Traitor to James Duke of
Monmouth, his old and intimate Friend. I am grievously afflicted that I should
prove the occasion of the great Sufferings of so many Persons and Families: But
this has fallen under the Just and Wise ordering of Divine Providence, as
David's going to Abimelech, when he proved the occasion of the Death of all the
Persons, Men, Women, and Children in the City: But who shall say unto God, What
do thou? The care of my most dear Wife, and a great many Children, I cast
upon God, who I hope will be better than the best of Husbands unto her, and the
best of Fathers unto them. God knows how Just and Legal Right my Wife has unto
her Estate; to him therefore I commit her, to defend her from the Violence and
Oppression of Men, particularly from a most inhumane and unnatural Brother: But
no wonder if he will lay violent hands upon his Sister's Estate, that has so
often laid them on his own Father. I die a deeply humbled, self-judging, and
self-condemning Sinner, loathing and abhorring my many and great Iniquities,
and my self for them, earnestly desiring full Redemption from the Bonds of
Corruption, under which I have groaned so many Years, long for a most perfect
Conformity to the most holy and glorious God, the only infinite pure Being;
thirsting for a perfect diffusion of his Grace through all the Powers and
Faculties of my Soul, panting after perfect Spiritual Life and Liberty, and a
consummate Love to my dearest Jesus, who is an All comprehensive Good, and to
be satisfied with his Love for ever: A vigorous and vehement Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, with a Belief I had of the Duke's Legitimacy, has
involved me in this ignominious Death; yet blessed be God, that by sincere
Repentance, and true Faith in the Blood of Jesus, there is passage from it to a
Glorious Eternal Life, and from these bitter Sorrows to the fullness of sweetest
Joys that are in his Presence; and from these sharp bodily Pains to those most
pure Pleasures, that are at his Right Hand for evermore. And blessed be God,
that such a Death as this cannot prevent and hinder Christ's changing of my
vile Body, and fashioning it like his Glorious Body, in the general
Resurrection-day.

I am now going into that World, where many dark things shall be made perfectly
manifest and clear, and many doubtful things fully resolved, and a plenary
satisfaction given concerning them; all Disputes and Mistakes concerning
Treason, Rebellion, and Schism, shall be at an end, and cease for ever: Many
things that are innocent, lawful, and laudable, which have foul Marks, and
black Characters stamped and fixed upon 'em here, they shall be perfectly
purified, and fully cleansed from there; where at one view, more shall be known
of them, than by all wrangling Debates, and eager Disputes, or by reading all
Polemical Books concerning them here. I greatly deplore and bewail the greedy
Appetite, and insatiable Thirst, that Professing Protestants have after the
Blood of their Brethren, and the high pleasure they take in the effusion
thereof. But what will not Men do, when they are either Judicially blinded, or
their secular Worldly Interest insensibly insinuates and winds it self into
their Religion, is so twisted and incorporated with it, that it animates and
acts it, is the Life and Soul, the vital Form and Power, and made wholly
subservient thereunto?

I bless God for all my Sufferings, and particularly for this last; for the
benefit and fruit of it, by God's sanctifying of them to me, have been great;
hereby I have been effectually convinced of the Vanity of the World, and my own
sinfulness by Nature and Practice, and to see that to be sin which I never saw
before; and to be more thoroughly humbled for what I know to be ^n, not only of
Commission, but of Omission also: Hereby I have been brought to a more
thorough, deep, inward sense and feeling of the absolute necessity of the
Righteousness of Christ to justify me, and he has been made much more dear
and precious to my Soul, than ever he was before. Hereby my Soul has been more
refined from the Dross of Sensuality, wrought into a more Heavenly Frame,
raised up to a higher pitch of Spirituality; hereby I am made more meek and
humble, and so judge more charitably of others that differ from me in Opinion
and Judgment: So though by God's most Righteous Judgment I have been
^^prehended, and most justly and deservedly undergo this Suffering for my Sins,
yet I hope th^^ have wrought for me a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory, fitting and preparing me, making me a better qualified Subject for, and
far more meet to be a Partaker of the same. By the Grace and Strength of God, I
will not purchase my Life by the Death and Blood of my Protestant Brethren, but
choose to die rather than be a Betrayer of them; the impetuous and violent
Assault of this, I dreaded more than Death it self. Blessed be God I was not
exposed unto it, and conquered by it, as some have been: Having such full
bodily vigor and strength, being in such perfect Health, notwithstanding my
Age, predominating in me, it has made it more difficult to die, than if I had
been clogged and encumbered with Infirmities, made to bow and stoop under them
by prevailing Diseases and Distempers, gradually worn out therewith, which many
times makes Men weary of Life, and to desire to die; and this in Conjunction
with many things (which I forbear to mention) highly gratifying and pleasing to
Sense, which I must leave for ever, strengthens and heightens the Difficulty,
and begets a great Regret and Reluctance in my Will, to have the Earthly
Tabernacle of my Body dissolved, and my Soul to dislodge and quit the same. But
now when the black and gloomy Shades of Death do overspread me, I can say, to
the Glory of God's most Free and Powerful Grace, True Faith in some measure
has changed the Difficulty into a Facility, and easiness of dying: It has
very much subdued the reluctance of my Will against it; for it makes future
things present, and invisible things visible, and does realize and substantiate
the same to me; and as by it I penetrate and pierce into Eternity, and behold
invisible and immortal things; so hereby, blessed be God, I have obtained a
greater Victory over Sense: The World is crucified to me, and I to the World,
and all the most pleasant and delightful Objects therein, all finite, fading
Creatures, Comforts, and Enjoyments, are become minute and small, despicable
and contemptible to me, in comparison thereof, being infinitely contained and
comprehended therein: Shall my Soul clasp and cling about these Mortal and
perishing things? Shall it cleave and be glued to them? Shall it be confined
and captivated into what is kept in the narrow bounds of Time, and in this
lower World? Shall it earnestly desire and thirst for muddy Streams, yea,
Rivers of Flesh-pleasing good; when by an Eye of Faith I can look into the
indeficient, inexhaustible purest Fountain; the immense, immensurate Ocean of
Divine Good; hoping to drink thereof, to swim and bathe my Soul therein for
ever and ever? And when I consider how long my Ears have been bound up, and
tied to their innumerable and horrid Oaths, and cursed Blasphemies, and mine
Eyes to see the Profanation of the Day of God; and when I beheld such an
overflowing Flood of most prodigious Impiety, such an inundation of most
monstrous Iniquity, and so much Hell upon Earth, and that there is so much
decay of holy Zeal, and true Piety, and Christian Religion among the Professors
of it, such seeming incurable Breaches and Divisions, such expiring Love and
Charity and partings among 'em; it has powerful influence on my Soul to
reconcile it more to Death, and makes it electively, and from choice to leave
this present World, and to take up my abode in that which is unseen and future,
where there shall be nothing but perfect Love and Holiness; a sinless state,
and serving God with all unweariedness, and perfection, with the highest
complacency and delight that immortal Souls can be capable of: There is perfect
Peace and Concord the innumerable Company of Angels, and the Spirits of Just
Men made perfect, all fastened together with indissoluble and uninterrupted
Chains of most pure Love, and all continually wrapped up in, and transported with
the highest Admiration of God's Love, his infinite and incomprehensible
Excellencies and Perfections, singing Hallelujahs to him without ceasing, and
triumphing in his Praise for ever and ever. The Consideration also, that I know
so little of these Sublime, Profound, and Divine Mysteries; of the most
Glorious Mystery of Salvation by Jesus Christ; that I am so incapable to Fathom
the depth of the Providence of God, whose ways are in the Sea, and whose paths
are in the deep Waters, and whose footsteps are not known, and particularly in
the late stupendous and amazing one; and that I am so ignorant of the Nature of
Angels and Spirits, with their Offices and Operations, and of their high and
glorious Excellencies; and that I am so little acquainted with the Nature of my
own Soul, as at present dwelling in, and united to my Body, and as disunited
and separated from it; how without Corporeal Organs, it shall most vivaciously
and vigorously perform all its proper Functions and Offices, and more than ever
strongly and indefatigably serve the Lord Jesus, most fervently and abundantly
love him, and delight in him, every way, much more obtain the supreme and
highest end of its Creation and Being; and this makes me much more willing to
die, that I may have the knowledge thereof, with innumerable other things, that
I am now either ignorant of, or do but imperfectly know, and so be made happy
by a plenitude of fullness of enjoying intellectual Pleasures, which are of all
other most suitable, sweet, and satisfactory to immortal Souls. And also I see
that he that departs from iniquity, makes himself a Prey; and so many plunging
themselves into the ways of Iniquity, lest they should be accounted odious and
vile, which makes them so much degenerate not only from Christianity, but from
Humanity it self, as if they were scarce the Excrement of either; contemning
even that most Noble, Generous, Heroic Spirit that dwelt in many Heathens, who
accounted it most honorable and glorious to contend for their Rights and
Liberties; yea, to suffer Death, and the worst of Deaths, in Defense of the
same; and judge them accursed, and most execrable in the World that do so; and
not only so, but, for their own Profit and Advantage, have many of them
enslaved their Posterity by it, and are most industrious and laborious, most
fierce and furious to destroy them, whereby they are become as unnatural as
Children that seek the ruin of their Parents that begot them, and brought them
forth; or them that lay violent hands upon themselves, dashing out their own
Brains, cutting their own Throats, hanging and drawing themselves, ripping up
their own Bellies, tearing out their own Bowels, they being in different senses
Children and Members of that Body Politic they design and attempt the
Destruction of; and when I know not how long the Duration and Continuance of
these things shall be, or a Conclusion or End by God shall be put thereto, who
by Divine and Unerring Wisdom Governs the World; why shall my Soul be unwilling
to take its flight into the unseen and eternal World? Where no sullied, sordid,
or impious thing, most incongruous and unbecoming Nature, shall be seen and
found, and where I shall behold no narrow, conclusive, contracted Soul there,
habitually preferring their private before a public good, but all most
unanimously and equally center in one common universal good, and where the
sighs, and groans, and cries of the afflicted and persecuted, shall be heard no
more for ever.

I earnestly exhort all most highly to prize and value Time, and diligently
improve it for Eternity; to be wise, seriously and seasonably to consider of
their latter End: For by the irrepealable and irreversible Law of Heaven we
must all die, yet we know not how, where, or when Live with your Souls full of
solicitude and care, with a most deep concernedness, and most diligent
industriousness, whilst you have time and opportunity, and the means of Grace,
Health, and Strength, make sure of these two great things, viz.

1. What merits for you a Right and Title to Eternal Life and Glory, and the
future unchangeable Blessedness, as the Redeemer's most precious Blood and
Righteousness; that thereby a real Application and Imputation may be unto you
by sincere Believing. (2.) That that which makes you qualified Subjects for it,
is the great work of Regeneration, wrought in your Souls, being renewed in the
Spirit of your Minds, the Divine Nature being impressed upon them, repairing of
the depraved Image of God in you; that being transformed into his own likeness,
thereby in the World you may mind and savor more the things of the Spirit than
the things of the Flesh, Celestial and Heavenly more than Terrestrial and
Earthly, Superior more than Inferior things: And therewith have a holy Life
and Conversation conjoined, that results and springs from the same, as Fruit
from the Root, and Acts from the Habits. Let all, in order thereto, seriously
consider these few Texts of Sacred Scripture, let them predominately possess
you; let them be deeply and indelibly Transcribed upon your Souls; let them be
assimilated thereunto, and made the written Epistles, the lively Pictures
thereof, Matthew. 5.8, 20. Blessed be the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Verse. 20. For I say unto you, except your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. John 3.3. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily,
I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, etc. Gal. 5.19, 20, to 23. Now the works of the Flesh are
manifest, which are these, Adultery, etc. James 1.18. Of his own Will begat he
us with the Word of Truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his
Creatures. 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which according to his abundant Mercy, has begotten us again to a lively hope
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Verse. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of
your Minds, etc. Colos. 3.1, 2. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things that are above: Set your affections on things above, not, etc. Gal.
5.24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh with the Affections
and Lusts, etc. Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins, Rev. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the
first Resurrection, on such the second Death has no power. Romans 8.1. There is
therefore now no Condemnation, etc. 1 Pet. 1.15. But as he that has called you
is holy, so be ye, etc. Verse. 23. Being born again, not of corruptible Seed,
etc. Psalm. 4.3. But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for
himself, etc. I shall mention now no more the whole Bible abounds with these
Texts, with what a Renovation and Change of our Carnal and Corrupt Hearts and
Natures, there must be, with Holiness of Life and Conversation, before we can
be capable of a future and blessed Immortality, and of inheriting the Kingdom
of God for ever and ever. Amen.

15. Captain Abraham Ansley 's Last Speech.
I AM come to pay a Debt to Nature; it is a Debt that all must pay, though some
after one manner, and some after another. The way that I pay it, may be thought
by some few ignominious, but not so by me; having long since, as a true
Englishman, thought it my Duty to venture my Life in defense of the Protestant
Religion against Popery and Arbitrary Power: For this same purpose I came from
my House to the Duke of Monmouth's Army: At first I was a Lieutenant, and then
a Captain, and I was in all the Action the Foot was engaged in, which I do not
repent: For had I a Thousand Lives, they should all have been engaged in the
same Cause, although it has pleased the wise God (for Reasons best known to
himself) to blast our Designs; but he will deliver his People by ways we know
nor think not of: I might have saved my Life, if I would have done as some
narrow-soul'd Persons have done, by impeaching others; but I abhor such ways of
Deliverance, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than
to enjoy Life with Sin. As to my Religion, I own the way and Practice of the
Independent Church, and in that Faith I die, depending on the Merits of our
Savior Jesus Christ, for my Eternal Salvation: His Blessing be with you all.
Farewell to thee, poor England, Farewell.

16. Mr. Josias Askew's Letter to his Father.
Honored Father,
I Not having an Opportunity to make my Gratitude known to you for all your
Endeavors, for the saving a poor, vain, perishing, and troublesome Life; and
seeing it is all in vain, I would desire you both to acquiesce in the Will of
God, and rejoice with me for this happy Day of my departure from this State of
Pilgrimage, home to the Possession of those Heavenly Mansions, which my God and
Father has provided for me, in and through my Lord Jesus Christ: It is in him
alone I put my Trust and Confidence, and therefore can boldly say, Who is he
that Condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, and
is set down at the Right Hand of God, making Intercession for all those that
have a well-grounded Confidence in him. My Time is but short, and by reason of
Company I am disturbed: Therefore I conclude with my last Breath, begging of
God, that he would keep you constant in his Fear, in this Day of great
Temptation, and at last receive you to his Glory, where we shall once more
unite, in praising, without interruption or distraction, World without end,
Amen. Until which time, the Grace of God the Father, the Love of God the Son,
the comfortable Refreshing of God the holy Ghost, be with you, all yours, and
the whole Israel of God, both now and for ever Which is the hearty Prayer of
your Son,

JOSIAS ASKEW.
Pray remember me to all with Joy.




The Account his Friend gives of him.
TO prevent your further Trouble in suing for a Pardon, I think it convenient
to let you know; I do not question but my dear Cousin has had his Pardon
sealed by the King of Kings, and is in everlasting Blessedness, singing
Hallelujahs, Salvation, Glory and Honor, to him that sits upon the Throne, and
to the Lamb for ever and ever: For God did so carry him through, to drink that
bitter Cup with so much Courage and Cheerfulness to the last, as was to the
Admiration of all Spectators, notwithstanding the terrible Sight he saw at the
Place of Suffering, and so vehemently, as he was tried by the Adversary, yet it
did not in the least discompose him, or alter his Countenance; for he continued
with a smiling Countenance to the last, and was transported above measure. I
want Words to express it; he was like one wrapped up in Heaven, with his Heart
there, and his Eyes fixed thereon. I could wish you had been there; it would
have driven away all cause of Sorrow from your Heart, to see his Deportment,
and hear the Gracious Words that proceeded out of his Mouth. He remembers his
Duty to you both, and left Paul's Blessing with you; Grace, Mercy, and Peace;
his Love to his dear Sister: He desires her not to be troubled for him; for he
has made his Peace with God, and was assured he should go to eternal
Happiness. He would have written more to you and to his Sister; but that he had
so short a time after Sentence, that he wanted Opportunity. When he went out of
Prison, he said, Gentlemen, Now I am going, and it is the Time I much longed
for; I would not change with him that passes Sentence upon me, for a World. I
was with him to the last, and seeing his Courage, it did very much encourage
me, though I never saw such a sight with my Eyes.

17. The Behavior of JOHN HOLWAY, before and at the Place of Execution, at
Warham, in the County of Dorset.
HE lived in Lime, where the Duke landed, and appeared in Arms at that time,
until his Captain left him; then took up Arms under the Duke of Monmouth, and
went with him, until the King's Proclamation came forth, That all that would
lay down their Arms before some Justice of the Peace, in Four Days after, and
take a Certificate for their so doing, they should be acquitted, and have his
Majesty's Pardon; which this Person did, though one Day too late. He received
his Sentence with much Courage and Resolution, and by the means of one Mr.
Tiller, who was to suffer with him, was brought to that settled frame of
Spirit, as is fit for one in that Condition. As he was riding in the Cart,
toward the Place of Execution, the Troopers being just behind the Cart, he told
them, They showed like brave Fellows; But, said he, if I were to have my Life
for fighting the best Five of you, I would not question it. At the Place of
Execution he said not much, But that he thought his and other Men's Blood would
be revenged one time or another; and said, Forgive me, have Mercy on my poor
Soul, pardon all my Sins, and the like; and so the Executioner did his Office.

18. The Last Speech and Prayer of Mr. Matthews, at the Place of Execution.
HE was much concerned the Morning before he died, to see his Wife weep, and to
be in such a Passion for him, which drew Tears from his Eyes; and taking her in
his Arms, said, My Dear, Prithee do not disturb me at this time, but endeavor
to submit to the Will of God; and although thy Husband is going from thee, yet
I trust God will be All in All to thee. Sure, my Dear, you will make my Passage
into Eternity more troublesome than otherwise, if you thus lament and take on
for me: I am very sensible of thy tender Love toward me, but would have you
consider, that this Separation will be so much for my Advantage, as your Loss
cannot parallel. I thank God, I am willing to die, and to be with my Jesus. Be
satisfied; the Will of God must be done. Thy Will be done, O God, in Earth, as
it is in Heaven. So embracing her, he took his Last Farewell of her, and
prepared to go to the Place of Execution; where being come, he with a very
modest, sober, composed frame of Spirit, stood, while he saw several Executed
before him. His Turn being come, he thus spoke.

Dear Countrymen,
I Suppose we are all of one Kingdom and Nation, and, I hope, Protestants. O, I
wonder we should be so Cruel and Blood-thirsty one toward another! I have
heard it said heretofore, that England could never be ruined, but by her self;
which now I frear is a doing. Lord have Mercy on poor England: Turn the Hearts
of the Inhabitants thereof; cause them to love one another, and to forget one
another Infirmities. Have Mercy, O Lord on me: Give me Strength and Patience
to fulfill thy Will. Comfort my dear and sorrowful Wife; be a Husband unto her;
stand by her in the greatest Trouble and Affliction: Let her depend upon thy
Providence. Be merciful to all Men. Preserve this Nation from Popery: Find out
a way for its Deliverance, if it be thy good Will, and give all Men Hearts to
be truly thankful. Comfort my Fellow Sufferers that are immediately to follow:
Give them Strength and Comfort unto the end. I forgive all the World, even all
those that have been the immediate Hastners of my Death. I am in Charity with
all Men. And now, blessed Lord Jesus! into thy Hands I commend my Spirit.

Our Father, etc.

After which, going up the Ladder, he desired the Executioner not to be hard to
him; who answered, No, and said, I pray, Master, forgive me. To which he said,
I do with my whole Heart; and I pray God forgive thee: But I advise thee to
leave off this bloody Trade. The Executioner said, I am forced to do what I do;
it is against my Mind. So lifting up his Hands to Heaven, the Executioner did
his Office.

17. The Behavior and Dying Words of Mr. ROGER SATCHEL, who was Executed at
Weymouth, in the County of Dorset.
MR. Satchel, at the time of the Duke's landing at Lyme, lived at Culliton,
about Five Miles West of that Town. No sooner had he the News of the Duke's
being landed, but he sets himself to work, to serve him, desiring all he knew
to join with him, and was one of the first that went to him to Lyme, and was
with him to the end. But after the Rout, traveling to and fro, to secure
himself, was at last taken at Chard, by three Moss Troopers. He was from thence
carried to Ilchester, and so secured in Ilchester Gaol; and at the Bloody
Assizes at Dorchester, took his Trial, and received his Sentence with the rest.

After Sentence, two of his Friends came to him, and told him, there was no
Hope. He answered, My Hope is in the Lord. After which, he spent most of his
time before Execution, in Prayer and Meditation, and conferring with many good
Persons. The Morning being come, he prepared himself, and all the way drawing
to Execution, was very devout. Being come to the Place, there was a Minister, I
think, of that Place, who sung a Psalm, and prayed with them, and would have
some Discourse with this Person, which he avoided as much as possible; but he
asked him, what were his Grounds for joining in that Rebellion? who answered,
Had you, Sir, been there, and a Protestant, I believe you would have joined
too: But do not speak to me about that; I am come to die for my Sins, not for
my Treason against the King, as you call it. So pointing to the Wood that was
to burn his Bowels, he said, I do not care for that; what matters it, what
becomes of my Body, so my Soul be at rest. So praying to himself near half an
Hour, and advising some he knew, never to yield to Popery, he was turned off
the Ladder. He was a courageous bold spirited Man, and one of great Reason,
just and punctual in all his Business, and one that did much Good amongst his
Neighbors.

18. Mr. LANCASTER.
THere was at the same Time and Place one Mr. Lancaster executed, whose Courage
and Deportment was such, that he out-braved Death, and in a manner challenged
it to hurt him, saying, I die for a good Cause, and am going to a gracious God.
I desire all your Christian Prayers. It Is good to go to Heaven with Company.
And much more he spoke concerning the Duke of Monmouth, whom he supposed at
that time to be living: And so praying privately for some small time, he was
turned, or rather leaped off the Ladder.

19. The Last Speech of Mr. BENJAMIN SANDFORD, at the Place of Execution.
HE, with Nine more, was brought from Dorchester, to Bridport, to be Executed.
Coming to the Place of Execution, he held up his Hands to Heaven, and turning
himself to the People, said,

I Am an Old Man, you see, and I little thought to have ended my Days at such a
shameful Place, and by such an ignominious Death; and indeed it is dreadful to
Flesh and Blood, as well as a Reproach to Relations; but it would have been a
great deal more, if I had suffered for some Felonious Account. Says one to him,
Is not this worse do you think than Felony? He answered, I know not any thing
that I have done so bad as Felony, that this heavy Judgment should fall upon
me, except it be for my Sins against my God, whom I have highly provoked, and
must acknowledge have deserved Ten thousand times more. Lord! I trust thou have
pardoned them. Seal my Pardon in the Blood of my Savior. Lord look upon, and
be with me to the last moment.

20. JOHN BENNET.
THere was also Executed at the same time one John Bennet, a poor Man, but
Pious and of good Report with his Neighbors in Lyme, where he lived. I have
heard, that when he was on Trial, a certain Person informed his Lordship, that
the Prisoner, then at the Bar, had Alms of the Parish: And that his Lordship
should reply, Do not trouble your selves, I will ease the Parish of that
trouble. In Prison, and at the Place of Execution, he behaved himself so to
all, that many of his Enemies pitied him, and would, if it had lain in their
Power (as they said) have saved him. Here was a glorious Instance of Filial
Affection.
His Son being then present, offered to have died for him, and was going up the
Ladder, if it might have been suffered. He prayed some short time, and so was
translated, as we have Hopes to think, from this troublesome World, into
Celestial Joy, and everlasting Happiness.

To conclude: The Solemn, Serious, Dying Declarations, and Christian Courage of
the Western Sufferers, have always outweighed with me the Evidence of those
flagitious Witnesses, who swore these Persons out of their Lives. And I did and
do most steadfastly believe, that the only Plot in that Day was the same, which
the Almighty has at length owned, and most signally prospered, in the Hand of
our Gracious, August, and Rightful Sovereign, King William: I mean, the
rescuing the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of England, from a
most impetuous Torrent of Popery and Tyranny, wherewith they were most
dangerously threatened.

Thus far the Author of the Bloody Assizes, from whom I have extracted all the
Memoirs, relating to the Deaths and Sufferings of English Protestants, from the
Year 1678. to this Time.

While we are thus talking of Death and Dying, I cannot forbear naming the
Ghostly Last Will and Testament of M. Armand: It contains the real Inclinations
of his Soul in all the Accidents of his Life. That he was bigoted to the Roman
Catholic Religion, is plain by this Ghostly Will; wherein he allows no
Salvation out of it. This Will being long, I shall not insert it here, but
referr you to the Present State of Europe, for December, 1695. where you will
find it recited at large. Since the Publication of M. Arnaud's Ghostly Will,
there is come to light his Temporal Will; wherein, that which is most
Remarkable, is his persisting to acknowledge himself a Son of the Catholic
Church, and his bequeathing his Heart to the Nunnery of Pict Royal des Champs,
whither it was carried after it was dead, and put up in an Urn, with this
inscription: Juveni Postum spes and fortuna valete.

The two following Letters (between Mrs. E -- and her Husband,) may properly be
inserted here, as they contain the Last Will and Dying Request of two Persons
very Remarkable for their conjugal Affection, as was mentioned before under the
Chapter of Good Wives.

The HUSBAND's Letter.
My Dearest Heart,
I Rejoice in the entireness of thy Affection, [which many I suppose he means
his late Voyage to America, and the Low Countries, etc. at which time he
presented her with a Ring, with this Inscription: Many Waters cannot quench
Love, Cant. 8.6.
Waters could not quench,] nor thy two Years Sickness abate; so that were there
Hopes of thy being well, I should think my self still in Paradise, or had met
with this Life but as an Earnest of the Happier to come. But the dearest
Friends must part; and thy languishing State makes it necessary for me to
impart a few things relating to my own and thy Decease; which, I must say, is
the greatest Affliction that can befall me, not only as thou were the Wife of
my Youth, but (as I ever thought) my truest Friend. Thy Sympathy with me in all
the Distresses of my Life (both at Sea and Land) will make thy Virtues shine
with the greater Luster, as Stars in the darkest Night, and assure the World,
you love me not for my Fortunes. Thy love to me (in this very Respect) has
exceeded the Generosity of that Dutch Lady, who having the Choice of all she
cau'd carry at once out of a besieged Castle, (instead of taking her Rings and
Jewels, as was expected) she locks her Husband up in a Chest, and carries him
thence on her Back, as her chiefest Treasure; and by that Stratagem saved his
Life. Mrs. Katharine Clark was another singular Instance of Respect to her
Husband, both in Words and Deeds: She never rose from the Table, even when they
were alone, but she made a Courtesy; she never drank to him without bowing;
his Word was a Law to her, and she made it her Business to please him. The Lady
Eleanor, Wife to King Edward I. saved his Life by sucking Poison out of his
Wounds, which had otherwise been incurable. Queen Mary II. was also a Royal
Pattern of Conjugal Affection, being both Hands, Ears, and Eyes to the King, in
his Absence: Neither was William less obliging in all the Instances of a tender
Husband.

Fair course of Passions, where two Lovers start,
And run together Heart thus yoked in Heart.
But though these are mighty Instances of a pure Love, yet all inferior to thy
Garden Walks, and something else I forbear to mention. Nothing can love like
the generous Daphne, or be so constant as Mutius, who strives to become [Not
This was the Motto in a Ring he gave her before Marriage.
thine alone, but even the same with thee.] There is such a Union between us,
that we seem as two Souls in the same Body, or rather two Souls transformed
into one: This makes such an even Thread of Endearment run through all we think
or do, that as you ever command me in any equal Matter, by your constant
obeying of me; so I as readily scruple every thing that is not agreeable to
your Will. But nothing happens that is not so; for, like Spanheimius's Wife,
thou art willing to be governed by me in all things. If any Quarrel is, it is
who of the two shall live the most Content; so that 'Tween you and me, now the
Accounts are even,
A Chain of Hearts, and the first Link is Heaven.
I enjoy both Worlds in such a Spouse; and were I to wed again (and this I
speak after They had now been Married about Ten Tears.
long Trial) I Would prefer thy self to the Richest Nymph. This was the Posie of
their Wedding-Ring.
[God saw thee most fit for me,] and I could not find such another, had I a
thousand Advisers, and as many Worlds to range in, to please my Eye and Fancy.
-- Then never think thy long Sickness can tire me; for Cant. 8.7.
True Love is stronger than Death: And I could be content to be Tossed, Weather
beaten, and even Ship-wrack'd, that you might get safe to Harbor; which should
you miss at last, yet you may take this Comfort, even in Death it self, that
you can die but half whilst I am preserved; neither need you fear the
Consequence of Death, who have lived so good a Life. It Is true, Conscience
makes Cowards of us all. Lewis II. King of France, when he was Sick, forbad any
Man to speak of Death in his Court. But there is nothing in Death it self that
can affright us. It Is only Fancy gives Death those hideous Shapes, we think him
in. It Is the Saying of one, I fear not to be Dead, yet am afraid to Die. There
is no Ponyards in Death it self, like those in the way, or prologue to it: And
who would not be content to be a kind of Nothing for a moment, to be within one
instant of a Spirit, and soaring through Regions he never saw, and yet is
curious to behold? My Dear, Thou have nothing to fear in thy Passage to the
other World; for thy Interest in Christ secures thee against the Devil, and as
to Death (which sets thee ashore) it is no more than a soft and easy Nothing.
Seneca says, It Is no more to die, than to be born. We felt no Pain coming into
the World, nor shall we in the act of leaving it. Death is but a ceasing to be
what we were before we were: We are kindled; and put out, to cease to be, and
not to begin to be, is the same thing. But you will say, perhaps, what do I mean
by the [same thing?] and that you are still as much in the Dark as ever; Why
truly, Daphne, so am I, it is true, Bradshaw tells us, There have been Men that
have tried, even in Death it self, to relish and taste it, and who have bent
their utmost Faculties of Mind, to discover what this Passage is; but there are
none of them come back to tell us the News.

-- No one was ever known to 'wake,
Who once in Death's cold Arms a Nap did take.
Lucret. Lib. 3. Canius Julius being condemned by that Beast Caligula, as he
was going to receive the Stroke of the Executioner, was asked by a Philosopher,
Well, Canius, (said he) Where about is your Soul now? What is she doing? What
are you thinking off? I was thinking (replied Canius) to keep my self ready,
and the Faculties of my Mind settled and fixed, to try if in this short and
quick Instant of Death I could perceive the Motion of the Soul, when she starts
from the Body, and whether she has any Resentment of the Separation, that I may
afterward come again, to acquaint my Friends with it. -- So that I fancy
there is a certain way by which some Men make Trial what Death is; but, for my
own part, I could never yet find it out. But let Death be what it will, it is
certain it is less troublesome than Sleep; for in Sleep I may have disquieting
Pains, or Dreams, and yet I fear not going to Bed. I hope these Thoughts will
put a gloss upon the Face of Death, and to make Death yet the easier to thee,
think with thy self, I shall not be long after thee; for it is but the other Day I
came into the World, and anon I am leaving it, I now take my leave of every
Place I depart from. There is (says Feltham) no fooling with Life, when it is
once turned beyond Thirty. Silence was a full Answer of him, that being asked
what he thought of Humane Life? said nothing, turned him round. and vanished.
Abraham; see how he begins to possess the World, by no Land, Pasture, or
Arable Lordship; the first thing is a Grave. The first Household Stuff that ever
Seleucus brought into Babylon, was a Sepulchre-stone; a Stone to lay upon him
when he was dead, that he kept in his Garden; and you know, my Dear, a Friend
of ours (though in perfect Health) that is now making his Coffin, as a daily
Monitor of his own Mortality. Life at best is uncertain; yet, as to outward
Appearance, I am likely to go first: But should thou die before me, (But
what a melancholy thing would the World then appear!) I Will retire to God and my
own Heart, whence no Malice, Time, nor Death can banish thee. The variety of
Beauty, and Faces, I should see after thy Decease, though they are quick
Underminers of Constancy in others, to me would be Pillars to support it, since
they would then please me most, when I most thought of you. I Have graved thy Picture
so deep in my Breast, that 'twill never out, till I find the Original in the
other World. Don't think, my Dear, that conjugal Affection can be dissolved by
Death. The Arms of Love are long enough to reach from Earth to Heaven; Fruition
and Possession principally appertain to the Imagination. If we enjoy nothing
but what we touch, we may say, Farewell to the Money in our Closets, and to our
Friends when they go to Agford. Part us, and you kill us; nay if we would, we
cannot part; Death it is true, may divide our Bodies, but nothing else. We have
Souls to be sure, and whilst they can meet and caress one another, we may enjoy
each other were we the length of the Map asunder.

Thus we may double Bliss, stolen Love, enjoy,
And all the Spite of Place, and Friends defy:
For ever thus we might each other bless;
For none could trace out this new Happiness.
No Argus here, to spoil or make it less.
It Is not (properly) Absence, when we can see one another, as to be sure we
shall, though in a State of Separation.

"For sight of Spirits in unprescrib'd by space:
"What see they not, who see the Eternal Face?
The Eyes of the Saints shall out-see the Sun, and behold, without Perspective,
the extremest Distances, for if there shall be in our glorified Eyes the
Faculty of Sight, and Reception of Objects, I could think the visible Species
there, to be in as unlimitable a way as now the intellectual.

"The bright transforming Rays of Heavenly Light,
"Immense, Immortal, Pure, and Infinite,
"Does likewise with its Light communicate,
"The Spirit exalt, and all its frame dilate.
St. Augustine tells us, The Saints of God, even with the Eyes of their Bodies
closed up, shall see all things, not only present, but also from which they are
corporally absent; for then shall be the Perfection whereof the Apostle says,
we Prophecy but in part, then the Imperfect shall be taken away. Whether this
be so, I cannot say; yet sure I am, that nothing can deprive me of the
Enjoyment of the Virtues, while I enjoy my self. Nay, I have sometimes made
good use of my Separation from thee; we better filled and farther extended the
Possession of our Lives in being parted; you lived, rejoiced, and saw for me,
and I for you as plainly as if you had your self been there.

But sure I dream; for, lo! on a sudden all the Arguments I use to sweeten our
parting, are as so many Daggers thrust into my Heart; and now it comes to the
push, I cannot bear the Thoughts on it. Part! bless me! how it sounds! it is
impossible it should be so; it does not hang together: What, part after so many
Vows of never parting here, or scarce a Minute in the other World. It Is true,
we first came together with this Design, to help and prepare one another for
Death, but now the Asthma is digging thy Grave, and thy Coffin lies in view, I
am fainting quite away; methinks I feel (already) the Torments to which a Heart
is exposed, that loses what it loves, never did Man love as I have loved, my
Sentiments have a certain Delicacy, unknown to any others but my self, and my
Hearts loves Daphne more in one Hour, than others do in all their Lives. Say,
dear Possessor of my Heart, can this consist with parting? -- No, -- With Gare
on your Last Hour I will attend,
And least like Souls should me deceive,
I closely will embrace my newborn Friend,
And never after my dear Pithia leave.
It Is my Desire to Die first, or that we expire together in thy tender Arms; I
would imitate herein the Mayor of Litomentia's Daughter, who leaping into the
River where her Husband was drowned, she clasped him about the middle, and
expires with him in her Arms; and, which is very Remarkable, they were found
the next Day embracing one another. I likewise admire the Resolution of the
Indian Wives, who, in Contempt of Death, scorn to survive their Husbands
Funeral Pile; but with chaste Zeal, and undaunted Courage, throw themselves into
the same Flames, as if they were then going to the Nuptial Bed. As Remarkable
is that of Laodomia, the Wife of Protesilaus, who hearing that her Husband was
killed at Troy, slew her self, because she would not outlive him. Neither is
Artemisia to be less valued, who after the Death of her Husband, lived in
continual Mourning, and died before she had finished his Tomb; having drunken
the Bones of her Husband, beaten into Powder, which she buried in her own Body,
as the choicest Sepulcher she could provide for him. And if we look back into
ancient Times, we find there was hardly a Dr. Horneck's Lives of the Primitive
Christians.
Widow among the Primitive Christians that complained of Solitariness, or
sought Comfort in a Second Marriage; Second Marriage then was counted little
better than Adultery, their Widows were the same that they were whilst their
Husbands lived. Neither are the Men without Ancient and Modern Instances of
this Nature: For C. Plautius Numida, a Senator, having heard of the Death of
his Wife, and not able to bear the Weight of so great a Grief, thrust his Sword
into his Breast, but by the sudden coming in of his Servants, he was prevented
from finishing his Design, and his Wound was bound up by them, nevertheless, as
soon as he found Opportunity, he tore off his Plasters, Val. Max. l. 4. c. 6.
p. 114.
and let forth a Soul that was unwilling to stay in the Body, after that his
Wife had forsaken hers. And as the Widows among the Primitive Christians (as I
hinted before) counted Second Marriages a sort of Adultery; so the Men too, in
that Dr. Horneck's Lives of the Primitive Christians.
purer Age, were so Chaste and Holy, that not a Man came near his Wife, after he
perceived or had notice that she was with Child, till she was delivered; and
even then, when they came together, there Thoughts were so Innocent, that they
proposed no other End, but Procuration of Children, to be brought up in the
Fear and Nature of the Lord; and would not hear of a Second Match. Neither is
the present Age without Instances of Loving Husbands. I shall begin with Ant.
Wallaeus, who lived with his Wife so very lovingly, that they never Quarreled;
their mutual Care was to please each other, and by Deeds to prevent each others
Desires; Neither did Wallaeus fear any thing more, than that his dear Wife
should die before him, for he used her not only for the Government of his
Family, but for his constant Companion. I shall further instance in Mr.
Ratcliff, whose Grief for the Death of his Wife, See her Epitaph in Westminster
Abbey.
was so very great and constant, that it indisposed him both in Body and Mind,
and in few Days ended his Life. I admire these noble Instances of conjugal
Affection; but in nothing so much, as their Aversion to new Bedfellows. The
Truth is, Second Marriages are a sort of who bids most: For my own share, I am
such an Enemy to 'em, and (naturally) of a Temper so averse to Confinement,
that (should I survive thee as is very unlikely) I doubt whether I should ever
be brought to draw again in the Conjugal Yoke. It Is said by one of the Rabbis,
concerning Methuselah's Wife, that she had Nine Husbands in One, for Age, and
Years; so I may say of thee, that I have Nine Wifes in thee alone, for
Matrimonial Sweetness and Love, and so have no need to marry a Tenth; or if I
marry again, 'twill be to a single Life, that I might imitate those Primitive
Virgins Dr. Horneck speaks of, who so freely and voluntarily dedicated
themselves to God, that they would be married to none but him; and though many times
they were tempted by Rich Fortunes, yet nothing could alter their Resolution of
continuing Virgins. It Is true, the World is a Desert without the Society of
Women, and my self no Enemy to 'em; but for all that, they are dangerous things
to meddle with, especially [for better for worse.] Whatsoever Gold one bestows
upon Fetters, and how glorious soever Servitude may be, yet I persuade my self,
for all the glittering show, that Shackles and Slavery are but a couple of bad
Masters, and therefore will dance no more to the Music of Fetters, except
(Phoenix-like) from thy Ashes another Daphne could arise, and then I cannot say
what I might do; for I love to look on thy Image, though but in a Friend, or
Picture, and shall ever receive thy Kindred with Honorable mention of thy
Name. Then wonder not (when ever you die) if I live and pine like the constant
Turtle. Thy Love deserves a great deal more. I know it is a common Saying,
There Is but one good Wife in the World, and every Man enjoys her. But I never
found this true in any Case but my own: For there is my Lord -- L -- declares,
he could love his Wife above all Women in the World, if she were not his Wife.
The Duke of -- is of the same Mind; and the George and Garter little better.
Sir Charles -- follows his Example; and most have a tang of this Rambling
Fancy. -- Where is the Man (except my self) that is not a C -- d? or the Woman
that so tempers her self in her Behavior with Men, as if Virtue had settled
her self in her Looks and Eyes? I profess, when I have excepted Daphne,
Chloris, and Sapho, I know not where to find her. We were wont to say, It was a
wise Child that knew his own Father, but now we may say, It is a wise Father
that knows his own Child. Men and Women as familiarly go into a Chamber, to
damn one another on a Feather bed, as into a Tavern, to be merry with Wine. She
that does not dance so lofty, that you may see her Silken Garters, and learn to
forget Shame, is no body. Who would think to find Hercules, the only Worthy of
his Time, stooping to the Meanness of being a Servant to Omphale, and in the
quality of a Wench working at the Rock and Spindle? Or to see Mark Anthony lose
the World for a Cleopatra, a Woman, a thing in Petticoats? But would Flesh and
Blood listen to Prove. 22.14. and remember, that the Child often proves the
Pisture of the Lover, and discovers it, (Blessed Conclusion of stolen Sweets^)
they would never invade the Right of another. But to see lewd Men seeking new
Wives, for a fresh Supply for Wenching, is no Wonder; but to find chaste Persons
marrying again, is what I could never approve of. And I find King Charles of my
Opinion; for in his Last Words to his Queen he tells her, That he had never
strayed from her either in Thought, Word, or Deed; And I am apt to believe him;
for I am such a Platenick my self, as never to touch the Lip or Hand of a lewd
Woman, and as much averse to a Second Marriage, so that if you should dye, I Will
fly the Sex in general; There Is Pitch and Birdlime in their Lips and Fingers,
an Itch of amorousness of Skin all over: A Man may as soon hug a Flame, without
burning, as not be fired, if he embraces Petricoats. Democrates put his Eyes
out, to avoid the Sight of 'em. These Patterns I resolve to imitate; for though
Men in Fashion make no account of their Wives, and live at a lewd rate, yet I
am no Lover of Strolling Mutton. No, -- I thank God, I have a good Wife, (a
very Non-such) and know it too; which are two Blessings that seldom go
together: But Miracles are ceast, and I must not expect such another. We find
the First Man Adam, the Righteous Let, the Meek Moses, the Philosopher
Secrates, and the Orator Cicero, were all either over-reached or afflicted with
Women; and I am not so stupid, to think I should merit a better Fate, or meet a
Second Wife that could match the first, (who, I must say, fully answers
Solomon's Character, in the 30th. of Proverbs; and has had no Equal, since the
World began.) If any come near thee, it is the Witty Chloris; but she is an Angel
(grown,) and wont be tied to a Ciod of Earth; or if she would, 'Ise too much a
Platonic, to tell her I am Flesh and Blood. No, my Dear, when you are gone, I
can easily part with every thing; my Leave then will soon be taken of All, but
my self. Never did any Man bid Adieu to the World more absolutely and purely,
and shake Hands with all Women in it, than I shall do, when thou art dead: not
but I kindly resent thy recommending that dear Saint: But she (and Argus) have
nothing to fear. For though my Flesh is malicious enough, yet I Am as Chaste as
Ice, and a perfect Enemy to Caterwauling.

I love my Daphne, 'cause she pleases me;
And therefore only pleases, 'cause it is she:
And therefore in her shake Hands with the whole Sex. But though I Am averse to a
Second Wife, yet to forbid thee Marriage after my Death (according to the
Property of some Husbands) I will not; for the Holy Scripture says, The Wife
is bound unto the Marriage as long as her Husband lives. If her Husband die,
she is at Liberty to marry with whom she will, only in the Lord. If therefore
(after my Death) thou have a mind to Marry again, (as I scarce think it of
thee) Marry in the Name of the Lord our God; but follow not the Practice of
doting Widows, who couple with those to whom they might more properly have
given suck: Neither would I have thee engage in a Smithfield Bargain. What!
Marry for Money? or be laying new Foundations of Life, now you are half way
through it? To lay up Goods for many Years, was thought (by the Primitive
Christians) fitter for Heathens than Christians, for having seen no such thing
in their Master, they could not tell how it should be proper in his Servants;
but thou art a Rational Creature, (though a Woman) and have no need of this
Advice.

I come next to tell thee I have made [my Will,] wherein thou art sole
Executrix, that I might give at the rate I love thee; from our Marriage, till
now, I have been wrapped in a Circle of Obligations to thee; and am so desirous
to require thy Love, that I am scarce contented with giving All, but could
grutch my Funeral Expenses, my very Shroud and Grave, that I might add to your
future Store. I need not press you to believe this, for Men in their Last Wills
and Speeches, appear just as they are they here grow Open and Plain-Hearted,
and dare not depart with their Hands to a Lie: But if you think this Will a
Romance, or that my Words out-love my Actions, I must referr all to Death it
self; for then will be seen whether the Items in it come only from my Mouth, or
from my Heart. I say, I referr you to Death for the Truth of this; for my
Carriage in Health en't able to show how Dear you are. I have not that Fondness
in my natural Temper, that trumpets forth great Love; and, to speak my
Conscience, I think it unhandsome in a As I hinted in a Letter to the Ingenious
Cl -- s.
Married State. The Stork is a fond Creature, and by always kissing his Mate in
public, gives a bad Example to Married People, who have learned it from him.
Public Wantonness is odious between Birds, much more so between Man and Wife.
Believe me. Daphne, more Souls of our Youth perish this way, than any other. It
pleases not me, though spoken by an Emperor Give me leave by the Lusts of others
to exercise mine own; though a witty, yet a wicked Speech. I ever thought an
intemperate Man in Wedlock differs little from a Brute; for too much Billing in
Public shows the way to unexperienced Youth to commit Riot in Private. Cato
accused one before the Senate, that he had kissed his Wife before his
Neighbor's Daughter. The very Elephants cry out against the Stork (and Married
Wantons) in this Matter, who, as Pliny writes make not the least Love one to
another, except they be covered with Bought. 'Twas a witty Answer of the
Lacedaemouian Virgin, who being asked in the Morning, by her Friend, whether or
no, in the Night, she had embraced her Husband? replied, Good Words, good Man;
not I him, but he me: Intimating, that Fondness in a Wife was unsufferable; and
in a Man, it is scandalous: Which makes me so little practice it. Surely a
Landlord may value his House without riding of the ridge on it. But I need not
bring Arguments to prove I love, though I am not fond, seeing your Charity for me
makes you say, I out-love every thing: Then wonder not I Am grieved at --
Neither am I less concerned for the after Reflections, so far as they relate to
my Dear -- But pray forgive all my Errors, and the Excess of a Love that has
nothing of parting in it. 'Twill (if I do survive you) follow thee to thy
Dying-Bed -- It Is there I Will attempt to expire, that I may (if possible) follow
thee in the same Tract to Heaven, where I hope to find and As I lately proved
in a Letter upon that Subject.
know thee hereafter: For why may not Husband and Wife, that helped forward
each others Salvation, whose Souls were mutually dear, and who went to Heaven
as it were Hand in Hand, there meet, and return each other Thanks for those
Christian Offices. Holy David cheared up his Thoughts, after the Death of his
Child, with this Meditation, 2 Samuel 12.23.
I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me: Which had been little
Comfort, if he had thought never to have known him there. It will be no small
Augmentation of our Complacency (as I told Ignotus) to find those very
Friendships, which we had contracted here below, translated to the Mansions
above; when I shall see and know thee again, with whom I had lived so well, and
slept so long in the Dust, With what Ardours shall we then caress one another!
With what Transports of Divine Affection shall we mutually embrace, and vent
those innocent Flames which had so long lain smothering in the Grave! How
passionately Rhetorical and Elegant will our Expressions be, when our
Sentiments, which Death had frozen up when he congealed our Blood, shall now be
thawed again in the warm Airs of Paradise! Like Men that have escaped a common
Shipwreck, and swim safe to the Shore, we shall Congratulate each others
Happiness with Joy and Wonder. Our first Addresses will be a Dialogue of
Interjections, and short Periods, the most pathetick Language of Surprise and
high-wrought Joy; and all our after-Converse will be couched in the highest
Strains of Heavenly Oratory, intermixed with Hallelujahs. But I Will stop here,
to let you see that my Love to your Soul is not so great as to make me forget
the House it dwells in. No, to thy Ashes I Will keep a Body pure, and Troth
inviolable; for Separation shall have no place in our Union, which is too great
to be exampled. And as to thy Burial, it shall speak aloud how much I love
thee; not that I like the Fune al State of Great Men, neither do I approve the
Embalming of the Egyptians; and I as little fancy your odd Whim of being
wrapped in a Leaden Coffin, and flung into the midst of the Sea, as if you
desired to protract the Corruption of your Flesh, out of which you shall be
generated anew, or dreamed of rising whole, as you lay down, and carrying Flesh
and Blood into the Kingdom of Heaven without a change: But though I like not
these costly Burials, yet I think no Tomb gay enough to enclose thy Ashes; tho
common Graves deserve no Inscription, yet thy Relics shall have a Monument may
tell thy Virtues to the end of Time. But what Epitaph can reach thy Worth? It Is
a Note above Ela, and cannot be reached by a Cowley's, scarce by a S -- r's
Verse. Neither can this Love to thy Ashes be called profuse, but a Debt due to
thy Memory, and is what is justified by the Example of former Ages. St. Jerome
tells us, That in his Time, Husbands were wont to spread Lilies, Violets, and
Roses upon the Graves of their deceased Wives; by which uxorious Office they
did lessen the Grief of their Hearts, conceived by the Loss of their loving
Bed-fellows; and the like Expressions of mutual Love, Wives showed to their
buried Husbands. Now above all Flowers in these Ceremonious Observances, the
Rose was in greatest Request; for though dead and dry, it preserves a pleasing
Sweetness, and was for that Reason by the Ancients strewed upon their Kindreds
Graves. It Is incredible (says a late Dr. Horneck's Lives of the Primitive
Christians.
Writer) to consider what Cost the Primitive Christians bestowed upon the
Burials of their deceased Friends; they looked upon it as sinful to neglect
those Bodies when dead, which in their Lifetime had been Temples of the Holy
Ghost. The Care they took to embalm them, was such, that the Arabs professed
they got more Money for their Perfumes, of the poor Christians, than of the
richer Pagans who yet never were without Incense in their Idol-Temples. Though
they had little in the World, yet what they had they were very free off on such
Occasions; for they looked upon Good Men's Funerals, as Prologues to Eternal
Rest. All this is supposing you die first; which if you should, my Corpse shall
follow just as Lodowick Cortusius, a Lawyer of Padua, followed his Wife: He Would
have no Mourning at his Funeral, but ordered Pipers, Harpers, and Twelve
Virgins clad in Green, to sing all the way to his Grave, that so (which is what
I intend) he might turn his Funeral Rites into a Marriage Ceremony. But if I
happen to die before you, prepare me thus for the Grave: Let me be said out in
the Chamber next the Dining Room; from thence, on the Not sooner, least I come
to Life again, at my Mother did, after seeming Death.
Seventh Day after my Death let me be nailed down in an Elm-Coffin, when kiss
and salute my Hand and Cheek, as a Token of thy Affection to me. The Chinese
always, before they bury their Dead (if he was a married Man) bring him to his
Wife, that so she might first kiss him, and bid him farewell. After this is
done, let my Body be carried to the New-burying Place, there to lie in the same
Grave with Thee, and our A Gentlewoman, descended of honorable Parents with
whom they had contracted an extraordinary Friendship.
dear O --, where we'll both wait thy coming to us; and instead of the
fashionable Custom of staying at Home, I Would have thee follow my Corpse to the
Ground, ('it is the last Office of Love to a Friend.) see me put into it, and be
one of the last that shall come thence. In performing this Request, you (in
part) imitate the generous Hota, who thus followed her Husband to the Grave,
laid him in a stately Tomb, and then for Nine Days together she would neither
eat nor drink whereof she died, and was buried (as she had ordered in her Last
Will) by the side of her beloved Husband.

He first deceased; she for a few Days tried
To live without him, liked it not, and died.
I mention not this Instance, as if I thought I deserved your Tears, or liked
Extravagant Mourning; No, (as St. Bernard says) let them bewail their Dead to
excess, who deny their Resurrection; yet I must say, that to follow our Friends
to the Grave and to mourn for their Interrment, is a manifest Token of True
Love. Our Blessed Savior himself wept over the Grave of dead Lazarus, (whom he
revived;) whereupon the standers by said among themselves, Behold how he loved
him! The Ancient Romans, before they were Christians, mourned Nine Months; but
being Christians, they used Mourning a whole Year, clothed in Black, for the
most part; for Women were clothed, partly in White, and partly in Black,
according to the Diversity of Nations. But in our Times, Husbands can bury
their Wives, and Wives their Husbands, with a few counterfeit Tears, and a
sour Visage masked and painted over with Dissimulation, contracting ( like the
Ephesian Matron) Second Marriages before they have worn out their Mourning
Garments: But the Tears I have shed for your long Sickness, have cleared me of
this Levity, and show (even while you are living) how much I shall grieve when
you die in earnest; and how impatient I Will be, till I bed with you in the Dust,
that as our Souls shall know each other when they leave the Bodies, so our
Bodies also may rise together, after the long Night of Death; and I hope I
shall find thee of this Opinion. Dr Brown applauds those ingenious Tempers,
that desire to sleep in the Urns of their Fathers, and strive to go the nearest
way to Corruption. 'Twas the late Request of a Great Divine, to lie by his
Wife, in Shore-ditch; and for that Reason he was buried there. And Sir
Nathanael Barnardiston, in his Last Will, desires his Executors, that the Bones
of his Father might be dug out of the Earth, (where they were buried,) and
laid by his own Body, in a new Vault he ordered 'em to erect for the same
purpose; that though he could not live with his Father as long as he would have
desired, yet he designed that their Bodies should lie together till the
Resurrection. As it is good to enjoy the Company of the Godly; while they are
living; so it is not amiss, if it will stand with convenience, to be buried
with them after Death. The old Prophets Bones escaped a burning, by being
buried with the other Prophets; and the Man who was tumbled into the Grave of
Elisha, was revived by the virtue of his Bones; and we read in the Acts and
Monuments, that the Body of Peter Martyr's Wife was buried in a Dunghill; but
afterward being taken up, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it was honorably
buried in Oxford, in the Grave of one Frideswick, a Popish She-Saint; to this
end, that if the Papists should go about to untomb Peter Martyr's Wife's
Bones," they should be puzzled to distinguish betwixt the Woman's Body, and the
Relics of that their Saint: so Good it is, in the Opinion of some, to be
buried with those that are accounted Pious. 'Twas for this Reason I formerly
desired to lie in the Chancel of C -- with my Reverend Father; but Love to a
Parent, though never so tender, is lost in that to a Wife; and [NOW] if I can
mingle my Ashes with thine, I have nothing further to ask. If I should be so
miserable, as to outlive thee a few Hours, thy Tomb shall be my Breast, till
on Six Shoulders I am brought to Thee, and O --, as the only Companions of my
Long Home. -- Neither is this Fancy without Precedent; for we read In the
Flying-Post, March the 4th. 1696.
of a young Gentleman, now in Town, who getting a Lock and Key to the Vault In
St. Clement's Church.
where his Mistress lies, pays her frequent Visits. Just thus I Will visit thee,
and when I leave this Light,
Come spend my Time in the same Cell at Night;
And then farewell, farewell, I cannot take
A final Leave, until thy Ashes wake.


You see, my Dear, how loath I am to give the Beck'n of Farewell: But will not you
pardon a Spouse (as Husbands go nowadays) who receives Life from your Smiles,
and is well no longer than he is Praising of you? [The Best of Wives, and my
Truest Friend,] is but part of your Character; And can I leave such a Treasure
in post-hast?

I have kinder Things to add, but have not time to write 'em half; so must
reserve the rest till we meet in Heaven, or till I write again; when expect my
Thoughts on the several Duties of a Married Life -- Remarks on thy present
Sickness, and some Secrets I here omit. I beg thy Answer to this Letter, for
I Will keep it by me as a dear Memorial.

I Would next proceed to consider the nature of our Souls, and that other World we
are hastening to: But here is enough to let you see, that as in Life, so in
Death, I am wholly ours; and shall so continue, as long as I am

London Wall, August the 3d. 1682. P -- t.


Mrs. E -- 's Answer to the foregoing Letter.
I Received (my Dearest) thy obliging Letter, and thankfully own, that though God
has exercised me with a long and languishing Sickness, and my Grave lies in
view, yet he has dealt tenderly with me; so that I find by Experience no
Compassions are like those of a God. It Is true, I have scarce Strength to
answer your Letter; but seeing you desire a few Lines, to keep as a Memorial of
our Constant Love, I Will attempt something, though (by reason of my present
Weakness) I can write nothing worth your reading.

First then, As to your Character of me, (Love blinds you;) for I don't eserve
it, but am pleased to find you enjoy (by the help of a strong Fancy) that
Happiness, which I cannot (though I would) bestow. But Opinion is the rate of
things; and if you think your self Happy, you are so. As to my self, I have met
with more a greater Comforts in a Married State, than ever I did expect. But
how could it be otherwise, when Inclination, Interest, and all that can be
desired, concur to make up the Harmony? From our Marriage till now, thy Life
has been one continued Act of Courtship, and sufficiently upbraids that
Indifference which is found among Married People. Thy Concern for my present
Sickness (though of long continuance) has been so Remarkably tender, that were it
but known to the World, 'twou'd (once more) bring into fashion Men's loving
their Wives. Thy WILL alone is a Noble Pattern for others to Love by; and is
such an Original Piece as will near be equaled. I next come to consider the
Imprudence of -- where I must say, I am so far from blaming your Conduct, that
I admire the Greatness of your Conjugal Love, (in that very Particular) which
showed it self to be like the Apple of the Eye which is disturbed with the
least Dust. But, my Dear, be concerned at nothing; for I am well pleased with
all you say, or do, and have such a Kindness for you, that I dread the Thoughts
of surviving thee, more than I do those of Death. Could you think I Would marry
again, when it has been one great Comfort under all my Languishments, to think
I should die first, and that I shall live in him, who, ever since the happy
Union of our Souls, has been more dear to me than Life it self? -- As to what
you mention about our Funerals, I like it well, and am yet further pleased with
our Ground Bed-follows; I doubt not, but dear O --, Thee, and I, shall make as
wholesome a Morsel for the Worms as any; and as we sleep together in the same
Grave, so I hope we shall be Happy hereafter, in the Enjoyment of the Beatifick
Vision, and in the Knowledge of one another; for I agree with you, that we
shall know our Friends in Heaven. Wise and Learned Men of all Ages, and several
Scriptures, plainly show it; though I verily believe, was there none but God and
one Saint in Heaven, that Saint would be perfectly Happy, so as to desire no
more. But, whilst on Earth, we may lawfully please our selves with Hopes of
meeting hereafter, and in lying in the same Grave, where we shall be Happy
together, if a senseless Happiness can be called so. You mention writing your
Thoughts of the Nature of the Soul, and that other World we are hastening to:
But seeing you did not send 'em, I shall wait with Patience, till those things
are no longer the Object of our Faith, but Vision.

Thus have I given a short Reply to some Part of your kind Letter, and will
answer it more at large, as my Strength increases. But I shall see you, to
Morrow, at Stoke, and will then tell you more of my Mind. I hope you will write
every Week; for (if I recover) I Will answer all your Letters.

I shall only add my Hearty Prayer, That God would bless you both in Soul and
Body; and that when you die, you may be conveyed by the Angels into Abraham's
Bosom; where I hope you will find

Your Constant E --


'Twill not be improper to add here another Letter writ by Mrs. E -- to a young
Lady, which (with the former) shows her Conjugal Affection was not by fits and
starts, but that 'twas the same in Health as on a Sickbed. The Letter is as
follows.

YOU was not mistaken (Dear Madam) when you believed I should break-open your
Letter: It Is a Freedom we Women take, that are blessed with such obliging
Husbands as I have; I read it, took your Advice, and sent it that Night for
Tunbridge, went to Bed, and diverted my self with the Thoughts of that Pure and
Virtuous Friendship which was begun between Cl -- s, and P -- t. I was much
concerned at that unhappy Accident which threatened the putting a Stop to it;
for I ever esteemed Platonick-Love to be the most Noble, and thought it might
be allowed by all; but some wise Persons are afraid least the Sex should creep
in for a share. Here was no Danger; for though Nature and Art have done their
utmost to make Cl -- s Charming to all, her Wit, etc. being beyond most of her
Sex, yet P -- t having, for many Years, given such Testimonies of a Conjugal
Affection, even to excess, (if such a thing can be,) that I fanned their
Friendship might have been honorably continued to the End of Time. I hope what
Difficulties they meet with at their first setting out, will heighten their
Friendship, and make it more strong and lasting. So wishes

August 27. 1695. Your Humble Servant, E --


This Letter was occasioned by a Misconstruction put on the Correspondence then
carried on 'tween P -- t and the aforesaid Lady; but E -- being universally
Religious, by consequence is universally Charitable, and therefore as she knew
no Harm, thinks none, but encourages the Correspondence.

Mr. Richard Mays was a Man of sincere Godliness: A Mr. Singleton.
worthy Person, sufficiently known in this City for his great Skill and Pains
in training up of Youth, was the Happy Instrument which Providence made use of
for the first awakening and enclining him to look out after God. I have often
heard him speak with great thankfulness both to God and him, of that Mixture of
Love and Prudence whereby he gained upon him. Throughout the Whole of his
Sickness, of Six Weeks continuance, all was clear between God and him. 2 Samuel
23.4.
His End was like the Light of the Evening when the Sun sets, an Evening
without any Clouds. He said to my self, when I enquired of him concerning that
Matter, I have not indeed those Raptures of Joy which some have felt, ( though
yet, he added, blessed be God, I have sometimes tasted of them too) but I have
a comfortable well-grounded Hope of Eternal Life. Another time; I have had my
Infirmities and Failings, but my Heart has been right with God as to the main,
and I look for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to Eternal Life. Again,
another time, I know that I have passed from Death to Life. And again; Blessed
be God for our Lord Jesus Christ who has delivered me from the Wrath to come.
In the Presence of others that stood by him, when the sudden Blast was so
strong as almost to puff out the Lamp of Life, expecting to die in a very few
Moments, he said, in the Words of the Psalmist, Into thy Hands I commit my
Spirit; thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth; and this was uttered by him
with a more than ordinary Cheerfulness visibly spread on his Face. He would
often say in his Sickness, If God has any Pleasure in me, and any more Work
for me to do, he will raise me up; but if not, lo, here am I, let him do with
his Servant what seems him good. In short, I could neither observe my self,
nor learn from those that were constantly about him ( who must know this Matter
better than any others, and would not Lie for God himself) that he had the
least Darkness upon his Spirit as to his present and future State, from the
beginning of his Sickness, till he gave up the Ghost; which he did the last
Lord's Day, about Five in the Morning, the time when he was wont to arise and
prepare himself for his Sacred Work. Mr. Nathaniel Tailor, in his Sermon at Mr.
Mayo 's Funeral.

Dr. Samuel Annesley was reconciled to Death, yea so desirous of it, as hardly
induced him to have his Life prayed for. But hearing some Ministers had been
fervently praying for his Life, he replied, I Am then more reconciled to Life
than ever; for I Am confident God will not give a Life so eminently, in answer
of Prayer, as mine must be, if he would not use it to greater purposes than
ever before. Yet some little time before his Change, his Desires of Death
appeared strong, and his Soul filled with the fore-tasts of Glory; often saying,
Come, my dearest Jesus, the nearer the more precious, the more welcome. Another
time his Joy was so great, that in an Ecstasie he cried out, I cannot contain
it, What manner of Love is this to a poor Worm? I cannot express the thousandth
part of what Praise is due to thee: We know not what we do, when we offer at
praising God for his Mercies: It Is but little I can give, but Lord help me to
give thee my All. I Will die praising thee, and rejoice that there is others can
praise thee better. I shall be satisfied with thy likeness; satisfied,
satisfied! Oh, my dearest Jesus! I come. See a larger Account in Dr. Annesley's
Funeral Sermon, preached by Mr. Daniel Williams.

The Death of Old Mr. Eliot, of New England.
While he was making his Retreat out of this Evil World, his Discourses from
time to time ran upon, The Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. It was the Theme
which he still had recourse unto, and we were sure to have something of this,
whatever other Subject he were upon. On this he talked, of this he prayed, for
this he longed, and especially when any bad News arrived, his usual Reflection
thereon would be, Behold some of the Clouds in which we must look for the
Coming of the Son of Man. At last his Lord, for whom he had been long wishing,
Lord come, I have been a great while ready for thy Coming! At last, I say, his
Lord came, and fetched him away into the Joy of his Lord. He fell into some
Languishments, attended with a Fever, which in a few Days brought him into the
Pangs (may I say? or Joys) of Death: And while he lay in these, Mr. Walter
coming to him, he said unto him, Brother, Thou art welcome to my very Soul.
Pray retire to my Study for me, and give me leave to be gone, meaning, that he
should not, by Petitions to Heaven for his Life, detain him here. It was in
these Languishments, that speaking about the Work of the Gospel among the
Indians, he did after this Heavenly manner express himself: There is a Cloud
(said he) a dark Cloud upon the Work of the Gospel, among the poor Indians: The
Lord revive and pr^^^er that Work, and grant it may live when I am dead: It is
a Work which I have been doing much, and long about. But what was the Word I
spoke last? I recall that Word, My Doings: Alas! they have been poor, and
small, and lean Doings, and I Will be the Man that shall throw the first Stone at
them all.

Mr. Cotton Mather tells us of Mr. Elias, That the Last of his ever setting Pen
to Paper in the World, was upon this Occasion: I shall transcribe a short
Letter, which was written by the shaking Hand, that had heretofore by Writing
deserved so well from the Church of God, but was now taking its leave of
Writing for ever. It was written to the Person that was Engaging for us; and
thus it ran:

Reverend and Beloved, Mr. Increase Mather,
I Cannot write. Read Neh. 2.10. When Sanbalat the Horonite, and Tobijah the
Servant, the Ammonite heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly, that there was
come a Man to seek the Welfare of the Children of Israel.

Let thy blessed Soul feed full and fat upon this and other Scriptures. All
other things I leave to other Men, and rest

Your Loving Brother, JOHN ELIOT.


It has been observed, that they who have spoke many considerable things in
their Lives, usually speak few at their Deaths. But it was otherwise with our
Eliot, who after much Speech of and for God in his Lifetime, uttered some
things little short of Oracles on his Deathbed, which, it is a thousand Pities,
they were not more exactly regarded and recorded. Those Authors that have taken
the Pains to Collect Apophthegmata Morientum, have not therein been
unserviceable to the Living; but the Apophthegms of a Dying Eliot must have had
in them a Grace and a Strain very extraordinary; and indeed the vulgar Error of
the signal Sweetness in the Song of a Dying Swan, was a very Truth in our
expiring Eliot: His last Breath smelt strong of Heaven, and was Articled into
none but very gracious Notes; one of the last whereof, was, Welcome Joy! and at
last it went away, calling upon the Standers-by, to Pray, pray, pray! which was
the thing in which so vast a portion of it had been before employed.

This was the Peace, in the End of this Perfect and Upright Man; thus was there
another Star fetched away to be placed among the rest that the third Heaven is
now enriched with. He had once, I think, a pleasant Fear, that the old Saints
of his Acquaintance, especially those two dearest Neighbors of his, Cotton of
Boston, and M^ther of Dorchester, who were got safe to Heaven before him, would
suspect him to be gone the wrong way, because he staid so long behind them. But
they are now together with a Blessed Jesus, beholding of his Glory, and
celebrating the high Praises of Him that has called them into his mavelous
light. Whether Heaven was any more Heaven to him, because of his finding there
so many Saints with whom he once had his Delicious and Celestial Intimacies,
yea, and so many Saints which had been the Seals of his own Ministry, in this
low: World, I cannot say; but it would be Heaven enough unto him, to go unto
that Jesus whom he had loved, preached, served, and in whom he had been long
assured there does All Fullness dwell. In that Heaven I now leave him; but not
without Grynaeus's pathetical Exclamations, (O Beatum illum Diem!) Blessed will
be the Day, O blessed the Day of our Arrival to the glorious Assembly of
Spirits, which this great Saint is now rejoicing with!

Bereaved New England, where are they Tears at this Ill-boding Funeral? We had
a Tradition among us, That the Country could never perish, as long as Eliot was
alive. But into whose Hands must this Hippo fall, now the Austin of it is taken
away? Our Elisha is gone, and now who must next Year invade the Land? The Jews
have a Saying, Quando Luminaria patiuntur Eclipsin, malum signum est mundo; but
I Am sure it is a dismal Eclipse that has now befallen our New-English World. I
confess, many of the ancients fell into the Vanity of esteeming the Relics of
the Dead Saints to be the Towers and Ramparts of the Place that enjoyed them;
and the dead Bodies of two Apostles in the City, made the Poet cry out,

A Facie Hostili duo propugnacula praesunt. If the Dust of dead Saints could
give us any Protection, we are not without it: Here is a Spot of American Soil
that will afford a rich Crop of it at the Resurrection of the Just. Poor
New England has been, as Glastenbury of old was called, A Burying-Place of
Saints. But we cannot see a more terrible Prognostic than Tombs filling apace
with such Bones as those of the Renowned Eliot's; the whole Building of this
Country trembles at the Fall of such a Pillar.

For many Months before he died, he would often cheerfully tell us, That he was
shortly going to Heaven, and that he would carry a deal of good News thither
with him: He said, He would carry Tidings to the Old Founders of New England,
which were now in Glory, that Church-work was yet carried on among us: That the
Number of our Churches was continually increasing: And that the Churches were
still kept as big as they were, by the daily Additions of those that shall be
saved. But the going of such as he from us, will apace diminish the Occasions
of such happy Tidings.

What shall we now say? Our Eliot himself used most affectionately to bewail
the Death of all useful Men; yet if one brought him the notice of such a thing,
with any Despondencies, or said, O Sir, such a one is dead, What shall we do?
He would answer, Well, but God lives, Christ lives, the Old Savior of
New England yet lives, and he will Reign till his Enemies are malle his
Footstool. This, and only this Consideration have we to relieve us; and let it
be accompanied with our Addresses to the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, That
there may be Timothies raised up in the room of our departed Paul's; and that
when our Moses's are gone, the Spirit which was in those brave Men, may be put
upon the surviving Elders of our Israel. Thus died the first Preacher of the
Gospel to the Indians in New England. Aged 86. Thus far Mr. Cotton Mather.

I would here insert some Account of the Deaths, etc. of the Reverend Mr.
James, and Mr. Oldfeild, but have not room; so referr the Reader to their
Funeral Sermons, preached by Mr. Slater, and Mr. Shower.

CHAP. CXLIV. The Last Speeches of Dying Penitents, abbreviated.
1. NAthanael Butler, executed in Cheapside, for killing his Fellow-Prentice,
1657. after his Shackles were taken off, a Friend, to try his Willingness to
Die, told him, he would get him freed, etc. But he, clapping his Hand on his
Breast, replied, That if he knew his Heart aright, he would not for Ten
thousand Worlds lose the Opportunity of that Morning, etc. declaring the dark
Dungeon was the best Room he ever came in, etc. p. 9.

Being at the Place of Execution, he warned the People to beware of the
beginning of Sin, saying: When I was first enticed into Evil, I was tender, and
fearful of it; but not diligently hearkening to the Word of God, nor the Voice
of Conscience, which checked me, I went on: So that by degrees I was emboldened
in Sin, and at last it became as familiar as my daily Food. Therefore, as you
love your Souls, take heed of the Beginnings of Sin. If I had so done, I had
escaped this Punishment. O that I could prevail with every young Person, to
cast away Sin betimes, and check it in the first beginning; and that I had
taken the Counsel which I have now given, etc. Loathing his beloved Sin,
Uncleanness, and admonishing all young People, to Watch and Pray against it:
Hoping, if he were to live as many Years as he had been but Moments to live, he
should (through the Grace of God) never commit it any more.

2. Thomas Savage, executed at Ratcliff-Cross, Oct. 28. 1669. He began very
early to tread the Paths of Sin; confessing at the Place of Execution, That the
first Sin he began with, was breaking the Sabbath. He was not above Sixteen
Years of Age, when he was Executed. His Crime was for murdering a Maid, his
Fellow Servants.

3. Robert Foulks, executed at Tyburn, Jan. 31. 1678. Being at the Place of
Execution, he admonished the People to consider the Mischief of Uncleanness;
and what a Sin it was, for a Member of Christ to make himself the Member of an
Harlot; that it was a Sin that seldom goes alone, but is the Mother-Sin to a
number more: Warning them to avoid the Snares of a Whorish Woman; to keep the
Marriage Bed undefiled. He was Minister of Staunton-Lacy, and executed for
murdering his Bastard-Child.

4. Thomas Short, executed at Oxford, Anno 1678. Being in Prison, he imagined
the Person whom he murdered, viz. Mr. Wingrove, an Oxford Scholar, to appear
before his Eyes, in a bloody and threatening form, commanding him to appear
before God's Tribunal, to answer for what he had done. Being at the Place of
Execution, he exhorted the People to speedy and sincere Repentance, and
strictly to observe the Sabbath, etc. Which had he done, he had not come to
this miserable End.

5. Margaret Clark, executed in Surry, Anno 1679. She consented, for 2000 Pound
Reward, to the Firing of her Master's House in Southwark. Being in Prison, in
the Marshalsea, she confessed, That for her Breaking the Sabbath, and
neglecting her Duty toward God, this Temptation had prevailed over her. On the
Day of her Execution, when she was going into the Cart, This is, said she, a
blessed Day to me. O this is my Wedding Day! I shall be married to my Savior.
O Lord, that ever I should offend so Good and Gracious a God as thou art! O the
Joys I long to be at the Place of! Being under the Gallows, she looked up, and
said, I am now going to the Glory, to the Glory which God has prepared for me,
etc. Lord, I am come to thee. I desire you all not to spend the Lord's Day idly
and wickedly, as I have done: For it was Sabbath-breaking that was my first
Step to this Wickedness. And I beg of you all, not to spend your Time in vain,
but to the Honor and Glory of God. Being asked by Dr. Martin, What Assurance
last thou of God's Forgiveness? I know, said she, in whom I have believed: I
had great Joys from the Lord, since the Sentence passed on me. Blessed be God,
that ever I came into a Prison! The Doctor having prayed with her, she
continued crying out, O the Glory! O the Glory!

6. Henry Parker, executed at Tyburn, Anno 1689. He lamented the mispending of
his Time, saying, O the precious Time I have squandred away upon Trifles and
Vanities, upon my Lusts and Pleasures, which I now want to make my Peace with
God, and purchase Eternal Life! That it was not so easy to Repent, as he
supposed. His Crime was for Counterfeiting Guinea's.

7. John Marketman, executed in Essex, April 17. 1680. He confessed he had
departed from his God in his Youth, and disobeyed his Parents, not showing them
that Reverence as he ought: For which Sin, said he, I think God has justly
punished me, in making me die Childless. For sure it is, if Long Life be a
Promise to those that Honor their Parents, it should cause Children to take
care how they do the contrary; adding, That neglecting the church, and the
Public Worship of God, and choosing rather to spend my Time in an Alehouse,
brought me to Evil Company, and so to Drunkenness; which getting an Habit, made
me a professed Enemy to God, and give my self over to Swearing, and Cursing,
and Lying, and so from one Sin to another, till I arrived at the height, etc.
That formerly he loved to commit Sin, but now hated the very Thoughts of it,
and could not commit a Sin to gain a Kingdom: Exhorting the People to take heed
of the Beginnings of Sin; telling them, You will find, if once you habituate
your selves to the committing of Sin, it will be very hard to root it out; it
must cost you many a Tear, and much Bitterness, in crucifying your darling
Sins; which Trouble and Expense might be saved, if you would be careful to
resist the first Temptation: Bewailing his Drunkeriness and Uncleanness. His
Crime was for murdering his Wife.

8. William Bottler, executed in Essex, for murdering Captain Wade: When he
heard his Friends labored for a Pardon, he expressed his Dislike of it, rather
desiring to be dissolved and to be with Christ; least, being so well prepared,
the Naughtiness of his Heart, without a Godly carcusie over it, might make him
turn again to Vanity.

9. John Stern, executed at St. James's, March 10. 1681. He consented to the
Murder of Thomas Thynn, Esquire; under the Promise of Three or Four Hundred
Rix-Dollers. He often blessed God for bringing him to a Prison, and that he had
not made his Escape, to lead a wicked Life any longer. The Morning of his
Execution, he confessed he found much Joy and Comfort, saying, He was going to
exchange a Prison for a Paradise; a Prison that had been better to him than any
Palace; for that God had touched him, and drawn him, and quickened him. And
now, says he, O God, I come to thee, to live with thee for ever: Breaking out
into such Ecstasies of Joy, as these; O, my God! my God! my infinitely Good
God! How do I love thee! I will bless thee as long as I live, etc. That when I
had forsaken thee, and was at the Gates of Hell, thou have brought me from
thence to the Gates of Heaven. I bless thee, that thou have chastised me with
thy Rod, that thy Rod is a Rod of Mercy! When he expressed these Words, he
appeared in a Rapture of Joy; and though he wept, he said, they were not Tears
of Sorrow, but Floods from the excess of Joy.

10. Robert Brighurst, who poisoned himself, Anno 1680. He confessed to a
Minister, whom he sent for to pray with him, That he had cast off Prayers two
or three Years ago, and that now he found his Heart so hardened, that he could
not form it to Prayer.

11. Francis Kirk, executed at Tyburn, Anno 1684. for murdering his Wife. The
Question being asked him, where was his Wife? he changed Color, and fell into
a Fit of Trembling; and being carried before a Magistrate, confessed he had
murdered her. A Note was left in her Pocket, signifying the Place of her Abode,
which the infatuated Murderer (Divine Providence so ordering it) had not taken
away; and so the Fact was discovered. After his Condemnation, being remanded
back to Newgate: O, said he, had the happy Words of a Text, which I lately
heard, been but well observed by me, how happy had I now been! And, O that all
young Men would seriously mind them, viz. Wherewithal shall a young Man cleanse
his way? by ruling himself after the Word of God. And then commenting on the
First Psalm, he said, But, O Wretch that I am! I walked in the Counsel of the
Ungodly, and stood in the way of Sinners, and sat in the Seat of the Scornful.
Confessing himself, at the Place of Execution, to be a young Man, but a great
Sinner.

12. John Atherton, executed at Dublin in Ireland, for unnatural Concupiscence:
One thing, he said, troubled him much; which was, his Neglect and Disrespect of
his Mother; acknowledging, according to the Fifth Commandment, that his Days
were therefore justly shortened. The Morning of the Day of his Execution, when
the Divines came to visit him, he cried out, as in a Rapture, O my God has
heard me, about Four or Five of the Clock this Morning; for the space of an
Hour and an half I have had that Sweetness in my Soul, that Refreshment in my
Heart, that I am not able to express! Comparing it to the hidden Manna, and the
white Stone, which no Man knows, but he that has it: Finding such Joy, as if
he had been in the Suburbs of Heaven already. When he was in view of the
Gallows, he said, There is my Mount Calvary, from whence I hope to ascend to
Heaven. He confessed and lamented his Neglect of Private Prayer in his Family;
for which, and other Sins, God suffered him to fall.

13. Thomas Holland, Executed near Southwark, Anno 1687. for the Murder of his
Wife. Being apprehended and committed to the Marshalsea, he confessed and
lamented his Drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, and other Sins; his Neglect of
Prayer, and the Public Worship of God, which brought him to that untimely End:
Exhorting the People, at the Place of Execution, to the well-spending of their
Time, laying up for themselves Treasures in Heaven, etc.

14. Thomas Watson, Executed (for murdering his Wife) on Kenington-Common, in
the County of Surrey, March the 19th. 1687. made this his last Speech. I
beseech you, Good People, who come to see my shameful and ignominious End and
Death, which I little expected one day to come to, that you would take Warning,
and not give way to Passion, which many times makes Men do what they least
design: For when a Man is enraged, the Devil, many times, prevails against him
with his Temptations. As for my part, I did no more design to act the Crime,
for which I suffer, than to do hurt to my own Heart; but what I did, I did out
of a sudden Rashness, and I hope in Christ Jesus I shall find Pardon for it.
See the Narrative.

15. Captain Winterflood, condemned for Pyracy, 1675. at the Gallows, begged
all to consider his Condition, and acquainted them with his Life and
Conversation: He told them he had been a great Sinner; but most of all he
lamented his Sin of Swearing. He said, it was a common Thing for him to swear
by the precious Blood of his dear Savior: A Saying so common amongst the
Seamen, when they should be admiring God's Wonders in the Deep, when they are
in a Storm, and know not but the next Billow will turn them to the bottom of
the Sea, and their Souls before the Righteous Judge of Quick and Dead; yet
they, in the midst of such Dangers, did usually swear most. He begged, that
they would take Warning by him, and learn to get an honest Livelihood, and then
God would bless them. He called a Psalm, and prayed very heartily to God, that
he would forgive him, though his Sins were great; yet he said, he knew there
was Virtue enough in Christ's Blood, to cleanse him, at whose Feet he would
throw himself; who, I hope, had Mercy on him, as he had on the Thief on the
Cross. See the Narrative, published, 1675.

16. A Brief Account of the Penitential End of Thomas Mackerness, extracted
from the larger Narrative, written by Mr. Buroughs, Minister at Wisbech.
THomas Mackerness, late of March in the Isle of Ely, was a Man of a most
Profligate and Heinously Wicked course of Life. As to his Parentage and
Education, (being utterly a stranger to him till after his Condemnation) I can
say nothing, nor is it much material. But by his own Confession to me, and
others, he was famous, or rather infamous for all manner of Impieties; living
many Years in such a Dissolute, Flagitious, and Atheistical way, as was
extremely hazardous to his Soul's Eternal welfare, and exposed him to the Fatal
stroke of Justice, even from Men here: He told me, that for Drunkenness,
Swearing, Whoring, and Theft, none had exceeded him; that in these Capital and
Epidemical Sins of the Age, it was not possible to apprehend how Notorious he
had been. I observed in him some kindly beginnings of True Repentance; which I
labored to promote with utmost diligence. He showed me several Books lent to
him, concerning which he asked my Advice: My Reply was, That he had not time to
read Books, and that I judged it best to lay them all aside, except the Bible,
and a little Book, Entitled, A Guide for Heaven; because it contained
Excellent Directions for a saving Close with Christ.

I directed him to several Texts of Scripture, which I desired him to Peruse,
and Meditate upon, in my absence: He thankfully accepted my Directions, and
when I returned in the Evening, he saluted me on this manner; Welcome, welcome
Guest indeed! I can now tell you, that you, and none but such as you are, that
come to do my Soul good, are welcome to me. One might read a mavelous change
of his inward Disposition in his Countenance; he seemed transported with more
than ordinary sense of the Quickening and Comforting Influences of Divine
Grace: I have been considering (says he) the Advice you gave me, and
Meditating on those Scriptures you directed me to: And, Oh! I see it is Nothing
but a Christ will do me good: Oh the sweet Promises that God has made to
Returning Sinners! Blessed be God I am out of Hell. I had thought I had been in
Hell in the Night; I saw, as it were, Hell Gaping, the Devil Roaring, and my
own Conscience Condemning me to the Pit of Hell; and indeed crying out with
Horror, Blood gushed from my Nose: Some that lay in the Room with me, said, I
had been in a Slumber; whether I was or no, I could not well tell, but thought
I might be so. However, when I found my self out of Hell, Oh, how it affected
me! Then he wept and melted kindly, saying, Oh, what a Wretch am I, that I
should sin against so good a God as this, who has declared himself so ready to
forgive! I am resolved to lie at his Feet: I am convinced that I am a lost
undone Creature out of Christ: It is not all I can do, that will or can save
me: Were I to live my Days over again, and spend them in nothing but Prayers
and Tears, that could not Save me; no, it is nothing but the Mercy of God in
Christ, that must save me; and upon this will I trust. I am resolved that at
the last I will lay my self wholly at the Feet of God's Mercy in Jesus Christ,
and there I will die: This he uttered with raised and enlarged Affections. They
have brought my Coffin, and I am not afraid to see it; proceeded he, I thank
God I can freely lie down in it: These Shackles about my Legs are, as if they
were not; I do not regard them. My Heart is so cheared with the consideration
of the Precious Promises God has made to poor perishing Sinners; and why not
to me? And why not to thee indeed, said I? She loved much, to whom much was
forgiven: Ah, replied he, it is much must be forgiven me, Much indeed. More to
this purpose passed between us: Several other Ministers were with him that Day,
and prayed with him, as he told me; what Discourse they had with him I know not.

A little before Execution, enquiring of him, what Confession he thought to
make, he said, he was not inclined to speak much publicly in that respect, for
this reason, That he judged it useless, and at most would only gratify some,
who came for nothing else but to hear him tell a long Story of a Vicious Life,
which was more likely to discompose his own Minds, than tend to their
Edification. Moreover he said, I cannot affect the Guilty, and for others, some
may believe me, some may not: The Guilty know themselves, I will therefore
leave them to God and their own Consciences, wishing them true Repentance, that
they may never come to this miserable End. He did not think fit to go out of
the World accusing others, whom he could no more than accuse, and neither bring
them to deserved Punishment for what they had done hor prevent thereby their
proceeding in the same course of Wickedness: No, for (said he) God must
convince them, and change their hearts, which he did, and would Pray earnestly
for to his last.

He was desirous to employ all his little space in seeking God, and giving up
himself to Jesus Christ in humble Prayer; now and then saying, Oh! my Time is
short, within a few hours, yea, moments, I shall be in Eternity; O vain World!

Requesting me often not to leave him till Death separated us, I accompanied him
to the Place of Execution, where I prayed with him, committing his Soul to God,
he joined with me with great Ardency: Then was sung the latter part of the
39th. Psalm by his Appointment; in singing whereof he seemed elevated in Heart
and Voice above most present. At last, turning about, and looking round on the
Multitude, he took his Farewell in these words, or words to the like effect.

Gentle Spectators, You are come to see a sinful miserable Wretch suffer this
Ignominious Death; I thank God it is not terrible to me, for I trust that I
shall find Mercy with God for my poor Soul, through the precious Blood of my
sweet Jesus. You may see here what Sin will bring you to; Oh, take warning by
me; take heed of Sin; shun Temptations^ flee Ezsil Company; beware of
Sabbath-breaking, for by this Sin the Devil begins with many to draw them to
all manner of Wickedness, so he did with me; Oh, forsake all your Evil Wars!
turn to the Lord, he is a gracious God. Oh, vile Wretch! that I have so sinned
against a holy, just, and merciful God: I have been a Prodigal indeed, but I
hope now a Returning one; Oh, that they that have been my Companions in
Mischief, may Repent before it be too late! I beg of them to fear God, and mind
their Souls: There may be some of them that hear me at this time, the Lord
touch their hearts: Oh, do not still go on! you are known to God, who will call
you to Account for all one day: Think of it, I beseech you; the Lord give you
true Repentance, and Pardon your Sins, that you may not come to this miserable
End you see me come to. With more to the like purpose.

Then Resigning himself to God, and begging Acceptance with him, for the Merits
of a Dear and All-sufficient Redeemer, he ended this Temporal and Miserable
Life. Thus far Mr. Buroughs.

CHAP. CXLV. The Last Wills of Persons Remarkable for their Oddness and
Singularity.
HAving had occasion to mention before several Wills with a particular Respect
to Charities bestowed, and some which were Remarkably Serious and Devout; here
I shall present the Reader with a few that I thought not very suitable to
either of those Heads, having something of Oddness, or Levity, or Brevity in
them extraordinary.

1. I have already spoken of Endamidas the Corinthian, who dying Poor, left his
Aged Mother to Aretaeus, and his Young Daughter to Charixenus, two Rich Friends
of his; the one to be maintained till she died, and the other till she married.
She the Chapter of Remarkable Friendship.

2. Hilarion is reported at Eighty Years Old, to have made this Will: All my
Wealth, that is, the Gospel, and one Hair Vest, my Coat, and little Cloak, I
leave to my most loving Friend Hesychius. Mourning Ring.

3. Antonius the Great, this; As for the Place of my Burial, let none know, but
your own Love; my Felt and old Cloak, give it to Athanasius, which he gave me
when it was new: Let Serapion take the other, which is somewhat better: Do you
take my Hair Garment. And so Farewell, my Bowels; for Antony is going. Ibid.

4. I Acathius Victor have been running to Eternity from A.C. 1581. and have
Eternity in my Mind: Now I commend my Spirit to God, my Body to the Earth and
Worms: But as for Estate, nothing now is mine, but Good Will, which I carry
with me to the Tribunal of God. Ibid.

5. S. Hierom, Martyr, left his Estate to his Mother and Sister; but to
Rusticius (the Chief Magistrate of Ancyra) his Right Hand, already cut off.
Ibid.

6. Zisca bequeathed his Skin to make a Drum, and his Flesh to the Fowls of the
Air, and Wild Beasts. Ibid.

7. A Woman left her Cat 500 Crowns, to maintain her with Food so long as she
lived.

8. I have mentioned already an Old Witch, that on her Deathbed bequeathed her
Imp (the Devil) to her Daughter.

9. Luther was more serious and wise, when he in his Last Will bequeathed his
Wife to God, who gave her.

10. Cardinal Bellarmine, as I have noted before, makes a long sputter in his
Last Will, about his Disposal of a few Clothes, and fine Pictures, etc.

11. I have been credibly informed, that a certain Schoolmaster in Shropshire,
making his Will, his Wife (who had always the Whip-hand over him) standing by,
took occasion frequently to Advise the Clerk that wrote for him, or rather to
Correct and altar what her Husband dictated; he not daring, or not caring at
that time of his Weakness, to gainsay or resist her; when he was called to Seal
and Subscribe, he wrote not in English, but Greek, This is the Will of Penelope
Chaloner. The Will being thus finished, to her great Satisfaction, she would
not depart, till she had got it into her own Custody, that it might be safely
kept. At last, upon some Difference between her Son and her arising, it was
produced, to her great shame and disappointment.

12. Going one time to Major Trevers his House in Cheshire, I met with the
Major at Tarvia, near his House, where there had been a Lecture that day,
permitted by Bishop Wilkins, and kept up by the Neighboring Clergy: The Major
told me, That the Preacher for that Day had this pleasant (shall I say? or odd)
Passage in his Sermon: A Scotch Lord, or Gentleman, having sent or a Clerk to
make his Will, began to him thus (after the common Preface,) Imprimis, I
bequeath my Soul to God -- To which his Clerk made answer very seriously -- But
what if he wonnot take it, Mon! With what temper of Spirit it was then spoken,
I know not; but sure I am, it is a Point that deserves a serious Thoughtfulness,
and Gravity of Mind.

CHAP. CXLVI. Remarkable Instances of Sudden Death.
WHO will not stand upon his Guard against the Efforts of Death, that threaten
us every Hour, who has appointed no time when he intends to meet us? He creeps,
flies, leaps upon us, with a tacit motion, a stealing pace, making no signs
beforehand, without any cause, without any caution, in-sickness, in health, in
danger, in security; so that there is nothing sacred or safe from his clutches.
No Man ( says the Reverend Mr. Veal, in his Sermon concerning the Danger of a
Deathbed Repentance) knows the time of his Death, any more than the manner of
it, or means by which it shall be brought about. Our breath is in God's hands,
Dan. 5.23. No Man has a Lease of his Earthly Tabernacle, but is Tenant at Will
to his Great Landlord. Who knows when he shall die, or how? Whether a Natural
Death, or a violent one? To how many thousand unforeseen Accidents are Men
subject? Not only Swords and Axes may dispatch them, but God can Commission
Infects and Vermin to be the Executioners of his Justice upon them. A great
Prelate may be eaten up of Mice (Hatto, Archbishop of Mentz) and a Patent
Prince devoured by Worms, Acts 12.23. And who does not carry the Principles of
his own Dissolution perpetually within him? Death lies in Ambush in every Vein,
in every Member, and none know when it may assault them. It does not always
warn before it strikes. If some Diseases are Chronical, others are Acute and
less lingering, and some are as quick as Lightning, kill in an instant. Men may
be well in one moment, and dead in the next. God shoots his Arrows at them,
they are suddenly wounded, Psalm. 64.7. How many are taken away not only in the
midst of their days, but in the midst of their sins? The lusting Israelites
with the flesh between their teeth, Numb. 11.33. Julian (if Historians speak
truth) with Blasphemy in his mouth; and how many frequently with the Wine in
their heads? In such cases what place, what time for Repentance, for seeking
it, for using means to attain it, when they have not room for so much as a
thought of it? Thus far Mr. Veal. I now proceed to Instances of Sudden Death.

Sound and merry was Tarquin, when he was choked with a Fish-bone. Healthy
also was Fabius, when a little Hair that he swallowed with his Milk, cut the
Thread of his Life. A Weezel bit Aristides, and in a moment of time he expired.
The Father of Caesar the Dictator, rose well out of his Bed, and while he was
putting on his Shoes he breathed his last. The Rhodian Ambassador had pleaded
his Cause in the Senate even to Admiration, but expired going over the
Threshold of the Courthouse. A Grape-stone killed Anacreon the Poet, and if we
may believe Lucian, Sophocles also. Lucia, the Daughter of Marcus Aurelius,
died with a littie prick of a Needle. Cn. Brebius Pamphilus, being in his
Pretorship, when he asked the time of the Day of a certain Youth, perceived
that to be the last hour of his Life. The Breath of many is in haste, and
unexpected Joy expels it. As we find it happened to Chilo the Lacedaemonian,
and Diagoras of Rhodes, who embracing their Sons, that had been Victors at the
Olympic Games, at the same time, and in the same place presently expired.
Lastly, Death has infinite accesses, through which he breaks into our Houses.
Sometimes through the Windows, sometimes through the Vaults, sometimes through
the Copings of the Wall, sometimes through the Tyles; and if he cannot meet
with any Traitors either in the City, or in the House; I mean, the Humors of
the Body, Diseases, Catarrhs, Pleurisies, and the like, which he makes use of
as Ministers in his Councils; he tears up the Gates with Gunpowder, Fire,
Water, Pestilence, Venom, nay, Wild Monsters, and Men themselves as bad; he
leaves no Engines untryed to snatch and force away our Lives.

Mephibosheth, the Son of Saul, was slain by Domestic Thieves as he was
sleeping at Noon upon his Bed. Fulco, King of Jerusalem, as he was Hunting a
Hare, fell from his Horse, and was trampled to Death by his hoofs, and so gave
up the Ghost. Josias, of all the Kings of Judah, David excepted, for Piety,
Sanctimony, and Liberality the chief, was unexpectedly wounded with an Arrow,
and died in his Camp. The Holy Ludovicus in the 57th. Year of his Age, upon the
African Shore, in the midst of his Army, the Pestilence there raging, died of
the Distemper. Egillus, King of the Goths, a most Excellent Prince, was killed
by a Mad Bull, which the madder People, not enduring the severity of his Laws,
had let forth. Malcolm the First, King of Scotland, after many Examples of
Justice, while he was taking Cognizance of the Actions of his Subjects by
Night, was on a sudden suffocated. Have not many gone well to Bed, that have
been found dead in the Morning? Of necessity the Soul ought to stand upon its
Guard. Vzza, a Person of no small Note in David's Lifeguard, when he attempted
to stay the shogging Ark, as it was carried in Triumph to Jerusalem, was
presently struck from Heaven, so that he died by the Ark. The hand of God armed
a Lion out of a Wood against the Prophet, that had eaten contrary to his
Command. The sudden voice of Peter compelled Anazias and Saphira to expiate
their Crime by as sudden a Death, whose Souls, the greatest part of Divines
believe to be freed from Eternal Punishment thereby. But enough of Ancient
Examples.

Charles the Eighth of France having concluded a Marriage between his Daughter
Magdalene and Ladislaus, King of Bohemia, while the Bride with great Pomp was
conveyed toward her intended Husband, he was taken suddenly with Sickness and
died. Chetwind 's Hist. Collections.

In the Year 1559. Henry the Second, King of France, was slain in the midst of
his Pastimes and Triumphs, and in public Joy of the People. For while he
Celebrated the Nuptials of his Daughter at Paris, in a Tilting, the Splinter of
a broken Lance flew with such violence, and pierced his Eye, that he died
immediately. In the Year 1491. Alphonsus, the Son of John the Second, King of
Portugal, being about Sixteen Years of Age, a Prince of great Hopes and Wit,
took to Wife Isabella the Daughter of Ferdinand King of Spain, whose Dowry was
the ample Inheritance of her Father's Kingdoms. The Nuptials were celebrated
with the preparations of Six Hundred Triumphs. Plays, Running; Racing, Tilting,
Banquets. So much Plenty, so much Luxury, that the Horse-boys and Slaves
glistered in Tissue. But, oh immense Grief! hardly the Seventh Month had
passed, when the young Prince, sporting a Horseback upon the Banks of Tagus,
was thrown from his Horse to the Ground, so that his Scull was broken, and he
wounded to Death. He was carried to a Fisher's House, scarce big enough to
contain him and two of his Followers; there he lay down upon a Bed of Straw,
and expired. The King flies thither, with the Queen his Mother: There they
behold the miserable Spectacle; their Pomp turned into Lamentation: The growing
Youth of their Son, his Virtues, Wealth, like Flowers on a sudden disrobed by
the North-winds blast, and all to be buried in a miserable Grave. O the sudden
Whirlwinds of Human Affairs! O most precipitate Falls of the most constant
Things!

What shall I remember any more? Basilius the Emperor was gored to death by a
Heart, while he was entangled in a troublesome Bough. The ancient Monument in
the Camp of Ambrosius, near Aenipontus, witnesses, That a Noble Youth, though
under Age, set Spurs to his Horse, to make him leap a Ditch twenty foot broad.
The Horse took it; but the Rider and the Horse fell by a sudden, and almost the
same kind of death. That the Spoils of the Horse, and the Garments of the
Youth, speak to this Day.

But this sudden Fate is common, as well to the Good as to the Bad; neither
does it argue an unhappy Condition of the Soul, unless any Person in the Act of
burning Impiety, feel himself struck with the Dart of Divine Vengeance. Such
was the Exit of Dathan and Abiram, whom the gaping Earth miserably swallowed
up, obstinate in their Rebellion against Moses. Such was the End of those
Soldiers, whom; for their Irreverence to Elijah, Heaven consumed with Balls of
Fire. Such was the End of the Hebrew, whom the Revengers Sword passed thorough,
finding him in the Embraces of the Midianitess, turning his Genial into his
Funeral Bed.

So many Pores of the Body, so many little Doors for Death. Death does not show
himself always near, yet is he always at hand. What is more stupid, than to
wonder that that should fall out at any time, which may happen every Day? Our
Limits are determined where the inexorable necessity of Fate has fixed them.
But none of us knows how near they are prefixed. So therefore let us form our
Minds, as if we were at the utmost extremity. Let us make no Delay.

Death has infinite accesses. So it is indeed; and to what I have said, I add:
It is reported, that a certain Person dreamed, that he was torn by the Jaws of
a Lion. He rises, careless of his Dream, and goes to Church with his Friends:
In the way, he sees a Lion of Stone gaping, that upheld a Pillar. Then
declaring his Dream to his Companions, not without Laughter; Behold, said he,
this is the Lion that tore me in the Night. So saying, he thrust his Hand into
the Lyon's Jaws, crying to the Statue, Thou have thy Enemy; now shut thy Jaws,
and, if thou can, bite my Hand. He had no sooner said the Word, but he
received a deadly Wound in that place where he thought he could have no harm;
for at the bottom of the Lyon's Mouth lay a Scorpion, which no sooner felt his
Hand, but he put forth his Sting, and stung the young Man to death. Are Stones
thus endued with Anger? Where then is not Death, if Lions of Stone can kill? In
the same manner died the young Hylas, who was killed by a Viper that lay hid in
the Mouth of a Bear's resemblance in Stone.

What, shall I mention the Child killed by an Isicle dropping upon his Head
from the Penthouse? whom Martial laments in the following Verses.

Where next the Vipsan Pillars stands the Gate,
From whence the falling Rain wets Cloak and Hat,
A Child was passing by, when, strange to tell,
Upon his Throat a frozen drop there fell,
Where, while the Boy his cruel Fate bemoaned,
The tender point straight melted in the Wound.
Would Chance have us adore her lawless Will?
Or tell where Death is not, if Drops can kill?
It Is the Saying of Annaeus: Uncertain it is, says he, in what place Death may
expect thee; therefore do thou expect Death in every place.

We trifle, and at distance think the Ill,
While in our Bowels Death lies lurking still:
For in the moment of our Birthday Morn,
That moment Life and Death conjoined were born;
And of that Thread, with which our Lives we measure,
Our Thievish Hours still make a rapid ^^^zure.
Insensibly we die; so Lamps expire,
When wanting Oil, to feed the greedy Fire.
Though living still, yet Death is then so nigh,
That oft-times as we speak, we speaking die.
Senccio Cornelius, a Roman Knight, a Man of extreme Frugality, no less careful
of his Patrimony than of his Body, when he had sat all Day, till Night, by his
Friend sick a Bed, beyond all Hopes of Recovery, when he had Supped well and
cheary, was taken with a violent Distemper, the Quinsey, scarcely retained his
Breath within his contracted Jaws till Morning; so that he deceased within a
few Hours, after he had performed all the Duties of a sound and healthy Man.

What follows, is extracted from Mr. Increase Mather's Book of Remarkable
Providence.
I Shall only add (says he) at present, That there have been many sudden Deaths
in this Country, which should not pass without some Remark: For when such
Strokes are multiplied, there is undoubtedly a speaking Voice of Providence
therein. And so it has been with us in New England, this last Year, and most
of all the last Summer. To my Observation, in August last, within the space of
three or four Weeks, there were twelve sudden Deaths, (and it may be others
have observed more than I did) some of them being, in respect of sundry
Cirrumstances, exceeding awful. Let me only add here, that sudden Death is not
always a Judgment unto those who are taken out of an evil World: It may be a
Mercy to them, and a Warning unto others, as the sudden Death of the Prophet
Ezekiel's Wife was. Many, of whom the World was not worthy, have been so
removed out of it. Moses died suddenly; and so have some excellent Persons in
this Country done. Governor Eaton, at New Haven; and Governor Hains, at
Hartford, died in their Sleep, without being sick. That Excellent Man of God,
Mr. Norton, as he was walking in his House in this Boston, was taken with a
Syncope, fell down dead, and never spoke more.

Nor is there any Rule or Reason for Christians to pray absolutely against
sudden Death. Some Holy Men have, with submission to the Will of the most High,
desired and prayed for such a Death. So did Mr. Capel, and God gave him his
Desire; for on September, 21. 1656. having Preached twice that Day, and
performed Religious Duties with his Family, he went to Bed, and died
immediately. The like is reported by Dr. Fuller, in his Church History,
concerning that Angesical Man, Mr. Brightman, who would often pray, (if God saw
fit) that he might die rather a sudden than a lingering Death; and so it came to
pass: For as he was traveling in the Coach with Sir John Osborne, and reading
of a Book (for he would lose no time) he was taken with a Fainting Fit; and
though instantly taken out in the Arms of one there present, and all means
possible used for his Recovery, he there died, August 24. 1607. The Learned and
Pious Wolfius (not the Divine, who has written Commentaries on several Parts of
the Scriptures; but he that published Lectionum Memorabilium and Reconditarum
Centenarios) on May 23. 1600. being in usual Health, was, after he had Dined,
surprised with a sudden illness, whereof he died within a few Hours. That Holy
man, Jacobus Faber, who did and suffered great things for the Name of Christ,
went suddenly into the silent Grave: On a Day, when some Friends came to visit
him, after he had courteously entertained them, he laid himself down upon his
Bed, to take some Repose; and no sooner shut his Eyes, but his Heaven-born Soul
took its flight into the World of Souls.

The Man, who being in Christ, shall always be doing something for God, may bid
Death Welcome, when ever it shall come, be it never so soon, never so suddenly.
Thus far Mr. Mather.

God who is a Rewarder of those who diligently seek him, was pleased to give a
Quietus est to the Reverend Mr. Hurst, suddenly taking him from his Work, to
receive his Wages, advancing him from the Pulpit to the Throne, ( April 14.
1690.) as he did the laborious Bishop Jewel, (who was first of the same Merton
College in Oxford) in somewhat alike manner, from preaching at Lacock in
Wiltshire; (now near an Hundred and twenty Years since) who had said to a
Gentleman dissuading him from preaching then, It did best become a Bishop to
die preaching (or standing) in the Pulpit, seriously thinking of that
comfortable Elogy of his Lord and Master (which you heard our Preacher chose
for his Text at the Interment of Mr. Cawton) Happy art thou, my Servant, if
when I come I find thee doing. Mr. Wells, and Mr. Pledger, were (if I mistake
not) both struck with sudden Death on the Lord's Day. An Ingenious Poet of our
own, said in his Jambicks of the excellent Mr. Vines, who went to his eternal
Rest the Night after his Preaching and Administering the Lord's Supper, (the
beginning of March, 1655.) Abit, (beata Mors!) Modis oportet hisce Episcopum
mori. And another then, to the same purpose, in our Mother Tongue wrote also:
Our English Luther, Vines (whose Death Iweep)
Stole away (and said nothing) in a Sleep:
Sweet like a Swan, he Preached that Day he went,
And for his Cordial, took a Sacrament.
Had it but been suspected -- he would die,
His People sure had stopped him with a Cry.


But his Hour was then come; and so was that of the famous Mr. Hollingworth at
Manchester, who when at a Fast in Praying and Preaching he had as far outdone
himself that Day, as he used to outdoe other Ministers, changed his Habitation
here for a better (having done his Work) upon the irresistible Stroke of a
deadly Apoplexy. So was that (as I have heard) of the holy Mr. Ambrose. So that
of the laborious and much-followed Mr. Watson, and we know lately of our
Brother Mr. Oaks, carried out of the Pulpit: As was the Learned and Pious
Professor, Dr. Joshua Hoyl, out of the University Pulpit in Oxford. Death which
came to him was in have, and made quick dispatch; it gave one blow, and down he
fell.

Mr. Thomas Gouge died (says Archbishop Tillotson, who preached his Funeral
Sermon) in the 77th. Year of his Age, October. 29th. 1681. It so pleased God
(adds this Great Author) that his Death was so sudden, that in all probability
he himself hardly perceived it when it happened; for he died in his Sleep. So
that we may say of him, as it is said of David: After he had served his
Generation, according to the Will of God, he fell asleep. I confess (continues
our Author) that a sudden Death is generally undesirable, and therefore with
Reason we pray against it, because so very few are sufficiently prepared for
it. But to him, the constant Employment of whose Life was the best Preparation
for Death, that was possible no Death could be sudden, nay it was rather a
Favor and Blessing to him; because, by how much the more sudden, so much the
more easy: As if God had designed to begin the Reward of the great Pains of
his Life, in an easy Death. And indeed it was rather a Translation than a
Death, and saving that his Body was left behind, what was said of Enoch may not
unfitly be applied to this Pious and Good Man, with respect to the suddenness
of his Change, He walked with God, and was not, for Good took him. See his
Funeral Sermon.

CHAP. CXLVII. EPITAPHS.
MANY Instances of EPITAPHS, in Prose and in Verse, may be collected from the
old Greek Poets and Historians, who yet were but Children, compared to the
Chaldeans and Egyptians: But the Ancientest President of Epitaphs must be that
recorded in the Ancientest History, viz. the Old Testament, 1 Samuel 6.18. where
it is recorded, that the Great Stone erected as a Memorial unto Abel, by his
Father Adam, remained unto that Day in being, and its Name was called the Stone
of Abel, and its Elegy was, Here was shed the Blood of Righteous Abel, as it is
also called 4000 Years after, Mattn. 23.35. and this is the Original of
Monumental Memorials and Elegies.

1. St. Bernard 's Epitaph, made by one Adam, a Canon Regular.

Clarae sunt Valles, sed claris Vallibus Abbas
Clarior, his clarum nomen in Orb dedit.
Clarus avis, clarus meritis and clarus honor,
Claruit ingenio, and religione magis.
Mors est clara, cinis clarus, clarumque sepulchrum,
Clarior exultat Spiritus ante Deum.
Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 105. 2. The Epitaph upon Bid, made by one of
his Scholars.

Hac sunt in Fossa Bedae Snacti Ossa.
But in the Morning this was found on his Tomb.
Hac sunt in Fossa, Bedae Venerabilis Ossa.
Ibid. p. 101. 3. Luther had many made upon him; as, Roma Orbum domuit; Romam
sibi Papa subegit; Viribus illa suis, fraudibus iste suis.
Quanto isto major Lutherus, major and illa;
Istum illamque uno qui domuit calamo!
I nunc, Alciden memorato Graecia mendax;
Lutheri ad calamum ferrea clava nihil.
Theod. Beza.

Another.

Lutherus Decimum confregit strage Leonem;
De clava noli quaerere, penna fuit.
Joh. Major. 4. Zuinglius had this.

Zuinglius arderet gemino cum Sanctus amore,
Nempe Dei imprimis, deinde suae Patriae;
Dicitur in solidum se devovisse duobus,
Nempe Deo imprimis, deinde suae Patriae;
Quam been persolvit simul istis vota Duobus,
Pro Patria exanimis, pro Pietate Cinis!
Theod. Beza. 5. John Picus Mirandula, who lived apace, and did a great deal in
a little time, dying in the 32d. Year of his Age, had this Epitaph engraven
upon his Tomb, in St. Mary 's Church in Florence, belonging to the Jacobine
Friars.

Joannes jacet hic Mirandula, caetera norunt
Et Tagus and Ganges, forsan and Antipodes.
Boisardus in Biblioth. 6. John Brentius was buried with much Honor, and had
this Epitaph.

Voce, Stylo, Pietate, Fide, Candore probatus
Joannes, tali Brentius ore fuit.
In English. With Voice, Style, Piety, Faith, and Candor graced,
In outward shape, John Brentius was thus faced.
Full. Abel. Rediv. p. 298. 7. John Knox had this Epitaph bestowed upon him in
extempore Expression, while his Corpse was putting in the Ground, by the Earl
of Murray.

Here lies one, who in his Lifetime never feared the Death of any Man.

Ibid. p. 324. 8. Wigandus made his own Epitaph.

In Christo vixi, morior, vivoque Wigandus,
Do sordes morti, caetera, Christ, tibi.
In English.
In Christ I lived, and die, and live again;
My Filth to Earth I give, my Soul with Christ shall reign.
Ibid. p. 369. 9. Mr. John Fox has this upon his Tomb, in St. Giles 's Church,
without Cripplegate. Christo S. S.

Johanni Foxo, Ecclesiae Anglicanae Martyrologo Fidelissimo, Antiquitatis
Historicae indagatori sagacissimo, Evangelicae Veritatis Propugnatori acerrimo,
Thaumaturgo Admirabili; qui Martyrs Marianos, tanquam Phoenices, ex cineribus
redivivos praestitit, Patri suo omni pietatis Officio imprimis colendo, Samuel
Foxus illius primogenitus hoc Monumentum posuit, non sine lachrymis. Obiit die
18 Men's. Apr. A. D. 1587. jam Septuagenarius.

Vita vitae mortalis est, spes vitae immortalis.

Ibid. p. 38^. 10. Bishop Andrews had this most excellent, significant, and
speaking Epitaph, Lector,

Si Christianus es, siste;
Morae pretium erit,
Non nescire Te, Qui vir hic situs sit,
Ejusdem tecum, Catholicae Ecclesiae membrum,
Sub eadem foelicis Resurrectionis spe,
Eandem D. Jesu praestolans Epiphaniam,
Sacratissimus Antistes, Lancelotus Andrews,
Londini oriundus, educatus Cantabrigiae,
Aulae Pembrock. Alumnorum, Sociorum,
Praefectorum
Unus, and nemini secundus;
Linguarum, Artium, Scientiarum,
Humanorum, Divinorum Omnium
Infinitus Thesaurus, stupendum Oraculum:
Orthodoxae Christi Ecclesiae,
Dictis, scriptis, precibus, exemplo,
Incomparabile Propugnaculum:
Reginae Elizabethae a Sacris,
D. Pauli, London. Residentiarius,
D. Petri Westmonast. Decanus,
Episcopus Cicestrensis, Eliensis, Wintoniensis,
Regique Jacobo tum ab Eleemosynis,
Tum ab utriusque Regni Consiliis,
Decanus denique Sacelli Regii.
Idem ex
Indefessa opera in studiis,
Summa sapientia in rebus,
Assidua pietate in Deum,
Profu^a largitate in egenos,
Rara amenatate in suos,
Spectata probitate in omnes,
Aeternum admirandus:
Annorum pariter and publicae famae satur,
Sed Bonorum passim omnium cum luctu denatus,
Celebs hinc migravit ad Aureolam caelestem,
Anno Regis Carolis Secundo, Aetatis suae 71. Christi MDCXXVI.

Tantum est, Lector, Quod Te merentes Posteri
Nunc volebant, atque ut ex voto tuo valeas, Dicto
Sit Deo Gloria.
Mr. Issaacson in his Life. 11. Dr. Reinolds had this Epitaph bestowed upon him
by Dr. Spencer, his Successor, with an Inscription in Golden Letters.

Virtuti Sacrum.

Johanni Rainolde, S. Theologiae D. Eruditione, Pietate, Integritate, hujus
Collegii Pres. qui obiit Maii 21. A. 1607. Aetatis suae 58. Johannes Spencer,
Auditor, Successor, Virtutum and Sanctitatis admirator, h. e. amoris ergo
posuit.

Fuller. Abel Rediviv. p. 491. 12. Archbishop Parker had this engraven upon his
Tomb in Lambeth Chapel, composed by Dr. Haddon.

Matthew Parker lived sober and wise,
Learned by study and continual practice;
Loving, True, of Life uncontrolled;
The Court did foster him, both young and old.
Orderly he dealt, the Right he did defend;
He lived to God, to God he made his End.
Ibid. p. 530. 13. In the last Year of the Reign of King Henry he Second, more
than 600 Years after the time of his Death, the Body of King Arthur was found
in the Churchyard of Glastenbury betwixt two Pyramids therein standing. He was
laid no less than 16 foot deep in the Ground, for fear (as Hollinshead writes)
the Saxons should have found him; and surely the searchers for his Body would
have never dug so deep, had they not at seven foot depth found a mighty
broad Stone, to which a Leaden Cross was fastened, and in that side that lay
downwards, in barbarous Letters (according to the rudeness of that Age) this
Inscription was written upon that side of the Lead that was toward the Stone.

Hic jacet sepultus inclytus Rex Arturius,
In insula Avalonia.
Here lies King Arthur, buried in the Isle of Avalodonia.
Nine foot deeper, in the Trunk of a Tree, was his Body found buried, his Bones
being of a mavelous bigness; the space of his Forehead betwixt his two Eyes,
was a span broad, and his Shin-bone being set in the Ground, reached up to the
middle Thigh of a very tall Man; ten Wounds appeared in his Scull, one whereof
was very great, and plain to be seen. His Wife, Queen Guinever, lay buried
likewise with him, the Tresses of whose Hair, (the last of our Excrements that
perish) finely pleated, and of color like the burnished Gold, seemed whole
and perfect until it was touched, but then (to show what all Beauties are) it
immediately fell to dust. Engl. Worthies, by Will Winstanley, p. 14.

14. The old Verses which were written on Geoffery Chaucer's Grave, at first,
were these.

Galfridus Chaucer vates and sama Poesis,
Maternae haec sacra sum tumulatus humo.
15. Mr. Michael Drayton was buried, Anno 1631. in Westminster- Abbey, near the
South Door, by these two eminent Poets, Geoffery Chaucer, and Edmund Spencer,
with this Epitaph.

Do, pious Marble, let the Readers know
What they, and what their Children owe
To Drayton's Name, whose sacred Dust
We recommend unto thy Trust.
Protect his Memory, and preserve his Story,
Remain a lasting Monument of his Glory;
And thy Ruins shall disclaim
To be the Treasurer of his Name:
His Name, that cannot fade, shall be
An everlasting Monument to thee.
16. Ben. Johnson bestowed this as part of an Epitaph on his eldest Son, dying
an Infant.

Rest in soft Peace; and (asked) say, Here does lie
Ben Johnson his best piece of Poetry.
He died himself, Anno Domini 1638. and was buried about the Belfry in the
Abby-Church at Westminster, having only upon a Pavement over his Grave, this
written.

O Rare Ben Johnson!

17. Mr. William Shakespeare was buried at Stratford upon Avon, The Town of his
Nativity, upon whom one has bestowed this Epitaph.

Renowned Spencer, lie a thought more nigh
To learned Chaucer, and a rare Beaumont lie
A little nearer Spencer, to make room
For Shakespeare, in your threefold, fourfold Tomb;
To lodge all Four in one Bed make a shift
Until Doomsday, for hardly will a Fifth,
Betwixt this Day and that, by Fates be slain,
For whom your Curtains may be drawn again.
If your precedence in Death do bar
A Fourth place in your sacred Sepulcher,
Under this sacred Marble of thine own,
Sleep, rare Tragedian Shakespeare! sleep alone;
Thy unmolested Peace, in an unshared Cave,
Possess as Land, not Tenant of the Grave;
That unto us, and others, it may be
Honor hereafter to be laid by thee.
18. Sir. John Mandevile, who died at Liege in Germany, the 17th. Day of
November, Anno 1372. had this Inscription upon his Tomb.

Hic jacet vir nobilis Dr. Joannes de Mandevile, Al. D. and Barbam Miles;
Dominus de Campdi; Natus de Anglia; Medicine Professor, devotissimus Orator,
and bonorum Largissimus pauperibus erogator, qui toto quasi orb Instracto.
Leodii diem vitae suae clausit extremum. Anno Dom. M. CCC. LXXI. Men's. November.
die 16. etc.

But the Town of St. Albans will not allow of this, but claim the Honor of his
Interment, as well as that of his Birth; and to this end, they have a Rhiming
Epitaph for him, upon a Pillar; near to which they suppose his Body to have
been buried: Which Epitaph (says Mr. Weaver) being set to some lofty Tune, as
to the Hunting of Antichrist, or the like, it will be well worth the singing.
Thus it runs:

All you that pass by, on this Pillar cast eye,
This Epitaph read if you can;
I will tell you a Tomb once stood in this Room
Of a brave spirited Man.
John Mandevill by Name, a Knight of great Fame,
Born in this honored Town;
Before him was none that ever was known,
For Travel of so high Renown.
As the Knights in the Temple, cross-legg'd in Marble,
In Armor, with Sword and with Shield;
So was this Knight graced, which Time has defaced,
That nothing but Ruins does yield.
His Travels being done, he shine like the Sun
In Heavenly Canaan:
To which blessed Place, O Lord, of his Grace,
Bring us all, Man after Man.
19. Palmer of Orford, within the Diocese of Rochester, had this Epitaph.

Palmers all over Faders were,
I a Palmer lived here;
And Travyld still, till worn with Age,
I ended this World's Pilgrimage,
On the blyst Assention Day,
In the cherful Month of May;
A Thousand with four hundred seven,
And took my Jorney hense to Heaven.
20. Rich. Davy, Master of the Jewel-House, and Mawd his Wife, had this Epitaph.

Pray for the Sowl of Mawd Davy,
Whose Corpse hereunder do lay;
She was Dawter of William Davy,
On whose Soul Jesu hae mercy.
I pray you all for Cherite,
Say a Peter Noster, and an Ave.
21. Rich. Bonevant laid interred in the Stone Church in the Diocese of
Rochester, had this Epitaph.

Preyeth for the Sowl in wey of Cherite
Of Richard Bonevant, late Mercer of London.
For the Brethren and Sisters of this Fraternite,
Owner of this Place, called Castle of the Ston.
Remember him that is laid under Ston.
For his Sowl, and al Christian to prey
To the merciful Jesew, a Pater Noster anon,
And Ave to his Mother, and make no deley,
In March which decessyd the xix dey,
In the Year of our Lord God, who keep him from pyne,
A Thousand four hundred fifty and nine.
22. And Sir John Dew, Priest, this.

O merciful Jesew,
Have Mercy on the Sowl of Sir John Dew.
23. Another thus.

Here lies William Banknot and Anne his Wyff,
Sweet Jesew grant to them and us everlasting Liff.
Pray you hertely for Cherite,
Say a Pater Noster and an Ave. 1400.
24. Another with Arms upon the Monument, thus. Non hominem aspiciam ultra.
Olivio,

25. Another thus.

Vixi, peccavi, penitui, Naturae cessi.

Which was as Christian (says Mr. Cambden) as that was Profane of the Roman:

Amici Dum vivimus Vivamus.

26. In St. Leonard's Foster-lane is this Epitaph.

When the Bells be merely roung,
And Mass devoutly soung,
And the meat merely eaten,
Then sall Robert Trappis, his Wiffs and his Children be forgetten.
27. The Pictures of Robert, Agnes, and Joan, inlaid in Brass, seem thus to
speak.

Sancta Trinitas Unus Deus miserete nobis,
Et Ancillis tuis sperantibus in te.
O Matter Dei memento mei.
Jesu mercy, Lady help.
28. John Brokitwell, an especial Founder, or new Builder of Leonard's
Foster-lane, had this.

All yat will good warks wurch,
Prey for them yat help this Church,
Geuyng Almys for Cherite,
Pater Noster and Ave.
29. Upon Michael Forlace, etc. this.

Prey for the Sowlygs of Michael Forlace, and his Wife, and in the Worschypp of
God and our Lady, for their Faders and Moders, with the Sowlygs of all
Christen, of yowr Cherite sey a Pater Noster and an Ave Maria.

Body. I, Mary Pawson, ly below sleepying.

Soul. I, Mary Pawson, sit above weaking.

Both. We hope to meet again with Glory clothed,

Then Mary Pawson for ever blessed.

30. Upon Sir John Woodcock, Lord Mayor, this.

Hic jacet in requie Woodcock Jon vir generosus,
Major Londonie, Mercerus valde morosus,
Miles qui fuerat.........
M. Domini mill centum quater ruit ille,
Cum X bis.
This John Woodcock was Lord Mayor, Anno Dom. 1405. in which his Office he
caused all the Werers in the River of Thames, from Stanes to the River of
Medway, to be destroyed, and the Trinks to be burned.

31. Tho. Knowles, Lord Mayor, and John his Wife, of St. Anthonies, had this
Epitaph.

Here lyth grauyn under this Ston
Thomas Knowles both flesh and bon,
Grocer, and Alderman Years forty,
Sheriff, and twis Mayor truly:
And for he should not ly alone,
Here lyth with him his good Wyff Joane;
They were togeder Sixty year;
And nineteen Children they had in fear.
Now ben they gone, we them miss:
Christ have there Sowlys to Heaven bliss.
Amen. Ob. Ann. 14 --
32. The Epitaph of Walter Lempster, Doctor of Physic.

Under this black Marbl ston lies the Body of Master Walter Lempster, Doctor
of Physic, and also Physician to the High and Mighty Prince, Henry VII. which
Master Lempster gayve unto this Church too Cheynes of fine Gold, weying 14
Ounces and a quarter, for to make certain Ornament, to put on the blessed Body
of our Savior Jesus. He died the 9th. of March, M. CCCC. 87. whose Soul God
pardon.

33. An Epitaph upon Simon Street, and Agnes his Wife.

Such as I am, such shall ye be;
Grocer of London somtym was I:
The King's Weigher more then Years twenty.
Simon Street called in my plas,
And good Fellowshyp fayn would was.
Therefore in Heaven everlastyng lif
Jesu send me, and Agnes my Wyff.
Kerli Merli my words were tho,
And Deo gratias, I added thereto:
I passed to God in the Year of grase,
A thousand four hundred just his was.
34. Upon William Wray

Here lies wrapped in Clay
The Body of William Wray.
I have no more to say.
35. Upon Henry Den, and Joane his Wife, of Saint Bennets Grase Church.

Prey for the Saulygs of Henry Den, and Joane his Wife, their Fadyrs, their
Moders, Bredyrs, and good Frendys, and of all Christian Saulygs Jesu have
mercy, Amen. Who departed this Life -- M. CCCC. 91.

36. Another.

Here lies Clement Town -- 1540 -- whose Obiit shall for ever be observed in
this Church, and his Mass always upon the day following, whose Soul, and his two
Wyfs Souls, Elisabeth and Elisabeth, and all their Chyldrens Souls, Jesus take
to his Glorious Mercy. Amen.

37. At Saint Olaves Hart-street. Another.

Qu. A. D. T. D. P.
os. nguis. irus. risti. ulcedine. avit.
H. Sa. M. Chapter M. L.
38. Another.

All the Nuns in Holywel,
Pray for the Soul of Sir Thomas Lowel.
He died he 25 of May at Enfield, Anno 1524.
39. Another.

John Stow says, that he had read this Inscription following, fixed on a Stone
Cross, sometime standing in the Charter House Churchyard.

Anno Domini M. CCC. 49. Regnante magna pestilentia, consecratum fuit hoc
Cemiterium, in quo and infra septa praesentis Monasterii, sepulta fuerunt
mortuorum Corpora, plusquam quinquaginta millia, preter alia multa abhinc usque
ad praesens, quorum animabus propitietur Deus. Amen.

40. Another.

Here lies Humphrey Gosling of London, Vintnor,
Of the Whyt Heart of this Parish a Neighbor,
Of virtuous Behavior, a very good Archer,
And of honest Mirth, a good Company-keeper,
So well enclyned to Poor and Rich,
God send more Goslings to be such.
41. Another.

Hic jacet Tom Shorthose,
Sine Tomb, sine Sheet, sine Riches,
Qui vixit sine Gown,
Sine Cloak, sine Shirt, sine Breeches.
42. Henry Chicheley, although he was Founder of All Souls College in Oxford,
and an especial furtherer of Learning, was but little honored, by this
unlearned Epitaph, 1443.

Pauper eram natus, post primas hic relevatus,
Jam sum prostratus, and vermibus esca paratus,
Ecce meum tumulum.
43. Out of Hackney Church, this. Christophorus Vrswicus Regis Henrici Septimi
Elemosynarius, vir sua aetate clarus, summatibus atque infirmatibus juxta
charus. Ad exteros reges undecies pro patria legatus. Decanatum Eboracensem,
Archidiaconatum Richmundiae, Decanatum Windsoriae habitos vivens reliquit.
Episcopatum Norwicensem oblatum recusavit, magnos honores tota vita sprevit,
frugali vita contentus, hic vivere, hic mori voluit. Plenus annorum obiit, ab
omnibus desideratus Funeris pompam etiam testamento vetuit. Hic sepultus carnis
resurrectionem in adventum Christi expectat:

"Obiit Anno Christi incarnati 1521. Die
3 Martii. Anno aetatis suae 74.
44. This Testamentary Epitaph, Mr. Camden has read in an Old Manuscript.

Terram terra tegit, Demon peccata resumat:
Rex habeat Mundus, spiritus alta petat.
45. The Abbot of St. Albans, which lies buried there in the high Quire,
suppressed his Name as modestly as any other, in this:

Hic quidem terra tegitur
Peccato solvens debitum,
Cujus nomen non impositum,
In libro vitae sit inscriptum.
46. Upon one buried in the Night without any Ceremony, under the Name of
Menalcas, this.

Here lies Menalcas as dead as a Log,
That lived like a Devil, and died like a Dog.
Here does he lie, said I? Then say, I lie,
For from this place he parted by and by.
But here he made his descent into Hell,
Without either Book, Candle, or Bell.
47. Dr. Caius, a Learned Physician of Cambridge, and a Confounder of Gunwell
and Caius College, has only this:

Fui Caius.

48. Upon Julius Scaliger. Scaligeri quod Reliquum.

49. Upon Cardinal Pool, which he made himself. Depositum Poli Cardinalis.

50. Upon a Gentleman, that falling off his Horse, brake his Neck, this.

My Friends, judge not me,
Thou see I judge not thee:
Betwixt the Stirrup and the ground,
Mercy I asked, Mercy I found.
51. Upon Queen Elizabeth, this. Memoriae Sacrum.

Religione ad primaevam sinceritatem restaurata, pace fundata, monetae ad
justuni va^orem reducta, rebellione domestica vindicata, Gallia malis
intestinis praecipiti sublevata, Belgio sustentato, Hispanica class
profligata, Hibernia pulsis Hispanis, and rebellibus ad deditionem coactis,
peccata; Reditibus utriusque Academiae lege annonaria plurimum adauctis; tota
denique Anglia ditata, prudentissimeque Anno XLV. administrata, Elizabetha
Regina vlctrix, triumphatrix, pietatis studiosissima, foelicissima; placida
morte septuagenaria soluta, mortales reliquias dum Christo jubente resurgant
immortales, in hac ecclesia celeberrima ab ipsa conservata, and denuo fundata,
deposuit.

42. Upon Mary, Queen of Scots, this.

Regibus orta, auxi Reges, Reginaque vixi:
Ter nupta, and tribus orba viris, tria Regna reiiqui.
Gallus opes, Scotus cunas, habet Angla Sepulchrum.
53. Upon Prince Henry, this.

Reader, wonder think it none,
Though I speak, and am a stone;
Here is shrin'd Celestial Dust,
And I keep it but in Trust.
Should I not my Treasure tell,
Wonder then you might as well,
How this Stone could choose but break,
If it had not learned to speak.
Hence amazed, and ask not me,
Whose these Sacred Ashes be.
Purposely it is concealed,
For if that should be revealed,
All that read would by and by,
Melt themselves to Tears, and die.
Within this Marble Casket lies
A matchless Jewel of Rich Prize,
Whom Nature in the World's disdain,
But showed, and then put up again.
54. Upon Queen Ann, this.

March with is Wind has struck a Cedar tall,
And weeping April mourns the Cedar's fall,
And May intends no Flowers her Month shall bring,
Since she must lose the Flower of all the Spring.
Thus March's Wind has caused April showers.
And yet sad May must lose her Flower of Flowers.
55. On King James.

He that has Eyes, now wake and weep;
He whose waking was our sleep,
Is fallen asleep himself, and never
Shall wake more, till wake for ever;
Death's Iron hand has closed those Eyes,
That were at once three Kingdoms Spies,
Both to foresee, and to prevent
Dangers, so soon as they were meant.
That Head, whose working Brain alone
Thought all Men's quiet, but his own,
Is fallen at Rest, (Oh) let him have
The Peace he lent us, to his Grave:
If no Naboth, all his Reign,
Was for his fruitful Vineyard slain:
If no Vriah lost his Life,
Because he had too fair a Wife.
Then let no Shimei's Curse wound
His honor, or profane this ground:
Let no black-mouthed breathed rank Curr
Peaceful James his Ashes stur.
Princes are Gods, (O) do not then
Rake in their Graves, to prove them Men.
56. Upon the King of Sweden.

Upon this Place the great Gustavus died,
While Victory lay weeping by his side.
57. Upon Sir Francis Vere.

When Vere sought Death, armed with his Sword and Shield,
Death was afraid to meet him in the Field:
But when his Weapons he had laid aside,
Death, like a Coward, struck him, and he died.
58. Another.

Here lies Richard A Preene,
One Thousand, Five Hundred, Eighty Nine,
Of March the xx day,
And he that will die after him, may.
59. Another.

Here lies he, who was born, and cried,
Told Threescore Years, fell sick, and dyed.
60. At Farlam on the West Marches, toward Scotland, near Naworth-Castle.

John Bell, broken brow
Ligs under this stean,
Four of mine even Sons
Laid it on my weam.
I was a Man of my Meat,
Master of my Wife;
I lived on my own Land
With mickle strife.
61. In St. Paul 's was this.

Here lies John Dod, a Servant of God, to whom he is gone;
Father or Mother, Sister or Brother, he never knew none.
A Headborough, and a Constable, a Man of Fame,
The first of his House, and last of his Name.
Died, buried, and deceased the Fifteenth of May,
One Thousand, Five Hundred, and Fifteen, being Whitson-Monday.
62. On Mr. Burbidge the Tragedian. Exit Burbidge.

63. On Mr. Weymark, a constant Walker in Paul 's.

Defessus sum ambulando.

64. In St. Mary Saviors, this.

Here lies William Emerson,
Who lived and died an honest Man.
65. In the North-Country, this.

Here ligs John Hubberton,
And there ligs his Wife,
Here ligs his Dagger,
And there ligs his Knife:
Here ligs his Daughter,
And there ligs his Son;
Heigh for brave John Hubberton.
66. Upon JOhn Death.

Here lies John Death, the very same
That went away with a Cousin of his Name.
67. Upon Mr. Parsons, Organist at Westminster.

Death passing by, and hearing Parsons play,
Stood much amazed at his depth of Skill,
And said, this Artist must with me away,
(For Death bereaves us of the better still.)
But let the Quire, while he keeps time, sing on,
For Parsons rests, his Service being done.
68. On Mr. Charles Wray.

When I in Court had spent my tender Prime,
And done my best to please an Earthly Prince,
Even sick to see how I had lost my Time;
Death pitying mine Estate, removed me thence,
And sent me (mounted upon Angels Wings)
To serve my Savior, and the King of Kings.
69. Many and sundry Opinions were conceived of Joan of Arck; some judging her
miraculously raised up by God for the good of France, others, that she was but
a mere Impostor: We will suspend our Judgment herein, and referr you to the
Epitaph, which we find thus written on her.

Here lies Joan of Arck, the which
Some count Saint, and some count Witch;
Some count Man, and something more;
Some count Maid, and some a Whore:
Her Life's in question, wrong or right;
Her Death's in doubt, by Laws or might:
Oh, Innocence, take heed of it,
How thou too near to Guilt do sit.
(Mean time France a Wonder saw,
A Woman Rule, against Salique Law.)
But Reader, be content to stay
Thy censure till the Judgment-day:
Then shall thou know, and not before,
Whether Saint, Witch, Man, Maid, or Whore.
70. An Epitaph upon Sir Philip Sidney.

England, Netherland, the Heavens, and the Arts,
All Soldiers and the World, have made six Parts
Of the Noble Sidney; for none will suppose
That a small heap of Stones can Sidney enclose.
England has his Body, for she it bred,
Netherland his Blood, in her Defense shed;
The Heavens his Soul, the Arts his Fame,
All Soldiers his Grief, the World his Good Name.
71. The following Epitaph was written upon the Tombstone of JOHN WHITE, Esquire;
a Member of the House of Commons in the Year 1640. and Father to Dr. Annesley's
Wife, lately deceased.

Here lies a John, a burning shining Light,
Whose Name, Life, Actions, all alike were WHITE.
72. Mrs. Wilkinson with her Child went to Heaven from her Childbed, on whose
Tombstone a learned Doctor wrote the following Lines, viz.

Here lies Mother and Babe both without sins,
Next Birth will make her and her Infant Twins.
See Mr. Adams 's Sermon in the Continuation of Morning Exercise, Questions,
and Cases of Conscience.

73. Upon Richard Howkins.

Here lies Richard Howkins, who out of his store
Gave Twenty good Shillings for the use of the Poor,
Upon condition his Body shoul'd never be removed,
Until the appearing of our dearly Beloved.
74. On the Tombstone of a great Scold, was written,

Her Husband prays, if by her Grave you walk,
You gently tread, for if she is waked, she will talk.
75. Upon Mr. West.

Here lies Ned West, of Men the best,
Well loved by his Wife;
But Oh, he is gone, his Thread is spun,
And cut off by the Knife
Of cruel Atropos; Oh, Jade, Rokcy and flinty hearted Maid,
To kill so good a Man;
Take from my Wooff two Inches off,
And let him live again.
76. On the Tomb of the Electeress Dowager of Saxony are to be seen the
following Devices and Motto's. I. Piety with an Heart, in which some Beams from
the Name Jehovah are centered, with this Motto, From him, and to him. II.
Clemency, with a Cloud of Dew hanging over the Land, with this Motto, Water is
common to all. III. Friendliness, with a Sun piercing a dark Cloud over against
a Rainbow, and this Motto, He enlightens and makes glad. IV. Magnanimity, with
a Rock, upon which some Thunderbolts are darted, with this Motto, They don't
terrify. V. Liberality, with a Fountain, from whence some Hands were taking
out Water, with this Motto. So much the more plentiful. VI. Patience, with a
Crucible full of Gold standing in the Fire, with this Motto, I burn, but I am
cleansed from my Dross, or I shall come out more pure. VII. Pity or Compassion,
with a Silkworm beginning to Spin, with this Motto, I will serve you with my
Bowels. And VIII. Humility, with a Violet Flower growing in the Grass, with
this Motto, The more humble, the more fragrant. Flying Post, Nov. 21. 1696.

77. I find I have inserted in my Paper-book an Epitaph upon the Tomb of the
Earl of Warwick, in whose Death the Family was extinct:

Within this Marble does Entombed lie
Not one, but all a Noble Family:
A Pearl of such a price, that soon about
Possession of it, Heaven and Earth fell out.
Both could not have it, so they did devise
This fatal Salvo, to divide the Prize;
Heaven shares the Soul, and Earth his Body takes,
Thus we lose all, while Earth and Heaven part stakes.
But Heaven not brooking that the Earth should share.
In the least Atom of a Piece so rare,
Intends to sue out by a new revize,
His Habeas Corpus at the Grand Assize.
Mr. Barker's Flores. 78. I have read of a certain Prince, who would have this
to be written upon his Tomb, (...), I was able to do all things. Monstrous
Ambition. Mr. Baker 's Flores.

79. Similius, being buried in the Cares of the Court, and living rather for
his Emperor's sake than for his own, caused this Inscription to be put upon his
Tomb. Here lies Similius, an Old Man of Seven Years of Age.

80. Adrian appointed this to be his Epitaph: Adrianus Sixtus hic situs est qui
nihil sibi infoelicius in vita duxit, quam quod regnaverat: Here lies Adrianus
Sixtus, who never thought any thing so unhappy to him in his Life, as his
Reigning. Mr. Barker 's Flores.

81. I have read of the People called Sicyonians, that they would have no
Epitaph written upon the Tombs of their Kings, but only their Names, that they
might have no Honor but what did result from their Merits. Mr. Barker 's
Flores.

82. Earl Morton put this Epitaph upon John Knox his Tomb. Here lies the Body
of that Man, who in his lifetime never feared the Face of any Man. Mr.
Barker's Flores.

83. Semiramis ordered this to be written upon her Tomb. If any King stand in
need of Money, let him break open this Monument. Hereupon Darius ransacked the
Tomb, and found within another Writing, Had thou not been unsatiably
Covetous, thou would never have invaded thus the Monument of the Dead: And so
went away ashamed. Mr. Barker 's Flores.

84. On Sardanapalus's Tomb, by his own appointment, was written, So much I had
as I eat and drank. Chetwind 's Hist. Collections.

85. A Monk bestows this Epitaph on Wickliff. The Devil's Instrument, Churches
Enemy, Peoples Confusion, Heretics Idol, Hypocrites Mirror, Schisms Broacher,
Hatred's Sower, Lies Forger, Flattery's Sink, who at his Death despaired like
Cain, and stricken by the horrible Judgment of God, breathed forth his wicked
Soul to the dark Mansions of the black Devil-Whereby God's Children may learn
not to regard while they live, the Malice, nor to expect after their Death
ought else but the slanderous rancour of the wicked. Speed's Hist. p. 622.

86. One John Child, a Gentleman, Hunting in the depth of Winter in Dartmore
Forest in Devonshire, lost both his Company and his Way, in a bitter Snow, and
to preserve himself from perishing with extreme Cold, he killed his Horse, and
crept into his Bowels for warmth, and wrote the following Verses with the Blood.

He that finds and brings me to my Tomb,
The Land of Plinistock shall be his doom.
That Night he was frozen to Death, and being soon after found by some Monks of
Tavestock Abbey, the Abbot of Tavestock, having caused him to be decently
buried, got that Rich Manor. See a Book, called, Mankind displayed.

Some Remarkable Epitaphs, now to be found in Westminster: Abbey, Stepney
Churchyard, and the New Burying-Place in Bunhill-Fields; the last of which was
enclosed with a Brick-Wall, at the sole Charge of the City of London, in the
Mayoralty of Sir John Lawrence, Knight, Anno Dom. 1665. And afterward the
Gates thereof were built and finished in the Mayoralty of Sir Thomas
Bloudworth, Anno Dom. 1666.

Here lies waiting for the Resurrection of the Just, Mary, late Wife of John
Merrion, who died Nov. 25th 1693. in the 26th. Year of her Age.

From my sad Cradle to my Sable Chest,
I found few Days of Joy, or Months of Rest;
My Race was short (yet tedious) ending soon,
For suddenly my Sun did set at Noon.
I groaned for Rest, and fell asleep at Even,
So when I waked, behold, I was in Heaven.
Weep not, dear Husband, do not weep no more,
Because I am not lost, but sent before.
Here lies the Body of Mrs. Dorcas Bentley, the Faithful tender Wife of
Johathan Bentley, Citizen and Watch-maker of London, who lived much desired,
and died much lamented, Aug. 3. 1693.

My Dear,

Thy zealous care to serve thy God,
And constant Love to Husband dear;
Thy harmless Heart to every one
Remains still, though thy Corpse lie here.
J. B. Mary Morris died November. 13th. Aged Three Quarters of a Year and Nine
Days, 1695.
If I could ever write a lasting Verse,
It should be laid, Dear Saint, upon thy Hearse.
Ah, beauteous Blossom, too untimely dead:
Whither, Oh, whither, is thy sweetness fled?
Where are the Charms that always did arise
From the prevailing Language of thy Eyes?
Here lies Interred the Body of Mr. Edward Bagshaw, Minister of the Gospel, who
received from God.

Faith to embrace it.
Courage to defend it.
And Patience to suffer for it.
When by the most despised, and by many persecuted esteeming the Advantage of
Birth, Education, and Learning (all Emia^^t in him) as things of worth, to be
accounted loss for the Knowledge of Christ [from the Reproaches of pretended
Friends, and Prosecutions of professed Adversaries,] he took Sanctuary, by the
Will of God, in Eternal Rest, 28th. of December, 1671.

Here also lies the Body of Mrs. Margaret, Wife of Mr. Edward Bagshaw, who
departed this Life 20th. of February, 1692.

Here the Wicked cease from troubling, and here the weary be at rest. Here the
Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the Oppressor.

Upon a Stone adjoining to Stepney Church, is writ,
Of Carthage great I was a stone,
Oh, Mortals, read with pity;
Time levels all, and spares none,
Man, Mountain, Town, nor City.
Therefore, Oh Mortals, all bethink
You whereunto you must,
Since now such stately Buildings lie
Buried in the Dust.
An Odd Epitaph on Will. Wheatly.
Whoever treads on this stone,
Pray now tread most neatly;
For underneath this stone here lies
Your honest Friend Will. Wheatly.
Here lies Interred the Body of Mary, Wife of Captain Malachy Simons, Mariner,
who departed this Life the 29th. of June, Anno Dom. 1677. Aged 50.

Rest thou, whose Rest gives me a restless Life,
Because I Have lost a kind and virtuous Wife:
I Will visit thee, and when I leave this Light,
Come spend my time in the same Cell at Night.
Till then farewell, farewell, I cannot take
A final leave, until thy Ashes wake.
Here lies Interred the Body of Dame Rebecca Berry, the Wife of Thomas Elton,
of Stratford Bow, Gent. who departed this Life April 26. 1696. Aged 52.

Come, Ladies, ye that would appear
Like Angels fair, come, dress ye here;
Come, dress you at this Marble stone,
And make that humble Grace your own,
Which once adorned as fair a Mind,
As ere yet lodged in Womankind.
So she was dressed, whose humble Life
Was free from Pride, was free from Strife;
Free from all envious Brawls and Jars,
Of Humane Life the Civil Wars.
These never disturbed her Peaceful Mind,
Which still was gentle, still was kind:
Her very looks, her garb, her mien,
Disclosed the humble Soul within.
Trace her through every Scene of Life,
View her as Widow, Virgin, Wife;
Still the same humble, she appears
The same in Youth, the same in Years;
The same in low, in high estate,
Never vexed with this, never moved with that,
Go, Ladies, now, and if you would be
As fair, as great, as good as she
Go, learn of her Humility.
An odd Epitaph upon Thomas Saffin.
Here Thomas Saffin lies Interred, ah! why,
Born in New England, did in London die?
Was the third Son of eight, begot upon
His Mother Martha, by his Father John.
Much favored by his Prince he 'gan to be,
But nipt by Death at the Age of 23.
Fatal to him was that we Smallpox name,
By which his Mother and two Brethren came
Also to breathe their last, nine Years before,
And now have left their Father to deplore
The loss of all his Children, with that Wife
Who was the Joy and Comfort of his Life.
June 18. 1687.
Here lie Interred the Bodies of Captain Thomas Chevers, who departed this Life
the 18th. of Nov. 1675. Aged 44 Years. And of Anne Chevers, his Wife, who
departed this Life the 14th. of Nov. 1675. Aged 34 Years. And of John Chevers,
their Son, who departed this Life the 13th. of Nov. 1675. Aged 5 Days.


Reader, consider well how poor a Span,
And how uncertain is the Life of Man.
Here lie the Husband, Wife, and Child by Death,
All three in five days space deprived of Breath.
The Child dies first, the Mother next, the Morrow
Follows, and then the Father dies with Sorrow.
A Caesar falls by many Wounds, well may
Two stabs at Heart the stoutest Captain slay.
On Another Tombstone is writ,
Here lies two loving Brothers side by side,
In one day buried, and in one day died.
Here lies the Body of Mrs. Bridget Radley, the most deservedly beloved Wife of
Charles Radley, Esquire; Gentleman Usher, Daily-Waiter to His Majesty; which Place
he parted withal, not being able to do the Duty of it, by reason of his great
Indisposition, both of Body and Mind, occasioned by his just Sorrow for the
loss of her. She changed this Life for a better, the 20th. of November, 1679.

Sacred to the Immortal Memory of Sir Palms Fairbone, Knight. Governor of
Tangier, in Execution of which Command he was Mortally wounded by a Shot from
the Moors, then Besieging the Town, in the 46th. Year of his Age, October. 24.
1680.

Ye Sacred Relics which that Marble keep,
Here undisturbed by Wars in quiet sleep;
Discharge the Trust, which when it was below,
Fairbone's undaunted Soul did undergo,
And be the Town's Palladium from the Foe.
Alive and dead these Walls he will defend,
Great Actions great Examples must attend.
The Candian Siege his early Valor knew,
Where Turkish Blood did his young Hands imbrew:
From thence returning with deserved applause,
Against the Moors his well-flesh'd Sword he draws,
The same the courage, and the same the cause.
His Youth and Age, his Life and Death combine,
As in some great and regular Design,
All of a piece throughout, and all Divine.
Still nearer Heaven his Virtue sho^e more bright,
Like rising Flames expanding in their height,
The Martyr's Glory crowned the Soldier's fight.
More bravely British General never fell,
Nor General's Death was ever revenged so well;
Which his pleased Eyes beheld before their close,
Followed by thousand Victims of his Foe. To this lamented Loss, for Times to
come, His Pious Widow Consecrates this Tomb.

Here lies (expecting the Second Coming of our Savior) the Body of Edmund
Spencer, the Prince of Poets in his Time; whose Divine Spirit needs no other
Witness than the Works which he left behind him. He was Born in London in the
Year 1510. and died in the Year 1596.

Abrahamus Couleius,
Anglorum Pindarus, Flaccus, Maro,
Deliciae, Decus, Desiderium Aevi sui, Hic juxta situs est.
Aurea dum volitant late tua scripta per orbem,
Et fama aeternum vivis Divina Poeta;
Hic placida jaceas requie, custodiat urnam
Cana fides, vigilentque perenni lampade musae.
Sit sacer iste locus. Nec quis temperarius ausit,
Sacrilega turbare manu venerabile bustum,
Intacti maneant, maneant per saecula dulcis
Coulei cineres servetque, immobile saxum. Six vovet,
Votumque suum apud posteros sacratum esse voluit,
Qui vivo Incomparabili posuit sepulchrale marmor.
Georgius Dux Buckinghamiae.

Excessit e vita Anno Aetatis suae 49. and honorifica pompa elatus ex Aedibus
Buckinghamianis vitis Illustribus omnium ordinum exsequias celebrantibus,
sepultus est Die 3. M. Augusti, Anno Domini 1667.

On the Royal Tombs, adjoining to Cowley 's, a Modern Poet writes thus:

Whole Troops of mighty Nothings lie beside,
Of whom it is only said, they lived and died.
Here lies Henry Purcel, Esquire; who left this Life, and is gone to that Blessed
Place, where only his Harmony can be exceeded. Obiit 21. die Novembris, Anno
Aetatis suae 37. Annoque Domini 1695.

CHAP. CXLVIII. Miracles giving Testimony to Christianity, Orthodoxy,
Innocence, etc.
I Can never believe, that Miracles ascended up to Heaven with our Savior; so,
as never to be seen upon Earth more, after the first Age of the Church. It Is
true, they have run in a narrower Stream: And when the Gospel was sufficiently
established and confirmed by the Testimony of them, they were not quite so
necessary. But some Necessity still occurs, and some Miracles have been in all
Ages wrought: Take these amongst many others, and compare them with some other
Chapters of this Book.

1. Irenaeus, in his Second Book against Heresies, says, Some of the Brethren,
and sometimes the whole Church of some certain Place, by reason of some urgent
Cause, by Fasting and Prayer had procured, that the Spirits of the Dead had
been raised again to Life, and had lived with them many Years: Some by the like
means had expelled Devils; so that they which had been delivered from Evil
Spirits, had embraced the Faith, and were received into the Church. Others had
the Spirit of Prophecy, to foretell things to come; they see Divine Dreams, and
Prophetical Visions: Others Cure the Sick and Diseased, and by laying on of
Hands, restore them to Health. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist.

2. S. Augustine tells us, that when the Bodies of Gervasius and Protasius (the
Martyrs) were taken up, and brought to S. Ambrose's Church at Milan, several
Persons that were vexed with unclean Spirits, were healed; and one, a noted
Citizen, that had been blind many Years, upon touching the Bier with his
Handkerchief, was restored to his sight. Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 7.

3. In the Reign of Constantine the Great, the Gospel was propagated into
Iberia, in the uttermost part of the Euxine Sea, by the means of a Captive
Christian Woman, by whose Prayers a Child that was Mortally Sick, recovered
health; and the Lady of Iberia her self was delivered from a Mortal Disease:
Whereupon the King her Husband sent Ambassadors to Constantine, entreating him
to send him some Preachers into Iberia, to Instruct them in the True Faith of
Christ; which Constantine performed with a glad heart. Clark in Vit.
Constantin. p. 11.

4. That Luther, a poor Friar, says one, should be able to stand against the
Pope, was a great Miracle; that he should prevail against the Pope, was a
greater; but after all, to die in Peace (having so many Enemies) was the
greatest of all. Clark's Mar. of Eccl. Hist. p. 145.

5. Hither perhaps may not unfitly be referred a strange Providence, which
happened on Midsummer-Eve, A. C. 1626. A Codfish being brought into the Market
in Cambridge, and there cut up for Sale, in the Maw of the Fish was found wrapped
up in Canvas a Book in Decimo Sexto, containing three Treatises of Mr. Frith's;
the Fish was caught about the Coast of Lyn, called Lyndeeps, by one William
Skinner; when the Fish was cut open, the Garbidge was thrown by, which a Woman
looking upon, espied the Canvas, and taking it up, found the Book wrapped up in
it, being much soiled, and covered over with a kind of slime and congealed
matter. This was beh^^^ with great Admiration, and by Benjamin Prime, the
Batchelor's Beadle (who was present at the opening of the Fish) was carried to
the Vice Chancellor, who took special notice of it, examining the Particulars
beforementioned. By Daniel Boys, a Book-binder, the Leaves were carefully
opened and cleansed: The Treatises contained in it, were, A Preparation to the
Cross, A Preparation to Death, The Treasure of Knowledge, A Mirror, or Glass to
know ones self, A Brief Instruction to teach one willingly to die. Ibid. p. 160.

6. Anno Christi 1620. There was seen by the Turks at Medina (where their
Prophet lies buried) for three Weeks together, this Apparition. Sept. 20. at
Midnight a great Tempest fell, with dreadful Thunder; when the Clouds were
dispersed, and the Elements clear, in the Firmament was seen in Arabic
Characters, Oh, why will ye believe in Lies! Between Two and Three a Clock in
the Morning, there appeared a Woman in white, compassed about with the Sun,
having a cheerful Countenance, and a Book in her Hand; and over against her
were Armies of Turks, Arabians, Persians, and other Mahometans, in
Battel-array, ready to fight with her; but she keeping her Station, only opened
her Book, at the sight whereof the Armies fled away, and presently all the
Lamps in Mahomet's Tomb were put out: For as soon as the Vision vanished,
(which was commonly an hour before Sunrising) a murmuring Wind was heard, unto
which they imputed the extinguishing of the Candles. The Ancient Pilgrims of
Mahomet's Race, (who, after they had visited this Place, never used to cut
their Hair) were much amazed, because they could not conceive the meaning of
this Vision, only one of the Dervises (or Priests) a strict Contemplative Order
among the Turks (as the Capuchins amongst the Papists) stepped in very boldly,
and made the following Speech to the Company, to this purpose) -- That there
were never but Three True Religions in the World; Three Prophets, Moses,
Christ, and Mahomet, etc. The Jews forsaken, because they fell to Idolatry;
Christians forsaken (their Church divided into Eastern and Western, Jerusalem
taken from them, and Constantinople, etc.) for committing Idolatry, etc. The
Mahometans had erred in every Point, and broken their first Institutions; and
therefore God had kept their Prophet from Returning (Forty Years) at the time
prefixed, etc. That this was a Token of some great Troubles and Alterations;
That the opening of the Book, signified either their own Law, which they had
shamefully broken, or some other Book, wherein they had not yet read, and
against which no Power should be able to prevail. So that I fear (says he) our
Religion will be proved Corrupt, and our Prophet an Impostor; and then this
Christ, whom they talk of, shall shine like the Sun, and set up his Name
everlastingly, At which words they cried out, Blasphemy, and with a Warrant
from the Beglerbeg; they condemned him, and put him to Death. See this Story
more at large in Mr. Knowles 's Turkish History, p. 1384.

This Relation was confirmed by Isuf Chaous, a converted Turk, who came to
London about Anno 1656. Which Vision, he said, did much affect him; but, he
added, that the Grand Seignior commanded none should speak of it, upon pain of
Death. See the Life of Isuf; or the Extract of this Particular in the
Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, by R. B. p. 97.

7. About four or five Miles from Grand Cairo, there is said to be a Place,
which, every Good Friday shows the appearance of the Heads, Legs, Arms, etc. of
Men and Children, as if rising out of the Ground, to a very great Number, etc.
Stephen du-Pleis, a sober discerning Man, says, he saw and touched diverse of
the same Members.

8. A certain Jew being held the space of many Years with a Palsy, was fain to
keep his Bed, who having tried all the Salves and Medicines, and all the
Practices and Prayers of the Jews, was not a jot the better: At length he fled
for Refuge unto the Baptism ministered in the Church of Christ, persuading
himself for surety, that by the means of this, being the true Physic of the
Soul, he might recover his former health of Body. Atticus was immediately made
privy unto this his Devout Mind, and Godly Disposition; he instructed the Jew
in the Principles and Articles of the Christian Religion, laid before him the
hope that was to be had in Christ Jesus, and bids that he, Bed and all, should
be brought unto the Font, and Place appointed for the Ministration of Baptism.
This Jew being grievously taken with the Palsy, was no sooner baptized in the
Faith of Christ, and taken out of the Font, but his Disease left him, so that
he recovered his former Health. This Gift of Healing being wrought by the Power
of Christ, prevailed in word among Men of these our days. Many of the Gentiles
hearing the Fame of this Miraculous Power, received the Faith, and were
baptized: But the Jews, although they sought after Signs and Wonders, yet could
they not be brought with Signs to embrace the Christian Faith. Socrat. Schol.
l. 7. c. 4.

9. Reflections upon the Miracle that happened in the Person of a Shepherdess
of Dauphine, by he Reverend Mons. Jurieu, in his Pastoral Letter, October. 1.
1688. You may perhaps think it very strange, my Brethren, that being accustomed
to entertain you with all such Extraordinary Matters as relate to Religion, we
have not yet acquainted you with what has happened in Dauphine, where God (for
so many Months past) has made use of the Ministry of a simple Shepherdess,
that can neither Write nor Read, (a Child of about Fifteen or Sixteen Years of
Age) to declare his Marvels, and to publish his Truth. The occasion of our so
long silence, has been the Time and Care we have taken to be fully informed of
the Reality of the Fact, that so we might not build our Reflections upon false
Grounds. After all the Assurances imaginable, we have found the Matter of Fact,
in short, to be thus:

She is but a Young Girl, of about Fifteen or Sixteen Years of Age; her Name is
Isabella Vincent, a Country-man's Daughter near Saou, within two Leagues of
Cret in Dauphine, by Profession a Shepherdess, dwelling with her Uncle, her
Father, who (several Years before the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes) had
left his Religion, in consideration of Money. She fell into all Ecstasie upon
the First Day of this present February. Her Ecstasie did not seem at first to
be any thing else but a sort of Apoplexy, or Natural Lethargy, into which she
fell without any appearance of a Violent Motion. She returned out of it again,
after having been in it some hours, her Health not being in the least impaired
by it. In this first Fit, she neither said nor did any thing extraordinary.
Upon the following Night, which was that of the Second or Third of February,
she fell again into those Fits, that have held her even since that time. They
did not seem to be any thing but a kind of a Profound Sleep, out of which it
was not possible to fetch her: They pulled her, they thrust her, they called
her, they pricked her till the Blood came, they pinched her, they burnt her,
yet nothing would awake her: So that she was in an entire, and absolute
Privation of all Sense, which is the true Character of an Ecstasie. In this
Condition she spoke and uttered many Excellent and Divine Matters. She can
neither Write nor Read: She never had learnt any other Prayer in her Life, but
Pater Noster and Credo: She could speak no other Language, but the Vulgar one
of her own Country, which has nothing of French in it. The first five Weeks
she spoke (during the time of her Ecstasies) no other Language but that of her
own Country, because she had no other Auditors but the Country People of her
own Village: For by all the Relations that we have seen, it is apparent that
she speaks according to her Hearers. After these first five Weeks, the noise of
this Miracle being spread abroad, there came People that could speak and
understand French: Then she fell a speaking of French, and that in as exact and
correct a Dialect, as if she had been brought up at Paris, and that in one of
the Families where they speak French best. The Subject of her Discourse is
always about Religion, and therein she uses to follow very near the Order and
Manner of our Divine Service; and though she never in her Life learnt one
Psalm, nor ever understood one Tune, yet notwithstanding this, she sings them
without missing one Syllable, or one Note: Yea, she sings them very sweetly,
and agreeably too; and for the most part quite through. And here it is that she
ordinarily begins. After this, she makes Prayers, which are very admirable and
excellent ones. Oftentimes she names certain Texts of Scripture, which she
takes for the Subject of her Discourses. She explains them, and speaks upon
them, and that not after the manner of Preachers, or in a set Method, but in a
manner very singular, and always full of good Sense; and it being out of the
ordinary Rules of Method, it gives the greater Character of Divinity to what
she says: For we do not find, that Inspired Persons use to follow Humane
Methods in their Discourses. Her Expressions are always very vigorous and
touching. She is quick in her Reprehensions, which she Addresses above all
others, to such as through Baseness have changed their Religion for Interest,
and so have sold their Souls for Money. She very often Addresses her self to
the Converters (as they call them) calling them Merchants, and Truckers for
Souls. She endeavors to make them see the foulness of their Conduct, and of
the means they use to make their Conversions by. If there be any one among her
Auditors, that is found to be distinguished by any Baseness of this kind, she
never fails to direct her Discourse to him. Her own Father confessed, that
coming one Night into her Chamber, she cried out aloud, as he was coming in,
without ever seeing him, That they would take away that wretched Judas, who had
sold Jesus Christ for Money. Sometimes she handles the Controversies betwixt Us
and the Papists, and she handles them with a great deal of Strength, though
without any Method; and with Reasonings (as it were) broken and unjoyned, but
such as are always very just, and principally by applying several Passages out
of the Holy Scriptures. After having encountered against the Sacrifice of the
Mass, she concluded one day with these words; In one word, there can be no
Sacrifice, where there is no Remission of Sin. Another time she would condemn
the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, by such Texts of Scripture as appoint the
worshipping of one God only. Sometimes she repeats a part of the Mass, or of
the Office in Latin, and then refutes it, by showing the Abominations contained
in it. She pronounces the Latin she speaks, very truly, and very intelligibly.
Her motions in delivery are not at all violent, neither does she use any strong
agitation of her Body: She puts her Arms out of Bed, and with them forms
certain graceful and well-ordered Gestures. Her Voice is clear and
intelligible, but without any Affectation: She moves her Lips, but it is but
slowly, and without any appearance of a Convulsion. There have been some
Physicians to View and Examine her in this Condition; but they could observe
nothing in her that favored of any Sickness, or Bodily Infirmity. Among the
many Menaces, which she makes against the Wicked, she mixes also Promises to
the Faithful, and to such as shall Repent. And her Promises are not only
General and undeterminate ones, but it is very certain, that she has made some
very particular Predictions, I shall say nothing of neither. Thus much is most
certain, That she has promised the Church a very sudden Deliverance. When she
is come out of her Ecstasies, she remembers nothing at all of what has passed,
nor of what her self has said. She affirms, that she has slept very well, and
seems not at all tired, after having talked sometimes three, four, and five
hours together, for her Fits are of no less continuance. True it is, that she
speaks but by Fits all this time, and her Discourses are not always connected.
And although the Motions and Actions, which the Holy Spirit of God causes in
her, make not any Impression on her Imagination and Memory (since she remembers
nothing of them) yet it is notwithstanding certain, that her Natural Sense
becomes thereby more clear and refined. For in the beginning she was observed,
after her waking, to return to her Natural Simplicity, and to the Ignorance of
a poor Shepherdess, and of a Country Girl without any Education, and whose
Instruction has been wholly neglected. But it is now apparent by several
Relations, that her Sentiment is become solid; nay, that she has something in
her that even sparkles: Which has been more especially noted since her falling
into the hands of our Enemies. She was Apprehended upon the beginning of the
Month of June, and carried to Cr^t; and examined three several times, both at
Cret and at Grenoble. It is very easy to imagine, that there has been nothing
omitted to induce her to discover her pretended Accomplices. But she has still
answered all these Interrogatives with so much Justness and Discretion, and
with so many marks of Sincerity, That the most able Advocate in the Kingdom
could not form a better Reply, after fifteen days study upon the
Interrogatives. These are the very words of our Relations, and of the Offices
of Justice that have examined her. She answered to every thing they asked her
with very good sense, and not without quickness of Wit; she renders a Reason
for her Faith, and easily confounds all such as come to Pose her with
Questions. She has been removed from Place to Place; first, to Cret, then to
the Hospital at Grenoble: In all which Places she continues to fall into her
Trances, and to Discourse in her Fits. They have shaved her Head, and taken
away all the Clothes and Linen she had, pretending she might have some Charm
hid somewhere about her: Nay, some Priests came and exorcised her with
Holy Water, as though she had been possessed with some Evil Spirit. But to no
purpose at all, she is still the same. Sometimes they have given way to some of
the New Converts to approach her in the Daytime, while she was in Prison, or
in the Hospital at Grenoble: But they would never give leave to any of them to
pass the Night in her Company, nor to be Witness of what she said when she fell
into her Ecstasie. The last Letters say, That the Rage of the false Devotees
was so great against her, that she could not be thought secure of her Life, but
for certain Persons of the first Note in tha Country, who gave Orders about
her. All that I have here said, is the naked Truth; but it is not all the
Truth: For we give you no Particulars of what she has either said or done.
There are some discreet, able, and unprejudiced Persons of that Country, who
labor to make an Exact Collection of all that is certain and well proved about
her. And we have most assured hopes, that the Time is now coming, in which it
will be both safe and free to see it. Reflections of Monsieur Jurieu upon the
Strange and Miraculous Ecstasies of Isable Vincent, p. 1.

11. One must be very dull in my Opinion ( says the same Author) not to see,
and not to feel the Hand of God, and his very Finger in what happened in the
Church of St. Malo's, by the fall of a Thunderbolt; and in the strokes of
Heaven, which have burnt and beaten down so many Churches within these two last
Years, in this dreadful shaking of the Earth, which has overturned great
Cities in Italy, the Country of Antichrist; and which has caused a Trembling
to the very Root of the Vatican, the Seat of the Beast. And lastly, I see no
cause why one should be so obstinate, as not to see a Miraculous Token of the
Will of God, in those Singings that have been heard in the Air at the beginning
of this Persecution. Not to be touched with this Miracle, Men will be wilful
Doubters; and yet there may be found in France above Thirty Thousand Witnesses
of it. Monsieur Vivens, who was a Preacher in the Cevennes, and held Assemblies
there for the space of almost two Years, brought us about Thirty or Forty at
one time; and we have it from his own Mouth, that he himself heard these
Wonderful Singings several times. Now, to have the satisfaction of treating
this as a Fiction, it is suggested by some, that even in our seventh Letter of
the first Year of our Pastorals, we have related nothing but hearsays: Yet
notwithstanding, would they but take the pains to read, they would find that I
have given the Certificates of Monsieur Maupoey, Monsieur Bergeret, Monsieur de
la Bordette, Mademoiselle de Formalagues; Monsieur de Vallescure, a Gentleman
of the Cevennes, who said, he heard sung in the Air five or six Verses of the
Fifth Psalm. Since which I have received, and have now in my Custody, the
Testimony of MOnsieur de la Bastide of Tourtelon, Son to the said Vallescure,
who Attests the same thing with his Father. I have also reported the Testimony
of Mademoiselle de Vebron, who assures me, that she has distinguished in these
Miraculous Singings above Thirty of our Psalms. I have (besides all this) the
Attestation of Monsieur de la Gardicolle, a Gentleman of Honor, who is now in
this Country, who has deposed betwixt my Hands, and in the Presence of five
other Gentlemen, all the Circumstances of these Singings, he having heard them
himself, within Two Hundred Paces of the Town of Vigan. The Truth whereof he
assured me upon Oath, nay, with Tears in his Eyes, being sensibly touched. I
have also the Depositions of two Inhabitants and Burgesses of the Town of
Mauvezin in Armagnac, who speak of it as Eyewitnesses. And last of all, here
is the Letter of one Monsieur de Besse, written from Swisserland: It is too
Remarkable upon the Subject, not to be made Public. Ibid.

11. The Divine Judgments upon the Jewish Nation may not iproperly come under
this Head; of which take this short Account.

The Jews, which crucified the Lord of Life, and wished, That his Blood might
be upon them, and their Children, presently after, through the just Judgment of
God, had Blood to drink in full Measure. There were slain in Caesarea Twenty
Thousand in one day. At Alexandria Fifty Thousand another day. At Zabulon, and
Joppa, Eight Thousand Four Hundred, besides the burning of the Towns. At
Damascus Ten Thousand had their Throats cut. In the Siege of Jerusalem they
were so famished, that Oxen's Dung was accounted good Meat: Others fed upon old
Leather, and some Women boiled their own Children, and did eat them. Many
thinking to save their Lives by flying to the Romans, were slit in pieces, to
search for Gold and Jewels in their Guts; Two Thousand died thus miserably in
one Night: Ninety seven Thousand were taken Prisoners at the Taking of the City
by Titus; and Eleven Hundred Thousand were slain. As for the Prisoners, some of
them were carried to Rome in Triumph: Others were slain in sundry Places at the
Conqueror's Will. Some were torn in pieces, and devoured by Wild Beasts: Others
were compelled to march in Troops against their Fellows, and to kill one
another, to make the Spectators Sport. The Relics of these wretched People
were dispersd into all Nations under Heaven, having no Magistrates of their own
to Protect them, but were, and still are altogether at the Will and Discretion
of the Lords of those Countries where they sojourn: So that no Nation in the
World is so vile and contemptible as the Jews:

In the time of Julian the Apostate leave was given to the Jews to re-build the
Temple at Jerusalem; but so soon as they had laid the foundations thereof, all
was overthrown by an Earthquake, many Thousands of them being overwhelmed with
the Ruins: Then came forth a Fire out of the Earth, which consumed all their
Engines, and Instruments. And last of all, there fell drops of Blood,
imprinting upon their Clothes Crosses with so deep a stain, that they were not
able to wash them out; and both the same Night, and the Night after, was seen
by them in the Air, the sign of a bright Cross, whereupon the remainder of them
fled, and returned home, acknowledging, That him whom their Fathers had nailed
to the Cross, was God indeed. Theod.

When the Foundation was laying, there was a Stone amongst the rest, to which
the bottom of the Foundation was fastened, that slipped from its place, and
discovered the Mouth of a Cave, which had been cut in the Rock. Now, when they
could not see the bottom, by reason of its depth, the Overseers of the
Buildings, being desirous to have certain knowledge of the Place, tied a long
Rope to one of the Laborers, and let him down into it. He being come to the
bottom, found Water in it, which took him up to the mid-ankles, and searching
every part of that hollow Place, he found it to be apiece, as far as he
could conjecture by feeling. Then returning toward the Mouth of it, he hit
upon a certain little Pillar, not much higher than the Water, and lighting with
his hand upon it, found a Book lying there, wrapped up in a piece of thin clean
Linen. Having taken it up into his hands, he signified by the Rope that they
should draw him up; which, when they had done, he showed them the Book, which
struck them with Admiration, especially seeming so fresh, and untouched, as it
did, being found in so dark and obscure a hole. The Book being unfolded, did
amaze not only the Jews, but the Grecians also, holding forth, even in the
beginning of it, in great Letters, [ In the Beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God.] To speak plainly (says the
Historian) that Scripture did manifestly contain the whole Gospel, which the
Divine Tongue of the Virgin Disciple had declared. This, together with the
other Miracles, which at times were proclaimed from Heaven, did demonstrate,
that not any word of our Lord should fall to the Ground, which had foretold
the utter Desolation, both of the City and Temple. Socrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 3.
c. 17. Theod. l. 4. cap. 20. Sozom. l. 5. c. 21. See the Chap. of Miraculous
Cures, etc.

CHAP. CXLIX. Attestations to the Truth of Christianity from such as were
formerly Enemies to it, or careless in the Practice of it.
I Make this a particular Head, because the Testimony of Friends is capable of
Fraud, and is often suspected as proceeding from a Principle of Flattery, or
Partiality, or Self-Interest: But the Attestation of Adversaries, even in the
judgment of the severest Philosophers, and the gravest Judges and Lawyers, is
generally accounted valid and weighty, as being extorted by the force of Truth
it self, and gives as convictive a Suffrage to the Cause, as can in common
Reason and ordinary Cases be desired.

1. Julian the Apostate having led the Roman Army into Persia, in the Winter
time, in a Battle against the Persians, was wounded with an Arrow from an
unknown Hand, with which Wound losing his Sc^ses, he fell upon his Horse Neck,
and by his Soldiers was carried into his Tent; where, after means used, coming
to himself again, and recovering Strength, he called for his HOrse and Arms,
that he might return again into Battle; but afterward finding his Strength
fail him, in extreme Pride he took his Blood in his Hands, and holding it up to
Heaven, he used these Words against our Savior, Vicisti, Galilaee, Vicisti, i.
e. Thou have conquered me, O Galilean; thou have conquered me: (For so he used
in scorn to call Jesus Christ.) Clark. is vit. Jovian.

2. The Earl of Marlborough, whose two most Devout Penitential Letters are
herewith Published, was a Person of great Understanding and Wit. The Scene of
his Life lay chiefly in Voyages and Expeditions by Sea, whereby he made many
laborious Attempts to repair the collapsed Estate of his Ancestors; but it
pleased not God to give him that Success he hoped for therein.

It is wholly unfit for any Writer to touch upon any irreligious Principles or
Practices, that were as Stains in his Life, since he has, by his own noble
Pen, in the following Letters, acknowledged them, and by his most exemplary
Repentance washed them off.

Mr. Roger Coke, in a Volume of his Detection, p. 142. mentions, That the Fight
wherein the Duke of York beat the Dutch, and Opdam was blown up, was the Third
of June, 1665. and that in this Fight, the English lost the Renowned Earl of
Marlborough, who, though Admiral in King Charles the First's Time, died here a
private Captain.

But it pleased God, in the Naval Expedition, to work in him such a Sense of
his Sins, as did infinitely make amends for the former Disappointments he met
with by Sea or Land.

The Date of his first Letter being the 24th. of April; and that of the second,
the 23d. of May following, will satisfy any candid Reader, that the new Birth
in him was accompaied with many Pangs and Efforts of great Consideration,
during the firmness of his Bodily Health, and much transcending the low nature
of poor Deathbed Repentances, which are so justly suspected by our Practical
Divines of all Persuasions.

And here it is necessary to acquaint the Reader, that these two Letters of
distant Dates, were sent by his Lordship, from the Royal Navy, enclosed in
other Letters to Mr. Tredewy, his Lordship's Agent in London, with a particular
Instruction, both as to that to Sir Hugh Pollard, and that to Mr. Glascock,
that each of them was to be delivered when Mr. Tredewy was credibly informed of
his Lordship's Death. His Design being, that his Pen should preach Repentance
to the World, in case he lived not to be a personal Adviser thereof himself.

The Publisher hereof assures the Reader, that both the Letters had a happy
Influence on the Lives of the two Persons to whom they were directed; and that
Sir Hugh Pollard having lent the Original Letter, which was sent to him, to Sir
William Davenant, to show it to whom he pleased: Sir William showed it to the
Publisher, among many others; and that Mr. Glascock permitted the Publisher to
take a Copy of that Letter directed to him. The Reader may then awaken his most
serious Thoughts, to consider the two following Letters.

A Letter from the Right Honorable James Earl of Marlborough, a little before
his Death, in the Battle at Sea, on the Coast of Holland, 1665. To the Right
Honorable Sir Hugh Pollard, Comptroller of His Majesty's Household.
SIR,
I Believe the Goodness of your Nature, and the Friendship you have always born
me, will receive with kindness this last Office of your Friend: I am in Health
enough of Body, and through the Mercy of God, in Jesus Christ, well disposed in
Mind. This I premise, that you may be satisfied, that what I write proceeds not
from any fantastic Terror of Mind, but from a sober Resolution of what
concerns my self, and earnest Desire to do you more Good after my Death, than
mine Example (God of his Mercy pardon the badness of it) in My Lifetime, may
have done you harm. I will not speak ought of the Vanity of this World; your
own Age and Experience will save the Labor: But there is a certain Thing that
goes up and down in the World, called Religion, dressed and presented
fantastically, and to purpose bad enough, which yet by such evil dealing loses
not its Being. The great and good God has not loft it without a Witness, more
or less, sooner or later, in every Man's Bosom, to direct us in the pursuit of
it; and for the avoiding of those inextricable Difficulties, and Intanglements,
our own frail Reason would perplex us withal: God, in his infinite Mercy, has
given us his Holy Word; in which, as there are many things hard to be
understood, to quiet our Minds, and direct us concerning our future Being: I
confess to God and you, I have been a great Neglecter, and, I fear, Despiser of
it; (God of his infinite Mercy pardon me that dreadful Fault;) but when I
retired my self from the Noise and deceitful Vanities of the World, I found no
true Comfort in any other Resolution than what I had from thence. I commend the
same, from the bottom of my Heart, to your (I hope, happy) use. Dear Sir Hugh,
let us be more generous, than to believe we die like Beasts that perish; but
with a Christian, manly, brave Ambition, let us look to what is Eternal. I will
not trouble you farther: The Only Great and Holy God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, direct you to an happy End of your Life, and send us a joyful
Resurrection. So prays

Your Dear Friend, MARLBOROUGH
Old James, near the Coast of Holland, the 24th. of April, 1665.

I beseech you commend my Love to all my Acquaintance; particularly, I pray
you, that my Cousin Glascock may have a sight of this Letter, and as many of my
friends besides as you will, or any else that desire it. I pray grant this my
Request.

To William Glascock, Esquire;
Dear Cousin, May 23. 1665.
IN case I be called away by God in this present Employment, I have recommended
these few Lines to you, first earnestly begging God Almighty his most merciful
Pardon, and yours, for the very bad Example, and many Provocations to Sin I
have given. Next, I do most heartily desire you to make use of your remaining
Time, in bestowing it upon his Service, who only can be your Comfort at your
Latter End, when all the former Pleasures of your Life shall only leave Anguish
and Remorse. If God had spared me Life, instead of this Paper, I would, through
his Grace, have endeavored to have been as Assistful to you, in minding you of
true Piety, as the care of mine own Life could have enabled me. Do not think,
that melancholy Vapors cause this: It is God's great Mercy, that by this
Employment has made me know my self; for which, his Name be for ever praised.

Lastly, I pray show these few Lines to my Lord of Portland, by which I in like
manner, and for the sarne cause, crave his Pardon, wishing you both the blessed
Peace and Content of a good Conscience toward God, and a happy End of your
Lives.

Your truly Loving Cousin, MARLBOROUGH.


The Gentleman who has communicated to us these Letters, sent by the Earl of
Marlborough, to Sir Hugh Pollard, and Mr. Glascock, is a Person of Quality, now
living in London; and if any one has the Curiosity to be satisfied from his
own Mouth, about the perfect certainty of the Matters therein related, if he
repairs to Mr. Darker, in Bull-head Court, near Cripplegate, he will be always
ready to bring any Gentleman to speak with him, for further Confirmation.

3. Mr. Hobbs, who was so much noted in the World for his Atheistical Writings;
insomuch that his Book, entitled, The Leviathan, was condemned by the
Parliament, in their Bill against Atheism and Profaneness, October. 1666. and
both that, and his Book de Cive, by the Convocation, July 21. 1683. Yet the
Earl of Devon's Chaplain has left it on Record, concerning him, That he
received the Communion from his Hands, with much seeming Devotion, about two
Years before his Death, than which there cannot be a more express
Acknowledgment of the Truth of Christianity. And this, methinks, should daunt
the Confidence of his Followers, the HObbists; who, because he was born on
Good Friday, are not ashamed, blasphemously, to say, That as our Savior Christ
went out of the World on that Day, to save Men of the World; so another Savior
came into the World on that Day, to save them. Ath. Oxon. Part II. P. 483.

4. But the next Instance of the Earl of Rochester, is still more convincing,
who, as it appears by his Funeral Sermon, did with very much abhorrence exclaim
against that absurd and foolish Philosophy, which the World so much admired,
and was propagated by the late Mr. Hobbs, and others, which had undone him and
many more of the best Parts of the Nation.

My Lord Rochester being awaked from his Spiritual Slumber by a pungent
Sickness, as appears by his Funeral Sermon, preached by Mr. Parsons, August 9.
1680.

Upon the Preacher's first Visit to him, May 26. my Lord thanked God who had in
Mercy and good Providence sent him to him, who so much needed his Prayers and
Counsels, acknowledging how unworthily heretofore he had treated that Order of
Men, reproaching them that they were Proud, and Prophesied only for Rewards;
but now he had learned how to value them, that he esteemed them the Servants of
the most High God, who were to show to him the way to everlasting Life.

At the same time, (continues our Author,) I found him laboring under strange
Trouble and Conflicts of Mind, his Spirit wounded, and his Conscience full of
Terrors. Upon his Journey he told me, that he had been arguing with greater
vigor against God and Religion than ever he had done in his Lifetime before,
and that he was resolved to run them down with all the Arguments and Spite in
the World; but, like the great Convert, St. Paul, he found it hard to ^ick
against the Pricks; for God, at that time, had so struck his Heart by his
immediate Hand, that presently he argued as strongly for God and Virtue as
before he had done against it; that God strangely opened his Heart, creating in
his Mind most awful and tremendous Thoughts and Idea's of the Divine Majesty,
with a delightful Contemplation of the Divine Nature and Attributes, and of the
Loveliness of Religion and Virtue. I never, said he, was advanced thus far
toward Happiness in my Life before; though upon the commissions of some Sins
extraordinary, I have had some Checks and Warnings considerable from within,
but still struggled with them, and so wore them off again. The most observable
that I remember, was this: One Day, at an Atheistical Meeting, at a Person of
Quality's, I undertook to manage the Cause, and was the principal Disputant
against God and Piety; and for my Performances, received the Applause of the
whole Company; upon which, my Mind was terribly struck, and I immediately
replied thus to my self, Good God! That a Man that walks upright, that sees the
wonderful Works of God, and has the uses of his Sense and Reason, should use
them to the defying of his Creator. But though this was a good beginning to my
Conversion, to find my Conscience touched for my Sins, yet it went off again:
Nay, all my Life long, I had a secret Value and Reverence for an honest Man,
and loved Morality in others. But I had formed an odd Scheme of Religion to my
self, which would solve all that God or Conscience might force upon me; yet I
was not over-well reconciled to the Business of Christianity, nor had that
Reverence for the Gospel of Christ as I ought to have; which estate of Mind
continued till the 53d, Chapter of Isaiah was read to him, and some other
Portions of Scripture; by the Power and Efficacy of which Word, assisted by his
Holy Spirit, God so wrought upon his Heart, that he declared, that the
Mysteries of the Passion appeared so clear and plain to him, as ever any thing
did that was represented in a Glass, so that that joy and Admiration which
possessed his Soul upon the reading God's Word to him, was remarkable to all
about him; and he had so much delight in his Testimonies, that, in my absence,
he begged his Mother and Lady to read the same to him frequently, and was
unsatisfied, notwithstanding his great Pains and Weakness, till he had learned
the 53d. of Isaiah without Book.

At the same time discoursing of his Manner of Life from his Youth up, which
all Men knew was too much devoted to the Service of Sin, and that the Lusts of
the Flesh, the Eye, and the Pride of Life, had captivated him, he was very
large and particular in his Acknowledgments about it; more ready to accuse
himself than any one else could be, publicly crying out, O blessed God! Can
such an horrid Creature as I am, be accepted by thee, who has denied thy Being,
and contemned thy Power? asking often, Can there be Mercy and Pardon for me?
Will God own such a Wretch as I? And in the middle of his Sickness, said, Shall
the unspeakable Joys of Heaven be conferred on me? O mighty Savior! never, but
through thine infinite Love and Satisfaction: O never, but by the purchase of
thy Blood; adding, that with all abhorrency he did reflect upon his former
Life, that sincerely and from his Heart he did repent of all that folly and
Madness which he had committed. He had a true and lively sense of God's great
Mercy to him, in striking his hard Heart, saying, If that God who died for
great as well as lesser Sinners, did not sp^edily apply his infinite Merits to
his poor Soul, his Wound was such as no Man could conceive or bear; crying out,
That he was the vilest Wretch and Dog that the Sun shined upon, or the Earth
bore; That now he saw his Error, in not living up to that Reason which God
endued him with, and which he unworthily vilified and contemned; wished he had
been a starving Leper crawling in a Ditch; that he had been a Link-Boy, or a
Beggar, or for his whole Lifetime confined to a Dungeon, rather than thus to
have sinend against God. How remarkable was his Faith, in a hearty embracing an
devout Confession of all the Articles of the Christian Religion, and all the
Divine Mysteries of the Gospel, saying, that that absurd and foolish Philosophy
which the world so much admired, propagated by the late Mr. Hobbs, and others,
had undone him and many more of the best Parts of the Nation. He cast himself
entirely upon the Mercies of Jesus Christ, and the Free Grace of God, declared
to repenting Sinners through him, with a thankful Remembrance of his Life,
Death, and Resurrection, begging God to strengthen his Faith, and often crying
out, Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief.

His mighty Love and Esteem of the Holy Scriptures, his Resolutions to read
them frequently, and meditate upon them, if God should spare him, having
already tasted the good Word; for having spoken to his Heart, he acknowledged
all the seeming Absurdities and Contradictions thereof, fancied by Men of
corrupt and reprobate Judgments, were vanished, and the Excellency and Beauty
appeared, being come to receive the Truth in the Love of it.

How terribly did the Tempter assault him, by casting upon him wicked and lewd
Imaginations: But, I thank God, said he, I abhor them all, and by the Power of
his Grace, which I am sure is sufficient for me, I have overcome them: It Is the
Malice of the Devil, because I am rescued from him; and the Goodness of God,
that frees me from all my Spiritual Enemies. -- He was greatly rejoiced at his
Lady's Conversion from Popery, which he called a Faction supported only by
Fraud and Cruelty. He was heartily concerned for the Pious Education of his
Children, wishing that his Son might never be a Wit, that is, as he explained
it, One of those wretched Creatures who pride themselves in abusing God and
Religion, denying his Being or his Providence; but that he might become an
Honest and a Religious Man, which could only be the Support and Blessing of his
Family. He gave a strict Charge to those Persons, in whose Custody his Papers
were, to burn all his profane and lewd Writings, as being only fit to promote
Vice and Immorality, by which he had so highly offended God, and shamed and
blasphemed that holy Religion into which he had been baptized; and all his
obscene and filthy Pictures, which were so notoriously Scandalous. I must not
pass by his pious and most passionate Exclamation to a Gentleman of some
Character, who came to visit him upon his Deathbed: O remember that you
contemn God no more; he is an avenging God, and will visit you for your Sins;
will in Mercy, I hope, touch your Conscience, sooner or later, as he has done
mine. You and I have been Friends and Sinners together a great while, therefore
I am the more free with you. We have been all mistaken in our Conceits and
Opinions. Our Persuasions have been false and groundless; therefore God grant
you Repentance. And seeing him again next Day, said to him, Perhaps you were
disobliged by my Plainness to you, Yesterday; I spoke the Words of Truth and
Soberness to you, and (striking his Hand upon his Breast) said, I hope God will
touch your Heart.

He commanded me (continues our Author) to preach abroad, and let all Men know,
if they knew it not already, how severely God had disciplined him for his Sins,
by his afflicting Hand; that his Sufferings were most just, though he had laid
Ten thousand times more upon him; how he had laid one Stripe upon another,
because of his grievous Provocations, till he had brought him home to himself;
that in his former Visitations he had not that blessed Effect he was now
sensible of. He had formerly some loose Thoughts and slight Resolutions of
Reforming, and designed to be better, because even the present Consequences of
Sin were still pestering him, and were so troublesome and inconvenient to him;
but now he had other Sentiments of Things, and acted upon other Principles. He
was willing to die, if it pleased God, resigning himself always to the Divine
Disposal; but if God should spare him yet a longer time here, he hoped to bring
Glory to the Name of God in the whole course of his Life; and particularly, by
his Endeavors to convince others, and to assure them of the Danger of their
Condition, if they continued Impenitent, and how graciously God had dealt with
him. -- The Time of his Sickness and Repentance was just Nine Weeks; in all
which time, 30 Hours about the middle of it excepted, wherein he was delirous,
he was so much Master of his Reason, and had so clear an understanding, that he
never dictated, or spoke more composed in his Life. Three or Four Days before
his Death, he had comfortable Persuasions of God's accepting him to his Mercy,
saying, I shall Die; but Oh what unspeakable Glories do I see! What Joys,
beyond Thought or Expression, am I sensible of! I am assured of God's Mercy to
me, through Jesus Christ. O how I long to die, and to be with my Savior.

His Dying REMONSTRANCE.
FOR the Benefit of all those whom I may have drawn into Sin by my Example and
Encouragement, I leave to the World this my Last Declaration, which I deliver
in the presence of the great God, who knows the Secrets of all Hearts, and
before whom I am now appearing to be Judged.

That from the bottom of my Soul I detest and abhor the whole Course of my
former wicked Life; that I think I can never sufficiently admire the Goodness
of God, who has given me a lively sense of my pernicious Opinions, and vile
Practices, by which I have hitherto lived without Hope, and without God in the
World; have been an open Enemy to Jesus Christ, doing the utmost despite to the
holy Spirit of Grace, and that the greatest Testimony of my Charity to such,
is, to warn them in the Name of God, and as they regard the Welfare of their
Immortal Souls, no more to deny his Being, or his Providence, or despise his
Goodness, no more to make a Mock of Sin, or Contemn the pure and excellent
Religion of my everblessed Redeemer. through whose Merits alone, I, one of the
Greatest of Sinners, do yet hope for Mercy and Forgiveness. Amen.

J. ROCHESTER. Declared in the presence of Anne Rochester. Rob. Parsons.

5. Sir Duncomb Colchester, who died, May 25. 1694. in his Return from London,
toward Gloucestershire, wrote this Penitential Letter.

Sir Duncomb Colchester's Penitential Letter.
Gentlemen, and Friends,
SInce it has pleased Almighty God, of his great and undeserved Mercy and
Goodness, to bring me, one of the chiefest of Sinners, by a long and sharp
Visitation, to a sense of my Sins, (for which, with all Humility of Soul, I
adore and praise him) it is a Duty I know incumbent on me, as ever I hope for
his Pardon and Forgiveness, to do what in me lies, to bring Honor to his Holy
Name, to make Reparation for the Mischief I have done by my former vicious
Life, and antidote, as far as I can, the Poison which my Example has shed round
about me: In order whereunto, I do hereby Declare, That I am heartily sorry for
all the Sins of my past Life, the remembrance whereof, however pleasant they
formerly seemed to be, is now Grief and Bitterness to my Soul. More
particularly, that I may take shame to my self, I do with the deepest Sorrow
lament my Bioting and Drunkenness, my Chambering and Wantonness, those daring
and presumptuous Sins which had so long dominion over me: I do also most
heartily lament that great Sin, which I was so frequently guilty of, of
encouraging and drawing others to Excess, which has made me partaker (O sad
Thought!) of other Men's Sins, and liable to answer for more than mine own: I am
sensible, that as it has been my Practice, so it is still of too many
Gentlemen; and that they, as I did, reckon excessive Drinking so far from a
Fault, as to be rather one of the best Indications of a hearty Respect and true
Affection to the Persons they entertain: But, O false Love! O treacherous
Friendship! to receive their Friends Men, and send them out of their Houses
Beasts. I wish, from the bottom of my Soul, that any thing I could say, would
make all those, whose Consciences accuse them of Guilt in this particular, to
loath and abhor this wicked Practice as I do. And I do also heartily lament my
great Neglect of putting the Laws in execution against common Drunkards,
Swearers, and suchlike scandalous Sinners; and do earnestly beseech all such
as are in Authority, and whose Business it is to see the Laws executed, if any
such come to hear this Paper read, that they will be more careful in that
particular, and consider, that as their Power is a Talent entrusted in them,
whereof they must give a strict Account to their Heavenly Lord, so by their
being duly conscientious in the Discharge of their Duty herein, we may hope for
a Reformation amongst us, and then with confidence expect God's Blessing to
rest upon us. And as I abhor my self for my Neglect in this Particular now
mentioned, and all my great Sins and Provocations against an infinite Majesty,
so I do farther hereby declare my full Purpose and Resolution, if it shall
please Almighty God (with whom all things are possible) to restore me to
Health, or prolong my Days, by his special Grace and Assistance, (without which
I shall be able to do nothing) to lead a new Life in all Holy Obedience to his
Will and Commands; and desire, that this Declaration of mine, if I fail to do
so, may be produced as a Testimony against me, to my Shame and Reproach. But
since my Recovery is very uncertain, and what I have the least Reason in the
World to hope for, being heartily desirous to do what good I can in the
Circumstances I am in. I do hereby earnestly warn and beseech all Sinners,
especially those whom my Example has at any time encouraged, (the Remembrance
whereof still fills me with Shame and Sorrow) to repent of all their Sins and
Provocations, least God's Vengeance overtake them in their Security, and there
be no Remedy. And I beseech them farther to take notice, that if this Warning
be slighted, the wilful Neglect and Refusal thereof will at last be charged
upon them as a heinous Aggravation of all their Sins they shall hereafter
commit, will increase their Condemnation, and make their Doom more dreadful and
terrible: But that it may have a contrary Effect, and be a means to reduce 'em
from their Sins to a Holy and Religious Life, that so their Souls may be saved
in the great Day of the Lord, is the earnest Desire of their

Languishing and Sorrowful Friend, DUNCOMB COLCHESTER, Who desires this may be
read in the Parish-Churches of Michel Dean, and Westbury, and shown to such
Gentlemen, Friends, and others, as may bring God most Glory.
Nov. 1693. Signed and Delivered in the presence of several of his Friends.




6. The Remarkable Penitence of J. H.

The next Letter is written by a Woman, and one of inferior Quality in the
World, but not at all inferior in her Repentance. It was that, and the Grace of
God in her Heart, which moved her to do it long before it was done; and it was
the pure effect of that, when at last it was done; and all her own Composure,
we are assured by Mr. Stephens, an ancient Divine, now living in London, who
gave her Absolution, approved her Purpose in it, and perused it when she had
done it, and has seen other Letters of her Writing, by which he could easily
discern the Composure of this, if there had been any other hand in it, or any
Reason to suspect it. It is published with her Consent, who is very ready to
embrace any Motion tending to the Honor and Service of God, or her own
Humiliation. Her Letter was directed to Mr. -- Minister in Portsmouth, and is
as follows, viz.

Reverend Sir,
I Have put Pen to Paper, humbly beseeching you to hear me of your Charity a
few Words: The Enemy of my Soul has raised many Objections to hinder my
intended purpose; and I have been almost persuaded to give it over; but now
having the Advice of a Pious Holy Minister of God, who says it may be of great
use, I desire to take Shame to my self, and to give Glory to the Majesty of
Heaven, who in great Love and Pity has plucked me as a Firebrand out of the
Fire, and I am this Day a Living Monument of Mercy. I cannot but be grieved at
the many sad Examples I have given at Portsmouth. My Sins have increased the
heap of the public Impieties, and made them cry the louder to Heaven for
Vengeance both there and here too. It is very meet, right, and my Duty to
confess, to the Glory of God, and Praise of his Grace, my crying Sins committed
in that Place, that some of my Companions in Evil may hear and fear, and do no
more such Wickedness. About Nine or Ten Years agone, I came a young Woman (if I
deserve that Name) to P --, my Husband, Cook of a Ship in that Harbor, a very
ill Husband, (no Excuse for me.) Almighty God did suffer two Sinners to come
together in plague one another; and whilst he acted the Part of a Drunkard,
(with Shame and Confusion of Face be it spoken,) I acted the part of a Harlot,
giving my self over to work all Uncleanness with greediness; insomuch that my
very Name was a Proverb of Reproach to all Civil Women. Two or Three Years I
lived openly Scandalous, and then it pleased the Almighty to visit me with a
sore Fit of Sickness, even to the Loss of my Limbs for a Season; at which time
I did beg of God to restore me to my Health, and did faithfully promise never
more to defile my Marriage Bed; and the Lord was entreated at that time also,
and has added to my Life these remaining Years. Some time after, it pleased
the All-wise Providence to make me a Mother; I was very thankful for the Mercy,
and was much reclaimed, and I was in some measure convinced of the great Evil
of sin, and did put Pen to Paper with intent it should come to the Ministers
hand; but the Enemies of my Soul prevented and hindered that reasonable Design,
and I was again lulled to sleep in the Bed of Carnal Security; where I
continued three or four Years with little Interruption; in which time I buried
my Husband and two Children. After this, I was in danger of being as bad as
ever, living at Service in the very midst of Temptation at Portbridge. I
continued there but a short space, for the good Hand of Providence brought me
to London, where I had Time and Opportunity to reflect upon my ill-spent Life.
O that I might improve the Mercy! O that I could tell you what God has done
for my Soul! He has brought me out of Darkness into his mavelous Light: O
that I could prevail with my Companions in Evil to seek the Lord while he may
be found, and call upon him while he is near! Some of them are old Sinners,
gray hairs are upon them, and they know it not; I could be content to stand in
a white sheet in your Church, if I might but prevail with any one Soul to see
the heinousness of my sin: Nay, I could be content to be stoned without the
Walls of the Garrison, so I might but be a means of the Conversion of any one
Sinner. O that I could write these Lines with my purest Blood! I am grieved for
the Dishonor I have done to God by my abominable sin, and heartily wish my
Head were Waters, and mine Eyes were a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep day
and night for abusing Mercy. O Sir, you live in a place relating to Sodom, cry
aloud, spare not to tell the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseer, their Sins, and my Companions in Evil their Sins. The Lord is coming
to reckon with the Nations, and with you: God grant you may be found among the
Faithful Shepherds, watching them, and giving them their Meat in due Season. I
humbly beg your Blessing, desiring to be remembered in your Prayers; and I
humbly beseech the Almighty, that this poor Paper may have its designed Effect,
that God may be glorified, and our Souls saved in the day of the Lord Jesus,
Amen and Amen.

J. H.
Jan. 22. 1693/4.

7. Sir Alan Broderick, who was a Gentleman of Extraordinary Learning and
Accomplishments, did own with much Contrition, that a long Scene of his Life
had been acted in the Sports and Follies of Sin, that he had sometime pursued a
Pagan and abandoned way, Skepticism it self not excepted; wherein the poignancy
of his Wit, and the strength of his Reasoning, even in that very Argument, the
using of which proclaims a Man, in the Language of the Holy Scriptures, a Fool,
may have been the occasion of a great deal of Mischief toward some that are
already gone to their Accounts.

Yet some Years before his Death, the bent and tendency of his Life and Actions
was Devout and Religious, and in his Private Conversation with his Minister, he
would always be Discoursing some Cases of Conscience about retired
Closet-Prayer, or the Nature and Necessity of True Religion -- and in his last
Sickness he thought himself under a mighty Incumbency to Pray, but was much
harassed and anxious what to do, because of his fear of not performing it with
all becoming Reverence and Seriousness.

For look you, says he, my Conscience is now as tender as wet Paper, torn upon
every apprehension of the least guilt before God -- And as he had much studied
the Nature of Repentance, he would frequently complain, That he had a great
Jealousy upon himelf, lest he had not yet conceived an horror answerable to
his past Exorbitancies of Life, and had not made those smart and pungent
Reflections upon himself, that might become one that had so long, and in such
Exalted Degrees violated the Laws of his Maker, and made himself so Obnoxious
to the Vengeance of his Judgment, and that if the cutting off one of his Hands
with the other, were but a proper or likely way, through the anguish of such a
Wound, to give him a just horror for his sins, he would do that as willingly as
he ever did any one Action that had given him the greatest Pleasure of Life. --
He also said, that by the Grace of God, he had such a sense of the Conviction,
and folly, and unreasonableness of Sin, that no Argument, no Tentation should
prevail upon him to do the like again. -- Having taken notice that all my Lord
Rochester's Religious Breathings were accounted by some, the Raves and
Delirances of a sick Brain, he did resolve to have given the World a Public
Account of the Sentiments he had of Religion, both as to the Faith and Practice
of it, but was prevented.

CHAP. CL. Testimonies of Ancient and Modern Infidels, Heathens.
1. AN Edict of the Emperor Maximinus, after a violent Persecution of the
Christians; extorted from him upon this occasion following:

A Plague from above lighting on him, first took Root in his Flesh, and
afterward proceeded even unto his So^^. A sudden Rutrefaction did seize upon
his Bowels in his most Secret Parts: He had a festered Ulcer in the bottom of
his Belly; an innumerable multitude of Worms crawled out; he breathed out a
deadly stink, insomuch that diverse of his Physicians, not being able to endure
his abominable savor, were killed with the very Air. Being afflicted with so
many Evils, he began to have a sense of those Evils which he had inflicted upon
God's Holy Servants. And this he confessed to have been justly inflicted for
his Impious Presumption and Fury against Christ. Hereupon he made this Edict.

The Emperor Caesar Galerus Maximinus, Puissant, Magnificent, Chief Lord, Lord
Thebais, Lord of Sarmatia, five times Conqueror of Persia, Lord of Germany,
Lord of Egypt, twice Conqueror of the Carpians, six times Conqueror of the
Armenians, Lord of the Medes, Lord of the Adiabeni, twenty times Tribune,
nineteen times General Captain, eight times Consul, Father of the Country,
Proconsul. And the Emperor Caesar, Flavius, Valerius, Constantine, the
Virtuous, Fortunate, Puissant, Noble, Chief Lord, General Captain, and Tribune
five times, Consul, Father of the Country, Proconsul. Among other things which
we have decreed for the Commodity and Profit of the Commonwealth, our Pleasure
is, first of all, to Order and Redress all things according to the Ancient Laws
and Public Discipline of the Romans. And withal, to use this Proviso, That the
Christians, which have forsaken the Religion of their Ancestors, should be
brought again to the Right Way. For after a certain Humor of Singularity, such
an Opinion of Excellency puffed them up, that those things which their Elders
had received and allowed, they rejected and disallowed, devising every Man such
Laws as they thought good, and observed the same, Assembling in diverse Places
great multitudes of People. Wherefore whenas Our Edict was Proclaimed, that
they should return unto the Ordinances of their Elders, diverse standing in
great danger, felt the Penalty thereof, and many being troubled therefore,
endured all kinds of Death. And because We perceive many as yet to persist in
the same Madness, neither yielding due Worship unto the Celestial Gods,
neither regarding the God of the Christians, having respect unto Our Benignity
and Godly Custom, Pardoning all Men after Our wonted Guise, We thought good in
this Case to extend Our Gracious and Favorable Clemency, that the Christians
may be tolerated again, and that they repair again to the Places where they may
meet together; so that they do nothing Prejudicial to Public Order and
Discipline. We mean to prescribe unto the Judges by another Epistle what they
shall observe. Wherefore, as this Our Gracious Pardon deserves, let them make
Intercession unto their God, for Our Health, for the Commonwealth, and for
themselves; that in all Places the Affairs of the Commonwealth may be safely
preserved, and that they themselves may live securely in their own Houses.
Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. 18.

2. The Emperor Adrianus, receiving Letters from Serenius Granianus, a Noble
President, signifying in the behalf of the Christians, that it was very
Injurious, that for no Crime, but only at the Outcry of the People, they should
be brought and executed; wrote unto Minutius Fundanus, Proconsul of Asia, and
commanded, That none without grievous Crimes and Occasion should be put to
Death. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8.

3. It may not be improper here, to mention that Confession extorted from the
Emperor Julian, after his Persecution of the Christians: He being suddenly
slain in a War against the Persians, throwing his Blood in the Air, ended his
wicked Life with this true Acknowledgment and Exclamation; Vicisti Galilaee:
Thou have overcome me, O Galilean, (or, O Jesus of Galilee!) This is attested
by Theodoret, and related by Sozomen, l. 6. c. 2. p. 511.

4. This likewise gave occasion to another like Confession from another
Heathen, and yet proceeding from another Passion: Quomodo Christiani dicunt,
Deum suum esse patientem and (...), etc. How can the Christians truly say, that
they have a Patient God, when we plainly see him so Angry and Impatient, that
he could not deferr his Anger so much as for a moment? Hier. l. 2. in Habac. c.
3. Tom. 6. p. 243.

5. Antoninus Pius sent this Epistle to the Commons of Asia, in behalf of the
Christians --

The Emperor Caesar Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus Armenicus, Pontifex
Maximus, fifteen times Tribune, thrice Consul, unto the Commonalty of Asia,
sends Greeting. I know the Gods are careful to disclose hurtful Persons: For
they Punish such as will not Worship them, more grievously than you do those
whom you bring in Trouble; confirming that Opinion which they conceive of you,
to be wicked and ungodly Men. It is their desire in God's Quarrel, rather to
die than live. So that they become Conquerors, yielding their Lives unto the
Death, rather than to obey your Edicts. It shall seem very necessary to
admonish you of the Earthquakes, which have and do happen among us, that being
therewith moved, ye may compare our Estate with theirs. They have more
Confidence to Godwards than you have. You, during the time of your Ignorance,
despise other Gods, contemn the Religion of the Immortal God, banish the
Christians which Worship him, and Persecute them unto the Death. In the behalf
of these Men, many of the Provincial Presidents have written heretofore unto
Our Father, of Famous Memory, whom he answered in Writing again, That they were
not to be longer molested, unless they had practiced Treason against the Roman
Empire. And many have given Notice unto Us of the same Matter, whom We answered
as Our Father did before Us. If any therefore hereafter be found thus busied in
other Men's Affairs, We Command that the accused be absolute and free, though he
be found such a one, I mean faulty; and that the Accuser be grievously
punished. This Edict was proclaimed at Ephesus, in the hearing of the great
Assembly of Asia. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 13.

6. Dr. Heylin in his Cosmography tells us, That some of the Natives of America
would say to some of the English, at their first going over to those Foreign
Plantations, That King James was a good King, and his God a good God; but their
Tauto naught.

7. In the City of Aleppo, a handsome French Slave, a Young Man of Eighteen
Years Old; being tempted to Sodomy by his Master's Steward, and upon his
denial, being threatened with immediate Death, if he disputed any longer: The
virtuous Slave finding himself destitute of all other Remedies, nimbly seized
upon a Scymetar which hung upon the Wall of the Chamber, and at one blow with
it, smote off the Turk's Head. To escape Death for this Fact, which was the
lightest Punishment he could expect, he takes an Arabian Horse out of his
Master's Stable, with a design to make for Scandaroon, to the English Factory
there: But unhappily meeting his Master upon the way, he was stopped, brought
back again, and upon discovery of the Murder, brought before the Basha; by
whom, upon the Importunity of the Turks, he was condemned to be beheaded. The
Slave then as brought to the Place of Execution (which is a Field without the
City;) where being come, he appeared, though very modest, yet undaunted, and
fearless of Death. And having prayed with much Fervor and Devotion, and having
particularly acknowledged his Fault, and begged Almighty God's Pardon for
telling his Master, that his House was robbed (when he met him upon the Road)
he was stripped stark naked (according to the Custom of that Place) and
discovered a lovely Body, in which inhabited a more lovely Soul. And
immediately before his Death he did aver, that he died a Christian, depending
wholly for his Salvation upon the Merits of our Savior; and that he killed the
Steward for no other reason but to avoid being polluted by him; and that he
hoped God would show some sign upon his Body to attest his Innocence, and the
Truth of what he said. After having said this, his Head was struck off from his
Body, and both left unburied, according to Custom. Many rebellious Turks were
executed at the same time in the same place, whose Bodies were quickly torn in
pieces, and devoured by a certain sort of great Dogs, kept at Aleppo, who were
allowed no other Sustenance almost but the Carcasses of Malefactors. But it was
observed, that none of those Dogs would touch the Body or Head of this Martyr
of Chastity.

And which is more strange yet, though this Young Man's Body lay in the Field
unburied Ten or Twelve days, and no other Execution in all that time, and the
Dogs so extremely pinched with Hunger, that they were ready to devour living
Men, yet they would not touch this Body. And which is more Remarkable yet,
though it lay exposed all this time to the heat of the Sun in that very
intemperate Climate, yet did it not stink, corrupt, or change color. And this
Circumstance moreover is affirmed as Remarkable, that after Ten days, there
being another Execution in the same Place, that Carcass was immediately
devoured in the sight of the People. But the Turks, to bury their own shame,
were necessitated at last to dig a Grave, and entomb this chaste Martyr. See
the Narrative, Printed with License at London, Anno Christi, 1676.

8. The Testimony of Cublay, the Emperor of the Tartars, concerning Christ,
upon occasion of a Victory obtained by him over the Great Province of Mangi, A.
C. 1286. THis Day I cannot deny, but that the Victory which I have obtained
over mine Enemies, is, by especial Grace from my great God the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, abiding in this Glorious Vault of Heaven: To whom I purpose to render
Thanks to Morrow, even in this open Field, to which purpose I give Order, that
the Places be avoided of Humane Bodies here slain, as also of the dead Beasts,
and decent Altars purposely erected. As for the Prisoners, being most part of
them Christians, whom I behold despoiled of their Arms, shouted at, mocked,
despised, and jested at by the Jews, Mahometists, and others, upbraiding them
with their God Jesus Christ (who was sometime fastened to a Cross by the said
Jews) for not aiding and helping them to the Victory, as wanting such Power,
because so many of their Ensigns are here prostrated at my feet. From this
present hour forward, I forbid all manner of Persons, of what Quality or
Religion soever they be, to use any more such Derisions of themm, on pain to be
deprived of their Arms, and well whipped with Rods at two several times; yea,
on the very greatest pain beside, that can be imagined. And so much the rather,
because their God Jesus Christ is esteemed of Us, to be one of the very
greatest Celestial Deities, full of all Right, Equity, and Justice: For, he
knowing these Christians to make War against Us unjustly, being Our Subjects,
that never gave them occasion, but revolted of themselves, and adhered with Our
Enemies; therefore has he permitted that I should win the Day, albeit I have
heard him to be called the God of Battles. Over and besides this, I Pardon all
them that have followed my unkind Nephews Naiam and Caydve, as being merely
deceived by them, in making them believe, they were levied for my Service; and
therefore I receive them again into my Protection. Giving further to
understand, that all such as have any Prisoners, they are not to offer the
least harm whatsoever, but immediately to set them at Liberty, delivering them
their Arms, and all other Equipages to them belonging, on pain to pass through
the danger of the Army, even he the proudest that shall make denial. Our Charge
imposed on the Christians, is, to Pray unto their God for Our Prosperity, and
to do Us Nine Months Service, by taking Wages of Us, in Our Instant War against
the King of Nixamora, who denies to pay Us Our Tribute, and strives to equal
himself with Our Greatness. Treasur. of Ancient and Modern Times, l. 2. p. 130.

9. The Testimony of Sidan, King of Morocco, concerning Jesus Christ, in a
Letter to James the First, King of England. WHen these Our Letters shall be so
happy as to come to Your Majesty's sight, I wish the Spirit of the Righteous
God may so direct your Mind, that you may joyfully embrace the Message I send;
presenting to you the means of Exalting the Majesty of God, and your own Reward
amongst Men. The Regal Power allotted to us, makes us common Servants to our
Creator; then, of those People whom we Govern. So that observing the Duties we
owe to God, we deliver Blessings to the World; in providing for the Public
Good of our States, we Magnify the Honor of God, like the Celestial Bodies,
which, though they have much Veneration, yet serve only to the Benefit of the
World. It is the Excellency of our Office, to be Instruments, whereby Happiness
is delivered into the Nations. Pardon me, Sir! This is not to Instruct, (for I
know I speak to one of more clear and quick sight than my self) but I speak
this, because God has pleased to grant me a happy Victory over some part of
those rebellious Pirates, that have so long molested the Peaceful Trade of
Europe; and has presented further occasion to Root out the Generation of
those, who have been so pernicious to the Good of Our Nations: I mean, since it
has pleased God to be so auspicious to Our beginnings in the Conquest of
Salla, that We might join and proceed, in hope of like Success, in the War
against Tunis, Algier, and other Places (Dens and Receptacles for the Inhumane
Villainies of those who abhor Rule and Government.) Herein whilst We interrupt
the Corruption of Malignant Spirits of the World, We shall glorify the great
God, and perform a Duty that will shine as glorious as the Sun and Moon, which
all the Earth may see and Reverence. A Work that shall ascend as sweet as the
Perfume of the most Precious Odours in the Nostrils of the Lord: A Work
grateful and happy to Men. A Work whose Memory shall be reverenced so long as
there shall be any that delight to hear the Actions of Heroic and Magnanimous
Spirits; that shall last as long as there be any remaining amongst Men that
Love and Honor the Piety and Virtue of Noble Minds. This Action I here
willingly present to you, whose Piety and Virtues equal the Greatness of your
Power: That we, who are Servants to the Great and Mighty God, may Hand in Hand
Triumph in the Glory which this Action presents unto us. Now, because the
Islands which you Govern, have been ever Famous for the unconquered Strength of
their Shipping, I have sent this my Trusty Servant and Ambassador, to know,
whether in your Princely Wisdom you shall think fit to assist me with such
Forces by Sea, as shall be answerable to those I provide by Land, which if you
please to grant, I doubt not but the Lord of Hosts will Protect and Assist
those that Fight in so Glorious a Cause. Nor ought you to think this strange,
that I, who much reverence the Peace and Accord of Nations, should exhort to a
War. Your great Prophet Christ Jesus was of the Line of the Tribe of Judah, as
well as the Lord of Peace; which may signify unto you, that he which is a
lover and maintainer of Peace, must always appear with the Terror of his Sword,
and wading through a Sea of Blood, must arrive to Tranquillity: This made James
your Father of Glorious Memory so happily renowned amongst all Nations. It was
the Noble Fame of your Princely Virtues, which resounds to the utmost corners
of the Earth, that persuaded me to invite you to partake of that Blessing,
wherein I boast my self most Happy. I wish God may heap the Riches of his
Blessings on you, increase your Happiness with your Days, and hereafter
perpetuate the Greatness of your Name in all Ages. Heylin. Cosmogr. p. 961, 962.

It were not difficult to add many more such Attestations as these from
Heathens, Indians, Jews, etc. For indeed all the Converts brought over to
Christianity, contribute a particular strength to this kind of Evidence. But
these, I think, are enough to satisfy any reasonable Reader; and the
unreasonable will not be convinced, though Witnesses should arise from the Dead.

CHAP. CL. The Sufferings of the Reformed in the Kingdom of France.
THE Sufferings of the Reformed in the Kingdom of France, within the Revolution
of a few Years, have been so great, and attended with so many Remarkable
Providence, that though we cannot pretend to give our Reader a full Idea of them
here, that being reserved' till the Publication of the Two last Volumes of the
Edict of Nants it self; yet we cannot but take notice of a few Particulars,
which were Transacted within the Bounds of Lower Languedoc, and that may in the
mean time serve for a Specimen of the same.

1. When the Parliament of Toulouse, and other Parliaments in France labored
to destroy the Protestant Churches; God was pleased to raise up a Lawyer named
Claude Brousson, who with much Zeal and holy Boldness solicited the Parliament
of Toulouse on their behalf, but being at last through the Violence of the
Persecution forced to go out of France in the Year 1683. after he had run
through many Dangers there, he did yet from thence forward labor according to
his Ability, for the Defense, Edification, and Consolation of his distressed
Brethren: Lausanne in Switzerland was the principal place of his Residence, and
though he had not been bred in the Study of Divinity, yet by assiduous
Application, and the blessing of God upon his Labors, he Composed and caused
to be Printed, several small Pieces adapted for the Use of the afflicted
Churches, etc. and which he took care to have dispersed up and down France and
elsewhere continually: As the extraordinary Ministers of God's Word, were
pleased to come often to confer with him, concerning what both the one and the
other of them had done for advancing the Lord's Work; and that on the other
hand, he found he had not now as also for some time past the same liberty as
formerly, to disperse his Writings in France by the Post, he was solicited by
his Conscience to return thither also, in order to do what he could for the
Promotion of God's Glory, and had always these Words upon his Spirit, Ezekiel.
13.4, 5. O Israel, thy Prophets are like the Foxes in the Desares. Ye have not
gone up into the Gaps, neither made up the Hedge for the house of Israel to
stand in the Battle in the day of the Lord. And that other Text in Judges 5.23.
Curse ye Meroz, [said the Angel of the Lord], etc. Wherefore he at length
determined to go thither, and in order thereunto, made up several Bales of
those Writings he had got Printed, and which he judged most proper for the
advancement of the Kingdom of Heaven; he did suppose he might be able to find
out a way to convey those Bales into Languedoc, and that when he found himself
in the Heart of the Kingdom, he might disperse the said Writings with more
Facility then he could have done during his abode in Switzerland; but the Ways
of God are not like nor Ways, nor his Thoughts like our Thoughts. But whatever
be proposed hereby, the Danger he should expose himself to, was very terrible;
for as he had had some share in the management of the Affairs of the Reformed
Religion in France before the entire Desolation of their Churches, some of
those Disorders which happened in the Year 1683, in Dauphine, Vivares, and
Cevennes, were partly, though he were innocent, imputed to him; and the Zeal also
which he had manifested diverse ways during his Exile, for the Truth, Service of
God, and the Consolation of his desolate Church, had more and more irritated
the Court, Clergy, and Jesuits against him. So that he clearly saw he could not
return into France without exposing himself to extreme Danger; But the Motions
of his Conscience were more vigorous than all the Considerations in the World;
wherefore he prepared himself for this dangerous Journey, by frequent Fastings
and continued Prayer.

And as he had resolved to go into France in company with some other Servants
of God, and that he saw the departure of one and another was deferred for
Reasons that savoured too much of human Prudence; He felt in himself a Fire
which consumed him without intermission, and which at last threw him into a
slow Fever, which most People thought to be Mortal, but whereof they knew not
the cause; he saw now clearly that God would infallibly make him die on it, if
he did any longer withstand the Motions of his Spirit; wherefore he concluded
with himself, that if he must die, it were much better he went into France and
died there, in following the Motion of his Conscience, than to pine away
elsewhere and die without the discharging of his Duty. In order whereunto he
met the other Servants of God who were willing to depart without any more
delay, and they divided themselves into several Companies, because of their
number, among whom were the Brethren Vivers, Lapiere, Serein, Boisson, Dombres,
Poutant, Papus, etc. Brousson was still very weak, and much wasted; but God
confirmed him in his Health while upon his Journey; he entered France in company
with Mr. Debruc, an ancient Minister, who for some time had Refugiated himself
in Switzerland; they had not been long in France, but Debruc finding himself in
eminent Danger, departed again out of the Kingdom; however, the rest
aforementioned continued to instruct the People according to Opportunity and
their Abilities; but many Months were not elapsed, when two of them, viz.
Boisson and Dombres, after they had preached the Gospel in Cevennes with
extraordinary success, suffered Martyrdom with unshaken Constancy; they went to
the place of Punishment singing God's Praises; but least the Faithful and
Roman Catholics themselves might be edified by their pious Demeanor and
Exhortations at the time of their Death, they ordered the Drums to Beat all he
while, which has been a frequent Practice with them on several occasions.

2. About the same time, a young Man of about Seventeen, whose name was
Soveirain alias Oliver, suffered Martyrdom at Mompellier with that mavelous
Constancy, that the Intendant sometime after taking occasion to Discourse upon
this Subject with Monsieur de Villeveille, Colonel of one of the Regiments that
had been for a long time in Cevennes and Langued^c to hinder such Assemblies of
the Reformed, he told him, If the God whom these People serve be the same with
that whom we adore, we run a risque of being one day very miserable.

But notwithstanding any present Remorse, on went the Fury of these Men, and
among others the Soldiers seized a young Man in Cevennes, whose name was Roman,
a Student in Divinity, and who had for a considerable time preached the Gospel
there; they carried him to the Castle of St. John de Gardonnenques, where he
was sentenced to die; but here Divine Providence interposed, for the Night
before the Day wherein he was to suffer, a young Maiden who served in the
Castle as Chambermaid, having passed the Guards that were asleep before the
Room wherein he was looked up, found a way through the Window to cut the Cords
wherewith he was Bound, and so he made his escape; next Day, when none of the
Prisoner was to be found, Monsieur de Montvaillant to whom the Castle belonged,
and who was of the number of the pretended new Converts, was accused of setting
him at liberty. But the young Woman camein of her self, and freely confessed, she
was the Person without the Intervention of any other, who had freed him,
because she believed him to be innocent, and so ought to have compassion upon
him; for which Fact she was sentenced to be Whipped by the common Hangman, and to
perpetual Imprisonment, in a place called Sommieres, where if alive, she is to
this Day.

But to return to Brousson, when he had got to Cevennes, and found he could not
find a way whereby by to get those Pieces he had Printed before in Switzerland
into France, and which he hoped he might have been able to have got dispersed
through the Kingdom; he immediately fell to instruct and comfort some of his
Brethren by short Exhortations, in Reading and Expounding to them the Holy
Scripture, or in dispersing one way or another, those small Writings which he
had composed for their instruction, and of which he made many Copies: Some
Months after his arrival in France, that is, in December 1689, being with a
small Company of the Faithful upon one of the high Mountains of Cevennes
covered with Snow, and in a Cottage, where he had dwelt for some Days with
several of his Brethren; all these Faithful entreated and adjured him in the
Name of the Lord, to preach the Gospel, and to administer the Lord's Supper
unto them; Vivens who was also with him in the same Cortage, exhorted him to
the same thing.

It is true, Brousson had found himself disposed of a long time, to Labor by
Writing according to his ability, to advance the Kingdom of God; but on the
other hand, he had not yet entirely forsaken his secular Employment; for during
his Exile, he had from time to time exercised the Function of his old
Profession of Advocate, though with some regret, and so far as was necessary
for the subsistence of himself and Family, having been dispossessed of all his
Estate before. Though at the same time he had not yet applied himself publicly
to Preach the Holy Gospel. Wherefore being stirred up by the unanimous
Exhortations of his Brethren to preach the Word of God, and then to administer
unto them the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; he told them he now clearly saw
God had put that into their Hearts, and that he had a call to consecrate
himself to his Work and Service in a more particular manner then he had done
till that time, wherefore he prayed to God with his whole Hear, that he would
be pleased to grant unto him those Graces that were necessary for so great a
Work: But before he began his Preaching, Brother Vivens sought God in a very
fervent Prayer, that he would be pleased to grant him the assistances of his
Holy Spirit, that he might Labor faithfully and successfully in so holy and
excellent a Work; which being ended, Brousson said, Well my Brethren, is it
then your desire that I should preach the Word of God to you, and also
administer the Holy Sacrament? To whom when the Faithful had made answer, That
they ardently desired it; he added, That since it was the Will of God that he
should preach the Gospel and administer the Lord's Supper unto them, he also
Prayed with all his Heart, that the Lord would vouchsafe the saving Aids of his
Holy Spirit unto him, and continually increase of Grace, to the end he might
for the remainder of his Life, Labor successfully to the Glory of the great
God, the Advancement of his Kingdom, and for the Salvation and Consolation of
his chosen Ones: Then having himself made his Prayer of Consecration, he entered
upon Preaching and Administering the Ordinances unto them.

Brouss^n in the beginning of January 1690, having need of a Companion took
Henry Poutant along with him, as Vivens did Papus, and so they left the high
Mountain where they had endured great Hardships and parted, Brousson going from
Desert to Desert through C^vennes and Lower Languedoc to preach the Gospel: And
though there were a great many Soldiers in that Country who moved Night and Day
to hinder such Assemblies, yet that did not prevent their being frequently held
in the Deserts. Brousson for the first two Years had a great many of them,
sometimes three or four Meetings a Week, till at last the ill state of his
Health and Stomach which he had lost by continual Labor forced him to abstain
for some Months; but the extreme Desolation whereunto the People of God were
reduced affected him to that degree, that he could not moderate his Zeal, so
that after he had taken some Repose in one place, his manner was to traverse a
large Country, and to keep Meetings almost at every League's distance,
according as he found it necessary for the Instruction and Consolation of the
People; Nay many times before he rested in any one place, he held ten, a dozen,
fifteen, to twenty Assemblies; sometimes it so happened, that for fifteen
Nights together he kept Meetings every other Night, and yet made use of some
part of the intermediate Night to go from one place to another. In the ordinary
Assemblies he was obliged to speak eagerly for the space of three Hours, and
when the Sacrament was administered for four or five Hours and an half, in the
various Exercises of Divine Worship. Besides these continual Labors he made
three long Prayers every Day, one in the Morning, another at three in the
Afternoon, and a third in the Evening, for the Consolation of Families he came
to as he passed from place to place, or for such who took care of him in the
Deserts, and for those of other faithful Families who could be present at these
particular Exercises; and these Prayers were also many times accompanied with
an Exhortation: He also every Lord's Day performed two religious Exercises, one
in the Morning, and the other in the Afternoon, with the Faithful who knew the
place of his retreat, and who could come to Pray to God with him, and hear the
Reading and Expounding of his Word, or the Reading of some one of his Sermons,
which Reading was also attended with an Exhortation.

He did not content himself with Preaching the Gospel, Viva voce, but he
Preached it also by Writing: for the Night he employed to keep great Meetings,
or to travel from Place to Place, and the Day after having taken a few Hours
Repose in the Morning, he spent incessantly in making Copies of his Sermons,
which he composed upon the most Important Matters of Salvation, in relation to
the State the Church of God was then in, in France; and in Opposition to the
Errors, Superstitions, Idolatry, and Tyrannick and Antichristian Rule, that
took place in the Romish Church; which he took Care to have dispersed in Towns
and Villages, where he could not go himself to Preach. He also Transcribed
Copies of several Letters, or Prayers, which he Composed for the Edification of
the People, and which he sent also to several Places: For this purpose he
always carried a little Board with him, which served him to write upon in the
Woods, upon his Knees, and which he called the Wilderness-Table; insomuch, that
when the ill State of his Body, or the overgreat Fury of his Enemies, hindered
him to continue Holy Assemblies, God gave him the Comfort to labor for the
Salvation of the People, in a way, sometimes, more efficacious and extensive,
than if he could have Preached to them in Person: Besides which, he also
labored from time to time, to defend the Truth by other Writings, which he
sent to the Court, in Justification of the Doctrine which he Preached; and to
serve at the same time for an Apology for the other Servants of God, who
Preached his Word in France, and for the People that met together to serve God,
and hear his Word. Which yet had so little effect, that besides the daily
Outrages of the Soldiery, there was an Order Published in the Year 1691,
wherein was promised Five thousand Livres, to any one that should take Vivens
and Brousson, dead or alive: At which Vivens being somewhat transported with
Indignation, tho otherwise of unblamable Conversation, of which even the
Intendant himself, Monsieur de Bavile, who has made so many Martyrs in Lower
Languedoc, Cevennes, Vivares, etc. bare Testimony, when he said, That he would
not judge that same Man, they were so transported against him, that having
taken one named Valdeiron, who was of the Number of those that accompanied him,
the Violence offered him, and the fear of the horrible Punishment prepared for
him, made him show them the Cave where Vivens had hid himself; which they
immediately surrounded with Soldiers, in February 1692: the poor Man, after he
had prayed thrice, resolved to sell his Life as dear as he could, and so killed
three of the most adventurous Men that drew nearest the Cave; at last, he was
killed. There were three Men in the Cave with him, who could have defended
themselves much longer, and destroyed many of their Enemies; but the Governor
of Alais, who Commanded the Soldiers, offering them Life, if they would
surrender, they accepted of the Conditions: But for all this, they were some
Days after most injuriously hanged at Alais, contrary to the said Capitulation.

It Is true, Brousson did not approve of this immoderate Zeal in his Brother
Vivens, and the rest; and therefore he proposed, for his part, to combat
against his Enemies with the Sword of the Spirit only, which is the Word, and
so continue his Ministry as before; and holding a Meeting one time in the Wood
of Boncoviran, where there happened to be a Person remarkable for his Quality,
who drew near him, through the midst of the People, and such being rarely then
seen in the like Assemblies; this Assembly was discovered, and somebody said,
He had seen a Person of Quality there: upon which Information, six Persons of
Quality in those Parts were seized, viz. the Barons of Fous and Agremont, Mon.
de Sanzet, Mon. de Gajans his Son, Mon. de Dommesargues, and Mon. de Fesse; for
every one of which one might be bold to affirm, that since the Desolation of
the Churches, they had never been in any of those Religious Assemblies; but
right or wrong, they would have it so: and thereupon Mon. Dommessargues, and
Gajans, were Condemned to the Galleys upon this Account, and the rest sent to
the Min^s at Lions.

But Br^^sson's gentle Carriage did not at all abate the Rage of his Enemies,
but after the Death of Vivens, all the Choler of the Government was levelled at
him; and they said, provided he could be destroyed, all would be quiet in the
Province: and from henceforward he was surrounded with an Army of Enemies, who
incessantly thirsted for his Blood, and who sought for him Night and Day, with
utmost Fury: But besides this great Number of declared Enemies, he was also
exposed to the Perfidy of false Brethren; as there are always a great Number of
Reprobates, who love the Ways of Iniquity, and give themselves to the Devil,
for the least Reward or Profit, and who are more afraid of the Reproaches of
Men, than of the Judgment of God; the Intendant was continually putting forth
an Order, that promised a great Sum of Money to whomsoever should take, or kill
him: And among others, there was one published, and set up everywhere, in the
Month of July, 1693, wherein was Five thousand Livres promised, to whomsoever,
that would, by a Letter to the Postmaster, discover the Place where he might
be seized: promising withal, upon his Faith and Honor, no Man should ever
know, who it was that gave that Information: and adding, that after Brousson
were taken, he that should give such Information, should have no more to do,
than to go to the Postmaster, to whom he had sent the Letter, and he would pay
him the Five thousand Livres, without enquiring who he was. There was almost no
place wherein there was not some new Judas, who would sell himself to the Devil
by seizing of him; it may well be judged, there now could have been no greater
Danger for a Servant of God, than to go from place to place, to instruct and
solace the People, and so put his Life into the Hands of a great many Persons,
seeing the Assemblies, were very numerous and frequent: but God upon this
occasion was pleased to make known, how wonderful the Care was he took for the
Preservation of those that fear him, who do not put their Trust in an Arm of
Flesh, but their whole Considence in him

But to be a little more particular upon this Head: You are to Note, that there
was a certain Person of Aulas near Du Vigun, in Cevennes, whose Name was
Gautier, with whom Brousson had been a Fellow-Student formerly, at Nismes; As
this Gautier was a profane and wicked Person, but yet one that pretended
himself to be of the Number of the New Converts, and who had also formerly been
a Student for the Ministry; he was from time to time carried covertly into the
Fort of St. Hipolite, as a Prisoner for Religion; and there he related to the
Faithful, who were really Prisoners for having been taken at Religious
Meetings, the pretended Miseries which himself had suffered for a long time, to
the end he might oblige those poor People to discover to him all that they
knew. After he had done a World of Mischief in the Prisons, in this fashion,
and had thereby got sufficient Instructions about Brousson, he treated with the
Magistracy about seizing him. But that he might have the better Success in his
Design, there was leave given him to hold Assemblies himself, and to Preach the
Gospel; as he was a Person that had some good Measure of Learning, and who
manifested much Zeal and Courage for the Truth, for he feared nothing; his
Meetings were many times very numerous, and many of those who labored
sincerely for the Salvation of the People, began very often to frequent it; But
he thought sit to spare them, that he might, as he thought, give more
considerable Blows, and for which he was promised a greater Reward; wherefore
he informed himself very diligently concerning Brousson, saying, he had a great
desire to see and confer with him, in order to know, whether he would advise
him to continue his Meetings, or go out of the Kingdom. When Brousson was
advertised hereof, he said, he suspected that Man, that he had already
understood that their Persecutors had sent false Brethren into the Prisons, for
to discover the Secrets of such as were true Prisoners for the Gospel; that
Gautier was got out of St. Hipolite Fort, nobody knew how, and that if he had
true Zeal for the Church, he should have no occasion to consult anybody, upon
the Message he sent him, since the People heard him with delight. That he must
needs know, that Brousson had reason to be mistrustful of all such as he did
not know thoroughly, and yet notwithstanding he had not heard of him but of late
days, yet he ceased not to desire pressingly, to see him in his Retreat. In the
mean time, a certain young Man, that had persevered in the Truth, and who had
been often with Brousson, and who happened to come into some Meeting where this
false Pastor was; conducted him to the House where Brousson then resided: But
as the young Man went in first, and that Brousson reproached him, that he had
betrayed him; the young Man went presently out again, and told the Traitor,
That Brousson was not in that House: However, he conducted him in, and brought
him to another Room than that Brousson was in; and from whence Brousson drawing
nigh to hear what he said, he understood, notwithstanding all his Disguise, he
was a false Brother; and this he made known to his Friends. Some time after
this, that same Wretch went to keep a Meeting in Lower Languedoc, near St.
Geniez, to which Assembly he invited the most faithful of those Parts, who were
surprised to see at some distance from him, eight or ten Men in Cloaks, whom
they knew not, and who in appearance were Soldiers: He presently told them, he
had prepared a little Sermon for them; but that seeing the Assembly was not
numerous, he would content himself to make an Exhortation and Prayer; which he
did very accurately. When he had done, he told them, He was one of those
Pastors who had Refugiated themselves in Switzerland; and that the other
Ministers that remained in that Country, had sent him to inform himself of the
Carriage of such as Preached the Gospel unto them. These poor People having
hereupon testified how much they were satisfied therein; the Wretch said, he
blessed God for it, with all his Heart. But he from thence forward took Care to
know exactly, all the Places of their Retreat, and as those poor People did not
know then, where they stood, he charged a Woman that was there, to let Broussen
know, That a Man of Note was come into France, about the Affairs of the
Reformed, and was very desirous to see him; and he sent a Person on purpose to
that same Woman every Week to know the News. It would be too tedious to relate
all that followed, and the many Circumstances of this Business; it is enough to
tell you* that there was so clear a Discovery of this Wretches being a Minister
of Satan, that after he betrayed in Cevennes, one of our Brethren, who, with
him, drank the Waters of Pommazet, he was constrained to take off his Mask, and
to go at the Head of Soldiers, to see for Brousson. As he had made discovery of
many Things, the Intendant gave common Proof thereof, by bestowing liberally
upon him of the Goods of such as were accused by him. But at the last, as the
End of these false Prophets is like their Works, this new Judas being terrified
one Day, threw himself into a River, between Vigan and Ganges, where he was
drowned, tho the River was not deep. There were a great many more of these
perfidious Wretches, that sold themselves to Satan, for to destroy Brousson,
and who were paid for searching continually for an opportunity to seize him. It
was affirmed, that the Intendant should boast after Vivens's Death, That he had
Eight hundred of them in the Cevennes, or Lower Languedoc: it is most certain,
he had one in pay through all the Cities, Towns, and Villages there; there were
also Rewards bestowed upon all the Officers and Soldiers, for all God's
Servants taken by them, and for other faithful Ones, whom they took upon the
Account of Religious Assemblies; And as Brousson was at that time looked upon
by the Government, as the principal Author of those Assemblies, and as the
Person who fomented them, which he could not do himself; it was said, Five or
Six Months before he went last out of France, that he had then cost the
Province Eight hundred thousand Livres: And though by the Order published against
him, there were no more than Five thousand Livres promised him, who should
discover him, it was afterward verbally given out, that they would give Ten
thousand Livres, to whomsoever should deliver him up, or take him: And at last
it was said, they would give a much greater Sum; which extremely animated both
Soldiers, and false Brethren, to look after him.

But that which Brousson in some, sort had most reason to fear, was the Zeal
itself of the People; for from the time that he came to any place, the great
desire which the poor People had, to pray to God, and hear his Holy Word, was
he Cause that those who knew of his Arrival, could not forbear to communicate
the same to other faithful Friends, though under the restriction of concealing
it. These told it to others, recommending also Secrecy to them, 'till at last
it came to be communicated also to some false Brethren, whose evil Designs God
alone could know: all which put together, made Brousson be in continual
Dangers; insomuch, that he was ordinarily constrained to make his Sojourning in
Deserts and Caves, where for all that, he was continually pursued by his
Enemies. He had Death continually before his Eyes, and even the cruellest of
Deaths: for the Magistrates were much more incensed against him, than against
all the other Servants of God; but God strengthened him always with his Grace:
It seemed to him a thousand times, that the Way of Escape was fully precluded,
and the most inhumane Martyrdom did an infinity of times stare him in the Face,
and dispose him to prepare to suffer, as if Sentence had been already
pronounced upon him; but yet God was pleased from time to time, to shine with
some Rays of Hope upon him; and then he was persuaded, that the Almighty would
never suffer him to fall into the Hands of those cruel Oppressors, who would
prepare unheard of Torments and Punishments for him; but in a little while
after would he return again into Darkness and Alarms. It happened also many
times to him, as it did of old to Job and David, viz. That God scared him in
Dreams, and terrified him through Visions; but then he said within himself, My
Life is in the Hands of God; if he will have me die, none can hinder it:
wherefore he went to preach the Gospel, as he had engaged; and then he exposed
himself to great Dangers, but God preserved him through his Wisdom, and
according to his great Mercy; he was in the fiery Furnace, which was heated
seven times hotter than it used to be; but God preserved him through ^
continued Miracle of his Providence.

In the mean time, he lived in a very sorrowful and wretched Captivity,
according to the World; he had not the liberty, for four Years, and five
Months, to travel by Day, and he was always forced to Journey in the Night,
unless it were upon some particular Occasions, whereof the great Dangers he was
exposed to, made him travel by Day: he has been sometimes in the City of
Nismes, keeping Meetings, when his Enemies at the same time knew he was there,
and made several Searches for him; but his ordinary Dwelling was in the Woods,
upon Mountains, in Caves, and the Hollows of the Earth; and he lay oftentimes
upon Straw, Dung, Faggots, under Trees, in Bushes, Clefts of Rocks, and upon
the Earth. In the Summer he was wasted with the Heat of the Sun, and in the
Winter he suffered many times extreme Cold, upon Mountains covered with Snow
and Ice, having nothing wherewith to cover him in the Night, and most commonly
not daring to make a Fire in the Daytime, for fear the Smoke might discover
him, and yet not adventuring to go out of his Hiding Place for to enjoy the
Heat of the Sun, for fear he should discover himself to his Enemies, or false
Friends: he was also sometimes exposed to Hunger and Thirst, and often to
intolerable, and even mortal Fatignes; all which put together, was the reason,
that in all the Pictures made of him, which the Magistracy took care to scatter
everywhere, that he might be known to the Soldiery, and such as designed to
betray him, they represented him among all God's Servants, as one much
Sunburned, and his Body very meager and spare: but all these miseries were to
him sweet, when he considered that he suffered them for the Glory and Service
of God, and for the Consolation of his poor People; and that same poor People
also, when they considered the Calamities and Dangers whereunto he was exposed
continually, in laboring for their Salvation and Consolation; and that on the
other hand, he made Reflection upon the Innocence of his Conversation, and upon
the Grace which God gave him to preach his Word with Simplicity, Purity, and
Evidence, he could not withdraw from these Religious Assemblies, but that they
first threw themselves upon his Neck, kissed him, and wished him a thousand
Blessings; and God at the same time made him also taste in his Mind, ineffable
Consolations; but above all, he knew not how to express those Comforts he felt
in the Holy Assemblies, and particularly in those where he administered the
Lord's Supper.

In the mean time, he had daily Experience of a very remarkable thing, which
the rest of God's. Servants did doubtless experience as well as he; and that
is, that tho he were surrounded with an Army of Enernies, who ran about, and
made continual Search after him to take him, yet while he was in these
Religious Meetings, and opened his Mouth to call upon the Name of the Lord, to
sing his Holy Praises, and to preach his Word, he had commonly as calm a Mind,
as if he had been in a free Country; and the like Tranquillity he also enjoyed,
when he took his Pen in Hand, to labor for the Advancement of God's Kingdom,
and for the Consolation of his desolated Church; and if God shall be pleased to
favor him with Life and Means to publish some Works, which he has composed in
the midst of so many Dangers, and which he sent to the Court for to vindicate
the Doctrine which he preached, the Reader will doubtless be surprised, that
amidst so many Troubles, he could be possessed with a Mind so calm, as to write
Things of that nature; but God perfecteth his Strength in the Weakness of his
Children. On the other hand, he had the Comfort to be a Witness of all the
Wonders which God did for the Salvation of his poor People, he could not but
admire the Graces he bestowed on so many faithful Servants, which he raised up
daily in an extraordinary manner, who were weak and contemptible in the Eyes of
the Flesh, but whom he strengthened by his Spirit; whereby he accompanied at the
same time his Word with a wonderful efficacy, and of which many from time to
time sealed the Truth by their own Blood, with an unshaken Constancy; tho they
were pleased to Honor him so far, as to look upon him as their Brother, and
Colleague in the Work of the Lord, and that they esteemed him also, as a Person
to whom God was pleased to give greater Degrees of Light, than to many others,
and that he edified then by his Conversation; yet he never compared the Graces
which they had received of the Lord, with those which it pleased God to bestow
upon him, but that he found very great matter of Humiliation administered to
him, and that he esteemed those faithful Servants of God, much more excellent
than himself; he saw plainly, that God was pleased to lay up Treasures in
Earthen Vessels, that it was his Spirit which made those dumb Ones to speak,
which drew forth Praises from the Mouths of those little Babes, and which made
those mystical Stones to cry out.

One Night as he was going toward a place which he had appointed for a
Meeting, as he drew nigh unto it, be heard the Voice of a Person, who spoke in
the midst of the People; whereupon he drew somewhat nigher, and finding that he
who spoke prayed to God, he fell down upon his Knees, as it is a constant usage
in the Religious Meetings of France, and there be heard a long and excellent
Prayer, wherewith he was much edified: when it was ended, he drew nigh to the
Person that prayed, and he found him to be a young Man, and a poor Tradesman;
to whom he said, Brother, if you be disposed to make some Exhortation to the
People, you may proceed. Alack, replied that poor Tradesman, how hold I do
it? I can neither Write nor Read. Some time after, this young Man, as he went
from place to place, to pray for the Consolation of the People, being taken
with another young Man, named Compan, who, together with him, did what he
could, in that kind, for the Peoples support; they were both of them condemned
to the Galleys, and suffered their Punishment, boldly confessing the Name of
the Lord.

I have noted before, that Brousson had made choice of Henry Poutant, for his
Guide and Companion, in the Work he was engaged in, who was a young Man of
about Five and twenty Years old, full of Zeal and Piety, and of unblamable
Life, and who having learnt to write in the Woods, while he was with Brousson,
he put him upon Copying his Sermons, as he had done himself, and to disperse
them in such Places where himself could not go to preach the Gospel. But as he
had Copied about a Dozen, and that he saw that Brousson, who had declined in
his Health, was then sick at Nismes, he told him, he was very desirous to go
and visit their Brethren from place to place, and read his Sermons unto them:
which Proposal being well liked of by Brousson, he recommended him to the Grace
of God: and so Poutant went from place to place, laboring everywhere for the
Instruction and Comfort of his Brethren; when he had got together some faithful
Ones, he began with the Confession of Sin, then sung a Psalm; after which he
prayed again the second time, to implore the Aid of the Holy Spirit in the
succeeding Exercise; then he read some Chapter in the Scripture, and some
Sermon, the reading whereof was followed by a warm Exhortation which he made to
those that were present, upon the Things which they had heard; and lastly, he
concluded the whole with an excellent Prayer, which he made with admirable
servour of Spirit: as Brousson found that God bestowed a particular Blessing on
his Labor, he told him, when he returned to him, That he ought to continue his
Work: it was what himself greatly desired; but finding Brousson somewhat
re-established in his Health, and that he was now in a Condition himself to go
and preach the Gospel in Person, as he had constantly done by Writing, during
the time of his Sickness, by sending up and down Copies of his Sermons among
the Faithful; he had some regret to abandon Brousson, knowing the need he had
of his assistance: for Poutant knew perfectly well all the Country; whereas
another faithful Friend, whom Brousson had pitched upon for his Companion, and
who had already been some time with him, did not know it near so well; but
Brousson told him, he had rather want his assistance, than that the People
should be deprived of the Edification which they might receive by his Labors,
and that God who knew the sincerity of his Intentions, would take care of him:
insomuch, that being separated from him, after that Brousson had again
recommended him to the Grace of God; God has since that time done great things
by his Ministry.

Brousson, on his part, set himself again to gather Meetings; but as he found
himself still very fe^ble, he could not from thence forward, but every Eighth
Day, or thereabouts, exercise his Function: in the mean time he found the Zeal
of the People much inflamed, during his Sickness; whether arising from the fear
they had of being deprived of the Comforts which God gave them in Times past,
or that from the great Number of Copies of his Sermons, Letters, and Prayers,
which he took care to disperse amongst them, during his Sickness, and which had
been read by Persons of Quality, and other wealthy Ones, who 'till that time
would not frequent the Religious Assemblies; the Zeal of the most Cold, and the
Courage of the most Fearful, had been influenced and raised up, it matters not
to determine; but Persons of Quality, and others, who 'till then had testified
less Zeal for the Truth, came now to give Glory to God in the Holy Assemblies,
in the midst of all the People; insomuch, that afterward it was one of
Brousson's greatest care, to prevent the Assemblies becoming too numerous, to
the end they might not make too much Noise, and that the People might not be
exposed to too great Evils: however these Assemblies made so much Noise in the
Kingdom, that the People of other parts, where those who preached in Cevennes,
and Lower Languedoc could not go, were edified and strengthened; Brousson also
sent as far as possibly he could, Copies of his Sermons, Letters, and Prayers,
to give part of those Instructions and Consolations to them afar off, which God
by his Ministry bestowed upon the People of Cevennes, and Lower Languedoc. He
was seconded in the same good Work by Papus, of whom you have heard somewhat
before, and who was saved by Divine Providence, when Vivens was killed: for he
had been gone but a Minute out of the Cave where Vivens was invested; on him
God had bestowed the Spirit of Prayer in a great degree: he had before the
Death of Vivens, begun to labor for the Consolation of the People, by
excellent Prayers, and this he continued after his Death, and went from place
to place to keep small Meetings, where he read the Holy Scriptures, and some of
the Sermons aforementioned, and of which he had desired Copies; besides whom,
there was another young Man, whose Name was Vzes. about twenty Years old, who
having got together ten or a dozen of the same Sermons, got them by Heart, and
went also to repeat them from place to place, and to comfort the People by
Praying amongst them.

But what is more surprising than any thing hitherto related is, that God was
pleased to raise up the young Maidens, for to labor for the Salvation and
Comfort of that distressed People, one whereof was called Isabel Redostiere,
about eighteen Years old, the Daughter of a Countryman that lived at the foot
of the Mountain Liron; and the other Pintarde, about sixteen or seventeen, the
Daughter of another Peasant, near St. Hipolite. They did not take upon them to
administer the Sacraments; but they went asunder from Place to Place, and
Desert to Desert, to keep Meetings, where they exhorted the People out of the
Word of God, to be converted, sanctified, be zealous for God, come out of
impure Babylon, to give Glory to God, and serve him in purity of Heart,
according to his Commandments, and to be faithful to him unto Death; and at the
same time edisying, comforting, and strengthening the People, by ardent and
excellent Prayers.

Redostiere coming to know that Broussin, with some other faithful Friends,
that accompanied him, were upon an high Mountain, she came thither to see them,
with another faithful Maiden, that was elder than herself, and who usually kept
her Company; in whom Brousson, and his Friends, observed such a Character of
Modesty, Humility, Simplicity, and Piety, that ravished them with admiration.
When she happened to be in the same part of the Country where Brousson was, she
would often come to see, and to confer with him about Religious Matters, and
especially she came frequently to those Assemblies where he administered the
Lord's Supper; and Brousson has always testified, that she was filled with the
Grace of God. After this same Maiden had for about two Years labored for the
Salvation and Support of the People, she was taken and carried before the
Intendant, who said unto her, So, are you one of those Maidens who concern
themselves in Preaching? I have, replied she, given some Exhortations to my
Brethren, and have prayed to God with them, when occasion hat served; if you
call that Preaching, I have Preached. But do not you know, said the Intendant,
that the King has forbidden it? I know it well, said she again, my Lord; but
the King of Kings, the God of Heaven and Earth, has commanded it; and I am
obliged to obey him rather than Men. Then the Intendant proceeded, and told
her, She deserved Death, and that she ought not to expect any other Treatment
than that which others had already suffered, who had been so adventurous as to
preach against the King's Orders. But she made him answer, She was not
disinay'd at that, and that she was fully resolved to suffer Death, for the
Glory and Service of God. After many such Discourses, the Intendant seeing this
young Maiden disposed to suffer Martyrdom, did not think fit to put her to
Death, for fear, without doubt, least the Constancy of this young Maiden should
produce a quite contrary Effect to his Intentions; he therefore contented
himself, to sentence her to a perpetual Imprisonment; where she is still, in
the Tower of Constance, in A^guemortes, with several other Women, and faithful
Maidens.

The other Maiden, whote Name we told you was Pintarde, labored (...) on her
part, in the Work of the Lord. Brousson had several times an opportunity to
confer also (...) her, and to join with her in many an excellent Prayer she
made to God, that she for the most part drew out of the Psalms, and those Old
Prophets, which agreed exactly to the then State of the Church of God in
France, and which she delivered with very great fervency. One Night as Brousson
drew nigh to a place, where he had appointed a Meeting to be in the
Neighborhood of St. Hipolite, he heard her make a Controversial Sermon, or
Discourse, with great strenuousness. She oftentimes kept Meetings, where she
prenched the Word of God, and where she made excellent Prayers; and this she
continued two Years, or better: But at last this good Maiden fell into the
Hands of her Enemies also, with whom the Intendant had much the same Discourse
as that already mentioned with the other Maiden; but finding she was also very
ready to go and suffer Martyrdom, he contented himself to condemn her to
perpetual Prison; where she is still in the Castle of Sommieres.

These two holy Maidens had not been long Imprisoned, but that God was pleased
to raise up in Low Cevennes, three other Maidens, who also edified the People
much by their excellent Prayers. One of them among the rest, and whom, perhaps,
it is not fit I should name, did many times Extempore, pray for Half an Hour,
and Three Quarters of an Hour, wherein she very pathetically brought in, and
applied several Texts of Scripture; insomuch, that at the very same time she
spoke to God, and called upon his Holy Name, the also instructed, edified,
comforted, and strengthened her Brethren. She had sometimes, at Nismes, four or
five Meetings in a Day, consisting of thirty, forty, and fifty Persons each,
'till at last being surcharged with Labor, for the People would never let her
alone, but followed her in the very Streets, she was at last constrained to go
elsewhere.

While Brousson wan at Nismes, Monsieur Gu^on, an ancient Pastor of Cevennes,
and one who had Refugiated himself in Switzerland, came into France again, and
had an Interview with Brousson, in the Country, not far off from the said
place, whither Brousson was retired, because of the Noise made of his holding
Meetings there, as were also several others. He was pleased to tell Brousson.
That it would have been more to purpose, to go from Family to Family, to
instruct the People, than to hold great Meetings. To whom Brousson answered.
That he had diverse times examined that matter, that be had well weighed it,
that if be should content himself to go from Family to Family the thing would
doubtless make less Noise and at the same time be performed with less Danger to
himself, and to the People, and to all such as Preached the Gospel; but that
the Harvest was great, and that the Number of Laborers was very few; and that
in the single Country of Cevennes, and Lower Languedoc, where God was pleased
to Honor him and his Brethren, to labor in his Vineyard, that there there
great Numbers of People, who must perish for wane of Pastors; that they could
not edisie the Hundredth part of them, if they contented themselves to go from
Family to Family; that it would be much better, that those poor People should
expose themselves to some Sufferings in this World, for to be eternally happy
in Heaven, than to reserve the Repose and Advantages of this World, and to be
eternally miserable in Hell; that in the mean time we should not be surprised
that we are exposed to Persecutions, when we would labor in the Work of our
Salvation; that all the Cospel does sufficiently prepare us for all that. That
moreover, if the People exposed themselves to some Danger to go and hear the
Word of God, the Danger whereunto the Servants of God exposed themselves by
Preaching the same, was yet much more terrible; but in the mean time, they used
all the Prudence they were capable of; that when they were obliged to keep
sometimes Meetings in the Cities, they did it with much Caution and
Circumspection; but that ordinarily they kept them in the Country and in such
places as were most remote from the Concourse of Men; and finally, that the
holding of Religious Assemblies was expressly recommended to us in the Word of
God, to the end, either, that every one might give Glory to God in the Presence
of his People, or that the Religious Assemblies of the Faithful might be
edisied, supported, and mutually comforted, by the public Testimonies they
shall'd give of their Piety and Considence in God; or that in these holy
Assemblies they might partake of the Seals of God's favor and relation to
them, and of the Pledges of their Salvation; or lastly, because that was the
Means whereby God was in a particular manner to be met with, by the efficacy of
his Spirit, and wherein be communicated abundance of Grace and Consolation to
the Faithful.

In the mean time, this old Pastor would not savor of these Reasons, and so
would keep (...) Meetings, but contented himself to see some Friends in
particular: But his Prudence proved to be no Fence to him; for some few Days
after his Arrival, as he was walking in a Chamber, a Roman Catholic Woman, who
lodged in the same House, and who heard him walk, having seen him through the
Keyhole, informed against him, so as that he was taken and carried before the
Intendant; who after much Discourse with him, presented him with a Letter of
Apology, which Brousson had writ to the Intendant some time before; and
wherein, after having fully justified his Conduct by the Word of God, he put
before his Eyes, the terrible Judgments he had reason to fear, in a Kingdom
where they had done such great Outrages to the Glory of God, by abolishing
everywhere his holy Service, and where they daily made his poor People suffer
such great Evils, when they would meet together in the Name of his holy Son
Jesus Christ, to meditate on his Word, call upon his holy Name, and sing his
Praises.

The Intendant asked him, If he approved of the said Letter? Guion, who was
affected therewith, told him, Have a care that what is noted in that Letter, do
not befall you. It was said, that the Intendant asked him further, Whether he
did approve of Brousson 's Conduct? And that he should answer, He did approve
of it; and that if he were at liberty, he would do the same himself. They made
him a tender of his Life, if he would change his Religion: But he made answer,
That he did not return into France, to be unfaithful to his Master. But they
would not put him to Death publicly, and therefore they carried him to the
Cittadei of Mompellier, and executed him by Beat of Drum, to the end nobody
might hear what he said before his Death. And this Martyrdom happened in July,
1693; and their Rage proceeded so far, as to pull down the House in Nismes,
where he was taken, which was a very good one.

About two Months after, one Paul Colognac, called Dauphine, from a place near
St. Hipolite, a young Man about (...) Years old, began to preach the Gospel,
from place to place, and from Desert to Desert; (...) Work he incessantly
continued for three or four Years in Cevennes, and Lower Languedoc: But he was
also taken at Nismes, where he was discovered by a naughty Woman, who was come
from St. Giles, and who having voluntarily abandoned the Truth a long time
before the Desolation of the Protestant Churches in France, did afterward give
Tokens apparently of a sincere Repentance for her Fault. It was pretended by
them, that this young Man was in Company, when an Apostate Minister, whose Name
was Bagards, was killed in Cevennes, and who was become a notorious Persecutor,
leading and commanding himself the Soldiers, when they searched after the
Religious Assemblies, and the Ministers of the Gospel, for to take them dead or
alive. This same Apostate was an Execration to all the People. The last time he
had preached, he pronounced an Anathema, Maranacha, against all such as should
forsake the Profession of the Truth; when for all that, he did himself, not
many Days after, become one of the first who abjured it for a Pension:
Wherefore all the People, and even the Roman Catholics themselves called him
Maranatha; it is from a Shepherd he became a revenous Wolf, who committed
greater Ravage in the Sheepfold of the Lord, than his old Enemies; which made
some young Men transported with Zeal and Indignation, as it was with Elias of
old, kill him upon the Road.

Brousson did not indeed approve of the Fact, and he had not heard say, that
Colognac had been present when the Fact was committed, and so since that time
he had seen Colognac several times, for the space of two Years, and he had
always appeared to him to be a very prudent Person, and of a pure and holy
Life, full of Zeal and Godliness; they examined and tortured him, and when they
had done, went to break him alive upon the Wheel, in a place called
Massilergues, near de Lunel, where he had kept the last Meeting; they left him
alone two or three Hours after they had broken him, but he never ceased during
all that time, to sing the Praises of God, or to speak the most holy and pious
Things imaginable; they have affirmed themselves, they had never perhaps made
any of the Faithful suffer greater Torments, than this Servant of God, and that
none ever had manifested greater Piety and Constancy of Mind, than he had made
to appear; to the last Gasp.

But in the mean time, while these Tragedies were acting, they made continual
search for Brousson, the great Fury which the Government made to appear against
him, proceeded, in that the Zeal of the People was raised up in a singular
manner, and that they looked upon Brousson as the principal Instrument, whom
God made use of to illuminate them. In the Month of February, 1693, he had held
an Assembly, which gave them sufficiently to understand, how far the Zeal of
this poor People was inflamed, and which greatly provoked them. This Assembly
had been held between Brigon, Vallence, and St. Maurice: Brousson had given
strict Charge to those who were to give the People Notice, that they should
invite none but such as were the Faithful, of the Neighboring Villages; in the
mean time, for all the Care that was taken to engage them to keep the Matter
secret, and to call together none but the Faithful of the Neighborhood, it
could not be prevented, but that a great Number of Persons came thither from
D'Vzes, which was two Leagues and a half distant from the place of Meeting; and
from Nismes, which was four Leagues, and from several other Towns and Villages,
which were very near as far distant; insomuch, that Brousson knew some of
Thirty five Towns and Villages in this Assembly. As those who were come from
far, were necessitated to travel in the Daytime, that they might be timely
enough in the Meeting, which was held about Ten at Night, the Assembly was by
that means discovered, and the Enemies took to their Arms, and a Troop of these
Murderers, commanded by a notorious Apostate, whose Name was Darcis, being
concealed in a Wood, through which they judged several of the Faithful were to
pass, in order to go toward Vzes; a Company of these poor People, consisting
of Men, Women, Youths, young Maidens and Children, fell into the Ambush laid
for them, and tho they carried no manner of Arms, when they came to this
Wilderness; and offered no manner of Injury to any Body, yet these Assassines
and Murderers fired six or eight Fuzees upon this unarmed and inoffensive
Company; one of which killed a poor Peasant, who was a pious Man, and lived
near Coulourges.

Several others were wounded; but no Complaint durst be made thereof. All the
rest dispersed themselves, except about Forty, who were taken: And among them
were some worldly Persons, who having but lately frequented the Religious
Assemblies, did not stand the Test; some others were condemned to the Galleys;
and about Twenty Women and Maidens made appear great Constancy, and so were
banished to Carcassonne. In the mean time, the Massacre was approved and
rewarded by the Government.

Some Months after this, the Soldiers committed another Murder, with most
horrible Circumstances: Having discovered a Meeting in a Village, near
Sammiere, a Soldier seeing a Woman who came from the Assembly, and who with a
Key opened the Door of her House, in order to go in, he shot at her, with his
Fuzee, and wounded her through the Body. He might have suffered the Woman to
have gone into her House, and then have taken her, without shooting: But the
Orders given, were to shed innocent Blood. When the poor Woman was wounded, she
fell; but being afterward raised up, and having taken the Key, to try to open
the Door, the Soldier ran to her, and cracked her Scull with the But-end of his
Musket; but she lived about two Years longer, and during all that time she
comforted continually her Husband and Family, and spoke such Godly Things to
them, that all of them burst into Tears.

Some Days after her Death, the Intendant de Baville, happening to go to
Sommiere ordered the Soldier to be brought before him; and instead of
manifesting an horror for the barbarous and hellish Action he had perpetrated,
and punishing this Villain as his Crime deserved; he contented himself to ask
him, If the Woman whom he had killed, had left any Children? And this Villain
having answered, That she had left several, and also Sons who were already
grown up. He said to him, So much the worse for thee; these Children may
revenge their Mother's Death; thou ought to have a care of them.

The Government would have had the People know, it approved of the Massacres,
as being done by Order, the Peoples Zeal having driven them to a Rage; and
because Brousson was one of those, to whom God vouchsafed the favor to labor
amongst them with success, the Magistracy redoubled their Diligence, and
neglected nothing for the apprehending of him and in order thereunto, they did
more especially take a particular Care to discover the Places of his Retreat.
After the holding of that great Meeting already mentioned, the Intendant being
informed, there was a likelihood that he was withdrawn into a great Wood, which
is between the Towns of Vzes, Alais, and Bagnols; and in the midst whereof
there is a little Mountain called Quonquet, wherein are diverse Caves; and
believing that it would Rain, and that then Brousson not being able to keep in
the Word, must be forced to retire to the Caves: As soon as it began to Rain,
he sent six Companies to invest those Caves, and to make a strict Search in
those Parts.

Brousson was quickly advertised of the March of those Troops, who gave out
they had another Design; wherefore, instead of going toward the Caves, he went
far remote from them: The Soldiers were all Night in the Field, and endured
very great Fatigues, through the greatness and coldness of the Rain, so that
many of them sickned and died thereupon. The Rain for the two first Nights was
not very great; but Brousson was in the mean time to endure very great
Hardships, having been constrained to lie in Bushes, and on the wet Ground: But
the third Night, there fell very heavy Rain, and as he was necessitated to
spend that same Night under a Rock, he was in a most miserable plight, having
nothing for all the Night to cover him, to lie upon, nor to wrap about his
Legs. Next Day, as he found himself benumbed with Wet and Cold, he told a
faithful Friend, that kept him Company, That he must go to the Neighboring
Village, to dry and warm himself a little: But when they were got our of their
Den, and had gone forward about thirty or forty Paces, they observed on one
side of them, in the thick Wood, a Detachment of a Dozen Soldiers, with a
Sergeant, advancing toward them, and not above a Pistol-shot from them, so
that they had scarce time enough to go back again, and to hide themselves in a
Bush: In a little while after they heard a great Number of Enemies, who by the
same Path marched also very near to them, by Defiling; they reckoned in all One
hundred and four; when they gave over Reckoning, because they found them halt
near them: They were four Companies of such as searched for Brbusson; and the
Officers stopped them, to consult together, whether they should make any
further Search: Brousson was not above a Stone's-throw from them, and the place
where he was, was very dangerous, by reason there were there some Rocks which
might serve for an Hiding Place, and so be more liable to be searched, and that
there were in these four Companies, a great many People who knew the Country
very well, and who had also Dogs to find out Brousson in the Woods. In the mean
time Brousson would not remove further, for fear of being discovered; whereupon
he fell upon his Knees to pray, and God was pleased to strike his Enemies with
Blindness; and so they went no further that way, but divided into several
Companies, and went to surround and search all the adjacent Villages and Barns,
and particularly the Village where Brousson was minded to go.

It may be easily judged, that during all the time he was in France, to labor
for the Salvation and Comfort of his Brethren, and which was for four Years and
five Months, that he saw himself often in such Dangers, as this now mentioned,
and even sometimes in greater; but to give an exact Relation of the Miseries,
Fatigues, and Dangers he has been exposed to, during that time, would be too
tedious; but the principal Design herein, has been to make known the great
Wonders which God has done, and does still do, in Cevennes and Lower
Languedoc, to give his People such Instructions and Comforts as were needful,
in the deplorable State they were in. Every body may well think, that a Servant
of God, against whom the Enemies of the Truth were so enraged, has been
continually in fearful Dangers; and that his Preservation amidst the Flames of
this horrible Persecution, has been a continual Succession of Miracles; he
passed like a Lamb through the midst of a Troop of ravenous Wolfs; he held
frequent Meetings in the midst of an Army of cruel and furious Enemies, who
searched for him Night and Day; and never found him, tho their Search had been
a thousand times, God having always brought their Designs to Confusion: He many
times lay in such Houses where the Soldiers went from time to time to search;
but God never suffered them to go thither, while he was in the place; tho they
went about continually, and laid Snares for him everywhere, Thanks be to God,
no ill did betide him; he held some Hundreds of Meetings, great and small, but,
blessed be God, none of them was ever surprised; many of them have been, at
times, discovered. And God, who governs all things by his Wisdom, permitted
it for diverse ends; but after all, none of those Assemblies have been surprised
by the Enemy: He has always experienced what the Holy Ghosts says, in the
Prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 4. v. 5, 6. And the Lord will create upon every
Dewlling Place of Mount Sion, and upon her Assemblies, a Cloud and Smoke by
Day, and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night: for upon all shall be a
Defense. And there shall be a Tabernacle for a Shadow, in the Daytime from the
Heat, and for a Place of Refuge, and for a Covert from Storm, and from Rain.

Lastly, The Fury of his Enemies coming to increase more and more; insomuch,
that at length he had no liberty almost left him, to labor for the Salvation
of the People; and considering on the other side, that almost all the Places of
his Retreat were discovered; that in the mean time, they had resolved to bring
four Regiments more into that Country, for the entire Suppression of the
Meetings; that having diverse times endeavored to go into another Country, he
could not execute his Design, because his Picture being dispersed up and down,
everywhere, he could not travel but by Night; and that he must have a place of
Retreat, every two or three Leagues, for to rest himself, upon the approach of
Day; which he could not propose to have without that Country, where God had for
a long time honored him with Preaching the Gospel; that his Health was also so
impaired, that from thence forward he could do but little for the Instruction
of the People, Viva voce; that besides, his Family whom he had left in
Switzerland, now for a considerable time, and wanting his assistance, were
reduced to great Misery; that his only Son, who was yet young, was also
deprived for a long time, of the Education he stood in need of; that on the
other hand, he had in his possession, some Religious and Pious Works, which he
hoped to get Published, and which he thought, with the Lord's assistance, might
contribute to the Edification of good Souls, and to the Advancement of the
Kingdom of God; that in the mean time, there were still in Cevennes, and the
Lower Languedoc, diverse Servants of God, whom he had raised up extraordinarily,
and who labored for the Salvation of the People; that he left behind a great
many Copies of his Sermons, and other Writings, which might serve for the
instructing and strengthening of that poor People; and that when he should get
out of France, if God were pleased to honor him so far, he might still labor
other ways for their Consolation, as in effect he quickly begun and continued.

He was at last constrained to make Choice of this last: And therefore he left
the Kingdom of France in December, 1693, and the Seventeenth of that Month
arrived at Lausanne; from whence he had departed, July 22. in the Year 1689.

And tho his Picture was sent up and down to all places, God who conducted him
safe into France, lead him out again, to the end the might tell his great
Wonders in Sion.

I shall give some few Instances more of French Cruelty, from a Book Entitled,
Martyrs in Flames. Printed for Mr. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry. And so
conclude this dismal Scene of Sorrow.
3. THE Dragoons that Quartered with Monsieur Solignac, at Montauban, (says the
foresaid Author) made his Dining Room a Stable for their Horses, tho the
Furniture thereof was valued at a Thousand Livres; and forced him to turn the
Spit, 'till his Arm was almost burnt, by their continual throwing Wood on the
Fire.

They beat an Old Man almost to Death, to force him to go to Mass, whilst the
constant Martyr, to his last Breath, cried, He would never do it: And only
requested, they would dispatch and make an end of him.

4. Monsieur de Garrison, one of the chief Men of the City, and an intimate
Friend of the Intendant, went and cast himself at his Feet, imploring his
Protection, and conjuring him to rid him of the Troopers, that he might have no
force put upon his Conscience; adding, That in recompense of the Favor he
begged of him, he would give him all he had: Which was to the value of about a
Million of Livres. But all his Entreaties were so far from prevailing, that he
ordered him, for Terror, to be worse used than the rest, by dragging him along
the Streets.

5. Some of the lustiest Soldiers took their Landlords, or others in the House,
and walking them up and down, continually tickled, and tossed them about like a
Ball from each other, without giving them the least Intermission, and keeping
them in that Condition three Days together, without Meat, Drink or Sleep.

6. Isaac Faim, a Citizen of Negreplisse, was hung up by the Armpits, and
tortured a whole Night by pinching and tearing off his Flesh with Pincers, tho
thereby they were not in the least able to shake his Constancy.

7. They made a Fire about a Boy of Ten Years of Age, who with Hands and Eyes
lifted up to Heaven, cried, My God, help me: And when they saw the Lad resolved
to die, rather than renounce his Religion, they snatched him from the Fire,
when he was at the very point of being burnt.

8. In diverse places they have endeavored to tire out the Patience of the poor
Protestants, and overcome their Constancy, by applying red hot Irons to the
Hands and Feet of Men, and to the Breasts of Women.

9. At Nants they hung up several Women and Maids by the Feet, stark naked; and
others by the Armpits, exposing them to the public View: Which is certainly
the most exquisite Suffering to the Modesty of the Fair Sex.

10. Children of four or five Years old were kept from Meat and Drink, 'till
they were ready to famish; and were then brought to their Parents by the
Dragoons, who swore bloodily, That except they would recant, they must prepare
themselves, to see their Children languish and die in their presence. If it
happen that any by their Patience and Courage stand our, the Soldiers go and
acquaint their Commanders, That they have done all they could, but without
success: Who in a barbarous and surly Tone answer them, You must return upon
them, and do worse than you have done: The King Commands it. Either they must
turn, or I must burst and perish in the Attempt.

11. Thirty two Companies of Foot, with an Intendant, and the two Bishops of
Again and Periguex, entered the City of Bergerack, and sending for Two hundred of
the principal Citizens before them, told them, That the King's express Will and
Pleasure was, they should all go to Mass; and that in case of Disobedience,
they had Order to compel them to it. To which the Citizens unanimously
answered, That if they were so resolved, they had nothing else to do but to
prepare themselves to receive the Punishment they should inflict. Whereupon
Thirty two Troops more of Horse and Foot marched into the Town, who were all
quartered upon the Protestants, with express Command, not to spare any thing
they had, and to exercise all manner of Violence upon them, 'till they had
extorted a Promise of Conformity to their Wills. These Wolves thus encouraged,
flew instantly upon these innocent Sheep, rending and worrying them in such a
manner, as the Relation thereof cannot but strike horror and amazement.

On one hand the Child cries with the languishing Tone of one ready to die, Ah
my Father! Ah my Mother! What shall I do, I must die, I can endure no longer.
The Wife on the other hand cries, Alas! my Heart fails me, I faint, I die.
Whilst their cruel Tormentors are so far from being touched with Compassion,
that from thence they take occasion to torment them afresh, and to renew their
Tortures, affrighting them with their Hellish Threats, accompanied with
execrable Oaths and Curses, crying, Dog, Bougre, what will thou not be
converted, will thou not be obedient? Dog, Bougre, thou must be converted, we
are sent on purpose to convert thee:

12. A young Woman was brought before the Council, in order to oblige her to
abjure the Truth, which she boldly and manfully refusing, was remanded back to
Prison, where they shaved her Head, and singed the Hair from other parts, and
stripping her stark naked, led her through the Streets of the City, where many
a Blow was given her, and Stones flung at her. After this they set her up to
the Neck in a Tub full of Water, where when she had been a while, they took her
out, and put upon her a Shift dipped in Wine, which as it dried and stuck to
her sore and bruised Body, they snatched off again, and then had another ready
dipped in Wine to clap upon her. This they repeated six several times; and when
by this inhumane Usage her Body was grown very raw and tender, they demanded of
her, Whether she did not now find herself disposed to embrace the Catholic
Faith? As they term their Religion. But she being strengthened by the Spirit,
and love of him for whose Name's-sake she suffered all these Extremities,
undauntedly answered, That she had before declared her Resolution to them,
which she would never alter; and that though they had her Body in their power,
yet she was resolved never to yield her Soul to them, but keep it pure and
undefiled for her heavenly Lover, as knowing that a little while would put an
end to all her Sufferings, and give a beginning to her Enjoyment of Eternal
Bliss. Which Words further enraging them, and despairing of making her a
Convert, they fastened her to a Gibbet by the Feet stark naked, with her Head
downward, and there let her hang in that ignominious posture 'till she gave up
the Ghost.

13. There was an old Man in the City, who having been long kept Prisoner in a
deep Dungeon, for the Protestant Profession, was brought at length before the
Judges, with Vermin and Snails crawling upon his mouldred Garment, who seeing
him in that loathsome Condition, said to him, How now, Old Man, does not your
Heart begin to relent, and are not you willing to abjure your Heresy? To which
he answered, As for Heresy, I profess none; but if by that word you mean my
Religion, you may assure your selves, that as I have thus long lived, so I
hope, and am resolved, by the Grace of God, to die in it. With which Reply they
being incensed, grew rougher with him: Do thou not see, said they, that the
Worms are ready to devour thee? Well, since thou art so resolved, we will send
thee back again to the loathsome place from whence thou came, that they may
dispatch thee, and ^^sume thy obdurate Heart. To which he replied in the words
of holy patient Job, I know that after Worms have eaten this Body, that in my
Flesh I shall see God. And having so said, he was remanded back to his Jail.

14. Some Dragoons quartered with a Person whom they could not pervert, they
forced him to dance barefoot upon the sharp Points of Glass; which when they
had continued so long as they were able to keep him on his Legs, they laid him
on a Bed, and stripping him stark naked, rolled his Body from one end of the
Room to the other, upon the sharp Glass, 'till his Skin was stuck full of the
Fragments; and returning him to his Bed, sent for a Surgeon to take out all the
pieces of Glass out of his Body, which was not done without frequent Incisions,
and horrible and extreme pain.

15. Another having the unwelcome Company of these villainous Soldiers, and
having suffered extremely by them with the utmost Constancy, one of them
looking earnestly on him, told him, he disfigured himself, with letting his
Beard grow so long: who answering, That they were the Cause of it, who would
not let him stir out of Doors to go to the Barber. The Dragoon replied, I can
do that for you as well as your Barber: telling him, he must needs try his
Skill upon him; and so fell to work: but instead of shaving him, flead all the
Skin off his Face. One of his Companions coming at the Cry of this poor
Sufferer, and seeing what he had done, seemingly blamed him for it, and said he
was a Bungler; and then said to his Host, Come your Hair wants cutting too: And
thereupon begins in a most cruel manner to pluck the Hair, Skin, and all off
his Head, and flead that as the other had done his Chin. Thus making a Sport
and Merriment, of the extreme Sufferings of these miserable Wretches.

By these Inventions they endeavor to subdue their Courage, telling them, The
King will have obedient Subjects, but neither Martyrs nor Rebels; and that they
have order to convert them, but not to kill them.

Let us conclude with a Prayer used by these blessed Souls, in the Agony of
their Spirits.
O Great GOD, who from thy heavenly Throne do behold all the Outrages done to
thy People, haste thee to help us! Great GOD, whose Compassions are infinite,
suffer thy self to be moved by our extreme Desolation! If Men be insensible of
the Calamities we suffer! If they be deaf to our Cries, not regarding our
Groans or Supplications, yet let thy Bowels, O Lord, be moved, and affect thee
on our behalf. Glorious GOD, for whose Name's-sake we suffer all these things,
who know our Innocence and Weakness, as well as the Fury and Rage of our
Adversaries, and the small Support and Help we find in the World; behold we
perish, if thy Pity do not rouse thee up to our Relief. It is thou art our
Rock, our God, our Father, our Deliverer: We do not place our Confidence in
any, but in thee alone. Let us not be confounded, because we put our Trust in
thee. Haste thee to our help, make no long tarrying, O Lord our God, and our
Redeemer. Amen.

Thus far for Martyrs in Flames.

I would proceed in the History of the Martyrdom of the French Protestants, but
that, as I said in the beginning of this Chapter, the Third and Fourth Volumes
of the French Book of Martyrs (a History of the famous Edict of Nantes) are now
preparing for the Press: Which Four Volumes, including the First and Second
already Published, contain an Account of all the Persecutions that have been in
France, from the beginning of the Reformation (there), down to this present
time; comprehending the Reigns of Henry III. Henry IV. Lewis XIII. and Lewis
IV. the whole Work faithfully Extracted from all the Public and Secret
Memoirs, that could possibly be procured, by that Learned and Judicious Divine,
Monsieur Bennoit. Printed first in French, by the Authority of the States of
Holland, and West-Friesland; and now Translated into English. Printed for John
Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, who alone has Queen Mary's Royal
Privilege, for the Publishing of it.

THE First and Second Volumes of this French Martyrology, already Published,
having fully answered the Expectations of the Curious, it has occasioned
several Gentlemen to desire a speedy Publication of the whole Work. And it is
not doubted, but that such a Seasonable Work as this is, (which has been
Patronized by the States of Holland, and born a Second Impression there in a
few Weeks) will meet with answerable Encouragement here, seeing Her Majesty's
Royal License for the Printing of it, and the Expectations of so many Great
Persons as have desired it in our own Language, will not a little recommend it
to the English Nation.

As for the Author, his Preface to the First Volume does yet promise fairer
Things, as his Correspondence for the carrying on so Great a Work, extending to
such distant Places, his Access to so many Public and Private Libraries, as
well as to the Cabinets and Studies of the Exacter sort, where Fugitive Pieces
secure themselves. His Assistances by Manuscripts and Collections, especially
those of the Learned and Ingenious Monsieur Tesserau, and the Memoirs he left
at his Death, with other Helps, which will best appear in the Work itself.

If History be properly Consecrated to preserve to Posterity the Remembrance of
Things the most remarkable that fall out in the World, it cannot be denied, but
that the deplorable End of the Liberty which the Protestants enjoyed so long a
time in France, is one of the most Memorable Accidents that merits to be taken
in hand, for the Information of succeeding Ages. There is not any thing in that
Revolution which does not deserve particular Reflections; upon whatever
Circumstance a Man fixes his Mind, he shall find enough to exercise his
Thoughts, either in wondering at the Malice and Fury of those that were the
Authors of it, or in admiring at the Patience of those that were invelop'd in
it. It is not to be imagined, what has passed in that Kingdom upon this
occasion, especially within these last Thirty Years. It was very necessary
therefore, to establish Things in their true Light, and to collect into a
History, all the sorrowful Accidents of this Revolution, (we having, as yet, no
faithful Collection extant) to the intent, that thereby a durable and perpetual
Monument might be erected, of a Catastrophe worthy to be Eternized in all its
Circumstances, and therein an Account given of all the Martyrdoms and
Persecutions, which, in France, have befallen those, who for these Fourscore
and ten Years have lived in that Kingdom, under the Faith of the most solemn
Edict that ever was published.

CHAP. CLII. The Memorable Speeches and Sayings of the late Queen MARY, from
her Childhood, down to the Time of her Death: With some Remarkable Passages,
relating both to her Person and Government.
I Shall conclude this History of Providence, with a Collection of the
memorable Speeches and Sayings, of our never-enough lamented Sovereign, the
late Queen MARY, and shall here and there add some remarkable Passages,
relating to her Person and Government, as a Noble Testimony to Religion, from
one whose Parts and Endowments were as high as her Dignity, as if Providence
would not leave the profane Age room to say, that Religion was only pretended
to by the Mean and Ignorant; but convince them by the Virtuous Life, and Dying
Breath of a Princess, every way so Glorious and Great: So extraordinary strict,
( says Bishop Fowler, in his Preface relating to the Queen) was Her Majesty's
Life, even from her Youth, that for the Seventeen Years of her Married State,
the King, as he has professed, could never see any thing in her, which he
could call a Fault; and no Man (continues this Learned Author) can keep a
stricter Guard upon his Words, than His Majesty is always observed to do. Then
certainly, a Collection of the Memorable Speeches of such a Princess, must
needs be very useful; and so much the more so, as there are several remarkable
Sayings of this Royal Person, scattered in so many Books, which its hardly
possible for any private Person to have all of them by him, and therefore a
View of them all at once, ( in a Collection from the best Authors that have
writ upon this Subject) may, perhaps, be very acceptable to the serious Reader.

1. That we may begin from her Cradle: The most August Queen MARY II. was born
in the Sixty second Year of this Age, upon the Tenth of May; James, then Duke
of York, and the Lord Chancellor's Daughter, being her Parents. Many and
conspicuous were the Prognostics of a true and far from counterfeited Piety,
that glittered in her, and shined forth in the early Dawn of her Infancy: For
when in her tender Years she had lost an excellent Mother, and under the
Tuition of Persons less concerned, was deliciously bred up in a Court full of
all manner of Pleasure and Voluptuousness, such was always her Constancy, such
her Temperance and Modesty, that no Example of others, no Allurement of Vice,
no Contagion of Neighbouring-Courts, could force her to go astray from the
right Path.

She was instructed in the Fundamentals of the true Reformed Religion, by the
Bishop of London, which he so happily laid, and she so cordially imbibed, that
she could never be shaken by any treacherous Insinuations, any Promises or
Threats, any Punishments or Rewards; choosing rather to die, than never so
little to recede from the Truth, wherein she had been grounded.

After she had spent the rest of her Childhood in those Studies, by which
generous and illustrious Souls are raised to the Expectations of great Fortune,
and had abundantly furnished herself, as well with Christian, as with Royal
Virtues, in the Fifteenth Year of her Age, she was auspiciously Married to
William the Third of that Name, Prince of Orange. William marries Mary, a
Kinsman, a Kinswoman; and thus by a double Tie, and a firmer Knot than
hitherto, the most Noble Families of all Europe are joined together. She, for
her Ancestors, claims the Family of the Stuarts; He, the Nassavian Race; She,
the Monarchs of Great Britain; He, the Governors of Germany, and the Caesar's
themselves.

The Nuptial Solemnities being over, the Royal Bride crossed over, out of
England, into these Parts, together with her Husband, and chose for her Seat
and Residence, the Hague; the most pleasant and delightful place, not only of
Holland, but almost of all Europe. Where beloved of all Men, and fixed in the
Good Will of all the People propensly devoted to her, for the space of some
Years, she so charmingly and affectionately lived with her Husband, the best of
Men, and no less cordially affectionate to her, not only without the least
Contention or Quarrel, but without the least suspicion of Lukewarmness, that
she might well be said to be a conspicuous Example of Conjugal Affection, not
only to Kings and Princes, and Men in high Degree, but also to private Persons.

After some Interval of Time, when they who bare ill will to our Princes and
us, to Liberty and Religion, and more especially to this Republic, stirred up
new Troubles in England, and the Nobility of the Kingdom called to their Aid
our Prince. While he strove one way, and the Winds drove another, at length
wafted over with favorable Gales and Wishes, safely arrived in England, and
without Resistance; but rather with the general Applause of the Nation, and, as
it were, born upon the Shoulders of the People came to the Royal City. When
afterward he invited his dearest Consort, then the Companion of his Bed, now
of his Kingdom, to partake of the Honor offered him, and the Dignity soon
after to be conferred upon him, and the equal share of his Fortune, in the
Eighty ninth Year of this Age, luckily, and auspiciously, both Husband and
Wife, were declared King and Queen, with equal Power and Authority, by the
common Vote and Suffrage, and unanimous Consent of both Houses.

In the Morning she rose with the Sun, and worshipped the Lord of Heaven and
Earth: But when she was sometimes forced to rise at Midnight, by reason of the
urgent Affairs of the State, and could not afterward sleep, she commanded
either the Holy Scripture, or some other pious Book to be brought her. If any
Persons came to visit her in a Morning before she had poured forth her Prayers,
she sent them back with this Expression, That she was first to serve the King
of Kings. If any persons were said to seek her life by Treachery and
Conspiracy, her Answer was, That she submitted to the Will of Heaven. Francius
's Oration upon the Death of the Queen.

2. Such was the Sanctity of Mary's Life, that King William, after her Decease,
calling to mind her Piety toward God, the Integrity of her Life, and her
Extraordinary Knowledge of Sacred Things, brake forth into this expression,
That if he could believe, that ever any mortal Man could be born without the
contamination of Sin, he would believe it of the Queen. And she preserved
herself so chaste and spotless, that while she resided upon Earth, she lived the
Life of the Saints, even in the Hurry of the Court, where there are so many
Incitements to evil. Grevius 's Oration on the Death of the Queen.

3. We had very admirable Accounts of the late Queen, from her Court at the
Hague, during her Abode there, from most unquestionable Testimonies, which made
us envy our Neighbors Happiness in such a Princess; who knew their Happiness,
(as 'twas impossible they should not) and had an extraordinary Value and
Veneration for her. And since her Return to her Native Country, and her
Advancement to the Throne here, we never knew a more eminent Exception than she
was, to that common Observation, Minuit praesentia Famam: The Fame that Persons
had when absent, suffers by their Presence. Bishop Fowler 's Preface relating
to the Queen.

4. As to the Sobriety which relates to the Palate, she was so far from being
fond of great Dainties, that I heard her once say, That she could live in a
Dairy. Ibid.

5. What an Enemy she was to Idleness, even in Ladies, those who had the Honor
to serve her, are living Instances. It is well known, how great a part of the
Day they were employed at their Needles, and several Ingenuities; the Queen
herself, when more Important Business would give her leave, working with them.
And, that their Minds might be well employed at the same time, it was her
Custom to order one to read to them, while they were at Work, either Divinity,
or some profitable History. Ibid.

6. As to the positive Instances of the Queen's Piety, or Fear of God, they
were such as showed she made no less Conscience of Sins of Omission, than of
Commission. Ibid.

7. I might speak of the pious Care she took of her immediate Attendants; and
how concerned she was to have them secured from Temptations, when they had
occasion to go abroad. But I cannot omit one passage, which is an equal
Instance both of her Piety and Humility: She having condescended to be
God-Mother to a Daughter of one of her Servants, and calling to mind those
Words at the end of the Office of Baptism; You are to take Care, that this
Child be brought to the Bishop, to be Confirmed by him, etc. she not only took
this Care of her God-Daughter, but in order to her due Preparation for
Confirmation, would instruct her herself, and hear her say her Catechism. She
did not think it enough, to Command one of her Servants, or the Clerk of her
Closet, to do this Office. Ibid.

8. How great a concern she had for the Reforming of the Manners of her
Subjects, in this very loose Age, appeared, by her most pious Letter to the
Justices of Middlesex: Wherein she vigorously excited them to do their Duty,
according to their Oaths, in Executing the Laws against Swearers and Cursers,
and Profaners of the Lord's Day, and all debauched Persons. Ibid.

9. The Queen's Death was such, as it might have been presumed, such a Life
would end in. Upon her having the first Intimation of the Danger she was in,
she replied to this effect: I have been instructed by the Divines of our
Church, how very hazardous a thing it is, to rely upon a Deathbed Repentance;
and I am not now to begin the Great Work of Preparing for Death: And, I praise
God, I am not afraid of it. Ibid.

10. She was so composed throughout her Sickness, that 'twas evident she had
not the least Disturbance upon her Mind; but that all was calm and serene
within her. One of her Physicians (a very worthy Gentleman) was so affected
with the Observations he then made of her, as since to say, She seemed to me,
more like an Angel than a Woman. Ibid.

11. Frequently she called for the Prayers; which my Lord of Canterbury still
read to her: And about Twelve Hours before her Departure, she comfortably
received the Holy Communion at his Hands, Seven Bishops communicating with her:
And at last she went away as quietly as a Lamb, with her Works following her.

12. She would conclude with Words that carried in them an Air of Modesty, that
shined then most particularly, when she seemed to desire an increase or
Knowledge. She would say, She did not know if there was any Difficulty in such
Things or not; or if she apprehended, or expressed it right; or, if it was only
her Ignorance. Bishop Burnet's Essay on the Memory of the Queen.

13. She gave her Minutes of leisure with the greatest willingness, to
Architecture and Gardenage. She had a Riches of Invention, with a Happiness of
Contrivance, that had Airs in it, that were freer and nobler than what was more
stiff, though it might be more regular: She knew that this drew an Expense after
it; she had no other Inclinations besides this, to any Diversions that were
expenceful; and since this employed many Hands, she was pleased to say, That
she hoped it would be forgiven her. Ibid.

14. When her Eyes were endangered by Reading too much, she found out the
Amusement of Work: And in all those Hours that were not given to better
Employments, she wrought with her own Hands; and that, sometimes, with so
constant a Diligence, as if she had been to earn her Bread by it. It was a new
thing, and looked like a Sight, to see a Queen work so many Hours a Day. She
looked on Idleness as the great Corrupter of Humane Nature: And believed, that
if the Mind had no Employment given it, it would create some of the worst sort
to itself: And she thought, that any thing that might amuse and divert, without
leaving a Dreg and ill Impressions behind it, ought to fill up those vacant
Hours, that were not claimed by Devotion or Business. Ibid.

15. She scarce ever expressed a more entire Satisfaction in any Sermon that
she had heard, than in our late Primate's against Evil Speaking. When she
thought some were guilty of it, she would ask them, if they had read that
Sermon. Ibid.

16. She was as free from Censures, as she was from deserving them. When
Reflections were made on this, before her, she said, She ascribed that wholly
to the Goodness of God to her: For she did not doubt, but that many fell under
hard Characters, that deserved them as little. She gave it this further turn,
That God knew her Weakness, and that she was not able to bear some Imputations;
and therefore he did not try her beyond her strength. Ibid.

17. Her Attention to Sermons was so entire, that as her Eye never wandered from
a good Preacher, so she showed no weariness of an indifferent one: When she was
asked, how she could be so attentive to some Sermons, that were far from being
perfect, she answered, That she thought it did not become her, by any part of
her Behavior, to discourage, or seem to dislike one, that was doing his best.
Ibid.

18. Pluralities, and Non-Residence, when not enforced by real Necessity, were
otherwise so odious to her, that she resolved to throw such perpetual Disgraces
upon them, as should oblige all Persons to let go the hold that they had got,
of these Cures of Souls, over whom they did not watch, and among whom they did
not labor. In a full Discourse on this very Subject, the Day before the fatal
Ilness overtook her; she said, She had no great Hope of mending Matters; yet
she was resolved to go on, and never to suffer herself to be discouraged, or to
lose Heart: She would still try what could be done, and pursue her Design how
slow or insensible soever the Progress might be. Ibid.

19. When Reflections were once made before her, of the Sharpness of some
Historians, who had left heavy Imputations on the Memory of some Princes, she
answered, That if those Princes were truly such, as the Historians represented
them, they had well deserved that Treatment: And others, who tread their Steps,
might look for the same: For Truth would be told at last; and that with the
more Acrimony of Style, for being so long restrained: It was a gentle suffering
to be exposed to the World in their true Colors, much below what others had
suffered at their Hands. She thought that all Sovereigns ought to read such
Histories as Procopius; for how much soever he may have aggravated Matters, and
how unbecomingly soever he may have writ, yet by such Books they might see,
what would be probably said of themselves, when all Terrors and Restraints
should fall off with their Lives. Ibid.

20. She did hearken carefully after every thing that seemed to give some hope,
that the next Generation should be better than the present, with a particular
Attention. She heard of a Spirit of Devotion and Piety, that was spreading
itself among the Youth of this great City, with a true Satisfaction: She
enquired often and much about it, and was glad to hear it went on and
prevailed. She lamented that whereas the Devotions of the Church of Rome were
all Show, and made up of Pomp and Pageantry; that we were too bare and naked:
And practiced not enough to entertain a serious Temper, or a warm and an
affectionate Heart: We might have Light enough to direct, but we wanted Flame
to raise an exalted Devotion. Ibid.

21. She was ^o part of the Cause of the War, yet she would willingly have
sacrificed her own Life, to have preserved either of Those that seemed to be in
Danger at the Boyne. She spoke of that Matter two Days after the News came,
with so tender a Sense of the Goodness of God to her, in it, that it drew Tears
from her; and then she freely confessed, That her Heart had trembled, not so
much from the Apprehension of the Danger that she herself was in, as from the
Scene that was then in Action at the Boyne: God had heard her Prayers, and she
blessed him for it, with as sensible a Joy, as for any thing that had ever
happened to her. Ibid.

22. The Reflections that she made on the Reduction of Ireland, looked the same
way that all her Thoughts did. Our Forces elsewhere, both at Sea and Land, were
thought to be considerable, and so promising, that we were in great Hopes of
somewhat that might be decisive: Only Ireland was apprehended to be too weakly
furnished for a concluding Campaign: Yet so different are the Methods of
Providence from Humane Expectations, that nothing memorable happened any where,
but only in Ireland, where little or nothing was expected. Ibid.

23. When sad Accidents came from the immediate Hand of Heaven, particularly on
the occasion of a great Loss at Sea; she said, Though there was no occasion for
Complaint or Anger upon these, yet there was a juster Cause of Grief, since
God's Hand was to be seen so particularly in them. Sometimes she feared there
might be some secret Sins, that might lie at the Root, and blast all: But she
went soon off from that, and said, Where so much was visible, there was no need
of Divination, concerning that which might be hidden. Ibid.

24. She was sorry, that the State of War made it necessary, to restrain
another Prince from Barbarities, by making himself feel the Effects of them;
and therefore she said, She hoped, that such Practices should become so odious,
in all that should begin them, and by their doing so, force others to
retaliate, that for the future they should be for ever laid aside. Ibid.

25. She apprehended she felt once or twice, such Indispositions upon her, that
she concluded Nature was working toward some great Sickness; so she set
herself to take full and broad Views of Death, that from thence she might
judge, how she should be able to encounter it. But she felt so quiet an
Indifference upon that Prospect, leaning rather toward the desire of a
Dissolution, that she said, Though she did not pray for Death, yet she could
neither wish nor pray against it. She left that before God, and referred
herself entirely to the disposal of Providence. If she did not wish for Death,
yet she did not fear it. Ibid.

26. We prayed for our selves more than for her, when we cried to God for her
Life and Recovery: both Priest and People, Rich and Poor, all Ranks and Sorts
joined in this Litany. A universal Groan was Ecchoed to those Prayers, through
our Churches and Streets. Ibid.

27. But how severely soever God intended to visit us, she was gently handled;
she felt no inward depression, nor sinking of Nature. She then declared, That
she felt in her Mind the Joys of a good Conscience, and the Powers of Religion,
giving her Supports, which even the last Agonies could not shake. Thus far
Bishop Burnet.

28. In the Public Worship of God, she was a bright Example of solemn and
unaffected Devotion. She prayed with humble Reverence, heard the Word with
respectful Silence, and with serious Application of Spirit, as duly considering
the infinite Interval between the Supremacy of Heaven, and Princes on Earth:
That their Greatness in its Luster, is but a faint and vanishing Reflection of
the Divine Majesty. One Instance I shall specify in this kind: When her
Residence was at the Hague, a Lady of Noble Quality coming to the Court to wait
on her, on a Saturday in the Afternoon, was told, she was retired from all
Company, and kept a Fast, in Preparation for the receiving the Sacrament the
next Day. The Lady staying 'till Five a Clock, the Princess came out, and
contented herself with a very slender Supper, it being incongruous to conclude
a Fast with a Feast. Thus solemnly she prepared herself for Spiritual Communion
with her Savior. Dr. Bates 's Sermon upon the Death of the Queen.

29. She had a sincere Zeal for the healing our unhappy Divisions in Religious
Things, and declared her Resolution upon the first Address of some Ministers,
that she would use all Means for that Blessed End. She was so wise as to
understand the Difference between Matters Doctrinals, and Rituals; and so good
as to allow a just Liberty for Dissenters, in things of small moment. She was
not fettered with superstitious Scruples, but her clear and free Spirit was for
the Union of Christians in Things essential to Christianity. Ibid.

30. In her Relation to the King, she was the best Pattern of Conjugal Love and
Obsequiousness. How happy was her Society, redoubling his Comforts, and
dividing his Cares? Her Deportment was becoming the Dignity and Dearness of the
Relation. Of this we have the most convincing Proof from the Testimony and
Tears of the King since her Death. Solomon adds to many Commendations of a
virtuous Woman, as a Coronis, That her Husband praises her. The King's
declaring, that in all her Conversation he discovered no Fault; and his
unfeigned and deep Sorrow for his Loss, are the Queen's entire Elogy. Ibid.

31. I cannot omit her Reverential Regard for the Lord's Day, which at the
Hague I had a very particular occasion to take Notice of: On a Saturday, a
Vessel (the Pacquet-Boat) was stranded not far from thence, which lying very
near the Shore, I viewed (happening to be thereabouts at that time) 'till the
last Passengers were brought (as all were) safe off. Multitudes went to see it,
and her Highness being informed of it, said, she was willing to see it too; but
thought she should not: for it was then too late for that Evening; and she
reckoned by Monday it would be shivered to pieces, (tho it remaining entire
'till then, she was pleased to view it that Day); but she resolved, she added,
she would noe give so ill an Example, as to go see it on the Lord's Day. Mr.
Howe's Discourse on the Death of our late Queen.

32. She was not inaccessible to such of her Subjects, whose dissentient
Judgments in some such Things, put them into lower Circumstances. Great she was
in all valuable Excellencies, nor greater in any, than in her most
Condescending Goodness. Her singular Humility adorned all the rest. Speaking
once of a good thing which she intended, she added, But of my self I can do
nothing: and somewhat being by one (of two more only) then present, interposed,
she answered, She hoped God would help her. Ibid.

33. He that will read the Character, Psalm. 15. and 24. of an Inhabitant of
that Holy Hill, will there read her true and most just Character. Wherein I
cannot omit to take notice, how sacred she reckoned her Word. I know with whom
she has sometimes conferred, whether having given a Promise of such a seeming
import, she could consistently therewith do so, or so, saying, That whatever
prejudice it were to her, she would never depart from her Word. Ibid.

34. She had a Love to all good Men, tho of a different Communion. Her Esteem
and Affection were not confined to one Party, or to the Church of which herself
was a Member. This is the Unchristian Character of many, that they hate and
despise those who differ from them, in the Circumstantials of Religion: But the
deceased Queen had a larger Soul, she loved and valued the Image of God,
wherever she found it. It Is well known, how frequently (I may say constantly)
she joined in the Worship of God, with the Dutch and French Churches, tho their
Constitution and Order are very different from those of the Church of England.
I have been a Witness of the Kindness and Respect, with which she treated
English Dissenting Ministers, and was present when she thanked one of that
quality, for a Practical Book of Divinity which he had published, and had been
put into her Hands. This Consideration makes our Loss the greater, because she
is taken away, who was so capable and willing to compose the unhappy
Differences in Matters of Religion, which she did lament, and earnestly wished
the removal of 'em. Mr. Spademan 's Sermon, preached at Rotterdam the Day of
Her Majesty's Funeral.

35. Those who never had themselves Experience of Want and Distress, are
tempted unto a neglect and disregard of the Miserable: Most of the Great and
Rich, choose rather to lay out their Treasures on any Vanity. than in Relieving
the Destitute and Distressed. But this pious Queen was rich in this kind of
good Works, and did as willingly seek out Objects of her Charity, as others do
avoid 'em. The Character, which Solomon gives of a Virtuous Woman, did most
visibly belong to the deceased Queen, Prove. 31.20. She stretched out her Hand
to the Poor; yea, she reaches forth (both) her Hands to the Needy. And it
might truly have been said of her, what Job alleged as an Evidence of his
Sincerity in the Service of God, Job 29.13, 15, 16. The Blessing of him that
was ready to perish, came upon me, and I caused the Widow's Heart to sing for
Joy, etc. -- By such a Christian Practice this wise Queen laid up Treasure in
Heaven. Ibid.

36. Could we, and those who were related to the late Queen, be persuaded to
walk in the Steps of her Faith and Piety, we should reap more Advantage after
her Death, than we did in her Life. It Is a memorable Wonder that is related, 2
Kings 12.21. How when a dead Man was cast into the Sepulcher of Elisha, as soon
as he touched the Bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood upon his feet. We may
hope, that if the holy Example of the deceased Queen, might touch our dead
Souls, they would be revived and gain Spiritual Life. Ibid.

37. She knew how dangerous an Instrument of the Devil Flattery is, and how
fatally her Station exposed her to it: And she took care for nothing more, than
to secure herself against the danger of it.

I Shall never forget with what weight of Reason, and sincerity of Concern, I
have sometimes heard this Great Queen, represent the Dangers which Princes,
above all others, are apt to run in this respect. And with what Earnestness she
has exhorted those about her, to deliver to her the plainest Truths; and with
all Freedom to tell her, if they had observed any thing amiss in her Conduct,
that she might amend it. Dr. Wake 's Sermon, preached at Grey's-Inn, on the
Occasion of the Queen's Death.

38. She thought herself engaged to labor, not only her own particular, but
the Salvation of others: You may know it, you that by your Employments were
designed to her immediate Service, have been so often corrected by her; when
over zealous for her, and so negligent of God, she would not admit of your
Sedulities, but when they were sanctified by Prayer. It behooves ye in the first
place to serve God, said she to ye, that is your first Duty; I will have none of
your Attendance, but upon that Condition. Mr. Claude's Sermon on the Queen's
Death, preached at the Hague.

39. Never was Majesty better tempered with Easiness and Sweetness. She knew
how to be familiar, without making herself cheap, and to condescend without
meanness. She had all the Greatness of Majesty, with all the Virtues of
Conversation; and knew very well, what became her Table, and what became the
Council Board.

She understood her Religion, and loved it, and practiced it; and was the
greatest Example of the Age, of a constant, regular, unaffected Devotion, and
of all the eminent Virtues of a Christian Life. In the midst of all the Great
Affairs of State, she would rather spare time from her Sleep, than from her
Prayers; where she always appeared with that great Composure and Seriousness of
Mind, as if her Court had been a Nunnery, and she had nothing else to do in the
World. Dr. Sherlock 's Sermon, preached at the Temple, upon the sad Occasion of
the Queen's Death.

40. She was not wrought up to any Bigottry in unnecessary Opinions. She was
most conversant in Books of Practical Divinity, of which some of the latest
used by her, were certain Sermons, and some Discourses concerning Happiness,
Death, and Judgment. Archbishop Tenison 's Sermon, preached at the Funeral of
Her late Majesty.

41. In this Princess, Authority, Majesty, and Humility met together. That
dwelt in her to such a degree, that in her Presence, or within her Hearing, the
speaking of this, which I have said, or any thing like this, would have been
exceedingly offensive. But the Justice of Nations gives those Praises to the
Merit of good Princes, which their own Modesty would not bear. An ordinary
Instance may suffice, for the showing her averseness, not only to Flattery, but
to Praise. Of a Book addressed to her, she said, She had read it, and liked it
well; but much the better, because the Epistle was a bare Dedication. Ibid.

42. Her Graces and Virtues were not blemished by Vanity or Affection: Had that
been so, she would scarce have made such a Profession as this, a little before
her Death: I know (said she) what loose People think of those who pretend to
Religion; they think it is all Hypocrisy: Let them think what they will, I may
now say, and I thank God I can say it, I have not affected to appear what I was
not. Ibid.

43. Seeing God had determined this good Queen must die, the Christian Manner
in which she went out of the World, is, in some sort, an Alleviation of the
Grief of those whom she has left behind her; who have indeed Reason more than
enough to mourn, but yet not as Persons without hope. Ibid.

44. I will not say, that of this Affliction she had any formal Presage; but
yet there was something which looked like an immediate Preparation for it. I
mean her choosing to hear read more than once, a little before it, the last
Sermon of a Good and Learned Man, now with God, upon this Subject, What! shall
we receive Good from the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? Job 2.10.
Ibid.

45. She fixed the Times of Prayers in that Chamber, to which her Sickness had
confined her. On that very Day she showed how sensible she was of Death, and
how little she feared it. She required him who officiated there, to add that
Collect in the Communion of the Sick, in which are these Words: -- That
whenever the Soul shall depart from the Body, it may be without Spot
presented unto Thee. I will (said she) have this Collect read twice every Day.
All have need to be put in mind of Death, and Princes have as much as any Body
else. Ibid.

46. She seemed neither to fear Death, nor to covet Life. There appeared not
the least Sign of Regret for the leaving of those Temporal Greatnesses, which
make so many of high Estate unwilling to die.

It was (you may imagine) high Satisfaction, to hear her say a great many most
Christian Things, and this amongst them, I believe I shall now soon die, and I
thank God, I have from my Youth learned a true Doctrine, that Repentance is not
to be put off to a Deathbed. Ibid.

47. On Thursday she prepared herself for the blessed Communion, to which she
had been no Stranger from the Fifteenth Year of her Age. She was much
concerned, that she found herself in so Dozing a Condition (so she expressed
it). To that she added, Others had need to pray for me, seeing I am so little
able to pray for my self.

48. When a Second Portion of a certain Draught was offered her, she refused
it, saying, I have but a little Time to live, and I would spend it a better
way. Ibid.

49. In all these Afflictions the King was greatly afflicted; how sensibly, and
yet how becomingly many saw; but few have Skill enough to describe it: I Am
satisfied I have not. At last, the Helps of Art, and Prayers and Tears not
prevailing, a Quarter before One, on Friday Morning, after two or three small
Strugglings of Nature, and without such Agonies as in such Cases are common,
having (like David) served her own Generation by the Will of God, she fell on
sleep.

Thus far Archbishop Tenison.

50. Before the Queen had exceeded the Age of Childhood, when in the midst of
her Play, she was imitating the Dutch March with her Hands upon the Cover of a
Chest, and was admonished not to mind the Dutch, the King, her Uncle's, Enemy;
but on the other side, France, and the Dauthin were commended to her, with a
Divine and Prophetic Utterance she made answer, I care not for France, it is
Holland I desire. Not many Words indeed, but certainly Prognosticating, and
apparently then foretelling that fame Wedlock from Heaven conferred upon us,
and upon all Europe. Dr. Perizonius 's Oration on the Queen in Holland.

51. She had a greater Regard to the Dignity of those on whom she conferred her
Bounty, than to her own Fame in so fruitful a Field of Honor; nor would she
endure it should be spread abroad, how many, or who they were, whom she
supported by her Liberality. Therefore she sat by herself, and four times a
Year, alone, in her Closet, carefully computed what she had formerly determined
to give to every one. She viewed the Accounts of her Beneficence herself, and
distributed it from those Notes, to several parts of the World, by Letters
written with her own Hand, no Body being admitted to assist her in so Noble an
Office, because it was not her pleasure, that any Body should be concerned in
the Testimony of her Conscience. This was that which the ancient Stoics so
studiously inculcated, but very difficulty persuaded either others, or
themselves to observe, That Virtue was to be desired for its own sake, without
any respect of Profit, Praise, or in hopes of great Advancement. Ibid.

52. After the Expedition for England, the Queen being tired out with Grief and
Mourning, she ordered a Lady to be sent for, of approved Probity, and
Illustrious Quality into whose Breast she might discharge the Sighs and
Afflictions which then oppressed her: And then it was, that she poured forth
these Expressions, sad indeed, but worthy to be Engraven in Gold, or carved in
Cedar: That if the only thing contended for, were the Right which her Birth,
and the Laws of the Land had given her to the Inheritance of three Kingdoms she
would never assent, that it should be justified and recovered by Arms from her
Father; but that she was overruled by this Persuasion alone, that the Laws of
her Country, and the Safety of the true Reformed Religion were in apparent
danger. Otherwise, that she would reddily and patiently acquiesce and be
satisfied with the Fortune which she had obtained in this Country, with the
Love and good Will of all Men, which was dearer to her, than a Kingdom. And
that she could not but extol the wonderful Goodness of God toward her; that
though she spent her brittle Years in a Court besieged with Vice and Impiety, and
though after the Death of her Mother, she grew up under a Step-Dame, and a Father
devoted to the Church of Rome, and were little minded by her Uncle, yet she had
so well imbibed the Principles of the true Religion in her Infant Years, that,
by means thereof, she attained to the profounder Knowledge of it by degrees,
and made out her way to Eternal Salvation. Therefore she consented to that
Expedition, neither willingly nor gladly, but after a long Hesitation, and
vanquished at length by the most weighty Reasons of Duty and Piety; while she
apparently saw, that had she not taken upon her to support whatever is valuable
among Public Enjoyments, and which no good Man will loose, but his Life; all
things would have gone to Rack and Ruin in her Country, through the
Ill-management of a Father, led away by the Councels of his Priests. Ibid.

53. A quick and ready Wit, and fit for Government, was admired in her, by a
great Number of Illustrious Ambassadors from Foreign Nations, to whom she
always answered without any Hesitation, wisely and gravely, concerning Affairs
of greatest moment. Nor will Albeville himself, if I am not mistaken, deny this
to be true; by whom, when her Father, after Fame had spread abroad the Report
of her Mother-in-Laws being with Child, would needs have persuaded his
Daughter, that he had not intention to disturb the legal Order of Succession in
England, nor to abolish the received Ceremonies of the English Church, but that
it should be of equal prevalency with the Roman Catholic Worship, both as to
Public Exercise, and equal share of Authority; she is said to have returned
this Answer, That she thanked her Father for designing nothing of Innovation in
the settled Succession of the Kingdom, though she were well assured, that by the
Laws of the Land, nothing of Novelty could be introduced in that Affair. In
Matters of Religion, she abhorred all Violence and Persecution; yet 'twas her
Opinion, That Dagon and the Ark would not agree so equally and lovingly
together in the same place, though she would not then determine which Party was
Dagon, or which the Ark. Ibid.

54. In the General Consternation in the Yar Ninety, as if she had nothing of
Female, but Form, prudently, and in a short time, got clear of all Dangers,
being in many places at once, present with her Body, everywhere with her Mind.
She viewed the Camps, and mustered the Soldiers, like another British Boadicia.
Those that were suspected, even her own and nearest Relations she sent to the
Tower: For she acknowledged no Relation that was an Enemy to the Public
Welfare. The Sea-Captains, who had failed in their Duty, and deserted our Men,
struggling with Multitude and Adverse Fortune, she sent for up, to answer for
their Misdemeanors; the Seamen maimed and wounded in the Engagement, she
bountifully relieved; and no less liberal to the Widows of the Slain; she sent
some Thousands of Pounds into this Land, to be distributed among the Relicts of
those that were killed. She confirmed the Minds of the English, and encouraged
'em by her own Example. She fortified the Ports and Entrances into the Kingdom;
she reinforced the Fleet wiht Men of War. Lastly, She provided against all ill
Accidents, with a Heroic Providence, so that the Enemy neither durst pursue his
Victory, nor attempt to Land. Ibid.

55. For the most part therefore, she rose betimes in the Morning, and before
all things dedicate her first Exercises to God; then she applied herself to the
Reading of such Books, by which our Minds are either excited to Piety, or
adorned and enriched with the Precepts of Wisdom. Then she dispatched such
Business as offered itself, and courteously, tho a trouble to her, admitted the
Visits of such as in Duty came to wait on her; and those Ceremonies being over,
she heard the Petitions and Requests of all that came; after which she
exercised her Body by walking in the Garden, at what time she conversed with
such Bishops or Divines, as were most eminent for Piety and Learning, and
greedily fed her Ears with their Discourses. In the Afternoon she delighted
herself in the Company and Converse of her Husband, if his more important
Occasions, or the Wars, would permit her the Opportunity of his Presence.
Sometimes she visited Ladies of highest Quality, or else repaid 'em their
Civilities; nor would she disdain at other times, with the same Royal Hands,
that but now wielded the Scepter, to work with her Needle. At what time also,
that she might not leave the least Minute unimprov'd, she ordered the History
of some Nation or other to be read to her. And this not only when she was so
empoly'd, but when she supped privately in her Bedchamber, or when she could
not sleep in the Nightime; as I was told by a most Noble Lady, that attended
upon the Queen for Nine Years together, and was acquainted with her whole
Course of her Life, and when she was in Waiting, had frequently herself read to
her. Ibid.

56. King James, the Father of Mary, when he came to the Crown, employed all
his Cares and Thoughts, and made it his Business, to Repeal several Acts which
his Ancestors had made for the Support of the Reformed Religion; more
especially to abolish the Law which enacted the taking of the Test, which
abjured all Power and Authority which the Pope, or any other Mortal claimed, or
could claim, either in Civil or Ecclesiastical Matters within the Kingdom. Mary
openly declared, That she could not approve his Conduct, nor assent to those
who urged, that the English might be absolved from the sanctity and observance
of that Oath, nor that any one for the future, was to be forced to it.

The King informed of this, ordered his Envoy, then at the Hague, to make it
out to Mary, and persuade her, that she had a wrong Opinion, induced thereto by
false Reasons and Grounds of her Father's Intentions and Meaning in that
particular. The Envoy taking a fit Opportunity, held the Queen in a long
Discourse upon this Subject, bringing not a few, nor those vulgar Arguments,
out of Scripture, many Testimonies out of the most Ancient and most Learned
Fathers of the Church, and more than one Reason from the Knowledge of Things
which Nature has imprinted in our Minds. When the Queen had attentively heard
him, she did not answer him with a Laconism; she so readily, and so smartly, of
a sudden, took to pieces the Envoy's Discourse, and his Arguments, refured all
his Reasons with so much Judgment, that when the Envoy was dismissed by the
Queen, he could not forbear testifying and acknowledging in the public Hall of
the Court, before a great many Persons of high Quality and Dignity, that he
could never have believed, there had been a Woman in the World endued with so
much Understanding of the Christian Doctrine, and of the Opinions urged to her
upon the several Heads of that Doctrine; or that could defend what she thought,
with so much strength and weight of Reason, and fortify it with so strong a
Guard, against all Assaults of open Hostility, or treacherous Insinuation.

He added moreover, That he was persuaded, that this Princess could be moved by
no Man living, from those Opinions concerning Religion, wherewith she was so
thoroughly seasoned. Nor would he be the occasion that any one should attempt to
Discourse her any more upon that occasion, unless he intended to lose his
Labor: And this was what he also wrote to K. James.

In this Conference with the English Agent, the most prudent Princess added
thus much farther, That she could not sufficiently admire, nor indeed imagine
how it should come to pass, that any Man, not void of Reason or Sense, or that
had a right Judgment of God and Divine Matters, or had comprehended in his Mind
the true manner of Worshipping him, could prove a Deserter, and run from our
Religion to the Ceremonies of Rome.

When the Agent replied, That her Father, the King of Great Britain, was a
living Example of a better Approbation of the Romish Worship. She made answer,
That there was nothing grieved her more; and the only thing she wondered at, by
whose Seduction, upon what Occasion, by what Arguments he could be induced to
betray the Bulwark of purest Truth; and having left that, upon what Supporters,
the Security and Tranquillity of his Mind could rely. These things the most wise
and prudent Mary.

Not long after, when there was no question but the King James had been
certified of all these things by his Agent's Letters; the Father sends a long
and weighty Epistle to his Daughter, wherein he set forth at large, the
Occasion, the Reasons and Methods he had followed, in abandoning our Worship,
and embracing the Opinions of Rome.

This Letter from King James was delivered to Mary, upon Tuesday in the
Evening; the Messengers who brought it, being to return into England the next
Day. Wherefore, when she had read it over and over again, with extraordinary
attention, and studiously considered every thing, she set herself to return an
Answer, wherein she spent the greatest part of the Night; and tho frequently
put in mind, that it was time to go to Bed, and that it behooved her to take
care of her Health, which would be much disordered by watching: the most
prudent Queen made answer, That the Duty of Answering the King's Letters, was
to be preferred before Sleep, lest she should be straightened in time the next
Day, and thereby be hindered from performing what she owed to her Father. That
therefore she made the more haste, lest if the Messenger should slip away
without her Answer, it might be suspected, that she had made use of help, and
got some Divine to write her Letters for her; which if her Father should
believe, they would want that weight and effect, which by the Favor of God,
she promised herself from dispatching 'em with all speed she could.

The King's chief Argument was taken from the Antiquity, and the long and
immovable Endurance of the Roman Church, established and founded upon the
Promises of Christ, Thou art Peter, etc. To which were added other Places,
Arguments, and Testimonies heaped together, to corroborate that Opinion. All
which the most ingenious Princess answered and refuted in so short a time, and
with so much Politeness and Judgment, that an eminent Divine, and some few
other Persons, conspicuous for their Quality and Integrity, who afterward were
permitted to see a Copy of that Epistle, ravished into admiration, asserted,
that they could never have persuaded themselves that such a Letter, so full of
grave and efficacious Arguments, could have been written by any Man, much less
by a Woman, unless by one who had devoted his whole Life to the Study of the
Scriptures, and true Divinity. Grevius 's Oration on the Queen, at Utrecht.

57. Such was also the Sanctity of Mary's Life, that King William, after her
Decease, calling to mind her Piety toward God, the Integrity of her Life, and
here extraordinary Knowledge of Sacred Things, brake forth into this
Expression, That if he could believe that ever any mortal Man could be born
without the Contamination of Sin, he would believe it of the Queen. And she
preserved herself so chaste and spotless, that while she resided upon Earth, she
lived the Life of the Saints, even in the hurry of the Court. Ibid.

58. When the News was sent from England, That Mary, the Eldest Daughter of
King James, was by Decree of Parliament, to be the next Day proclaimed Queen of
England; the Messenger was to pass through the Hague, and to impart the News in
the Resident's Name, to a Person of high Authority, and no less high both in
William and Mary's Esteem. He immiedately hastens to the Court, and informs
Mary of this Vote of the House, and congratulates her Advancement to the Royal
Dignity. She, according to her wonted Good Nature, mildly indeed, but with a
less familiar Countenance, and a more contracted Brow, made answer, That she
neither hoped those Things to be true, which he related, neither did she
believe, that William would accept the Kingdom, as a Substitute to Female
Authority, or as one that was to be beholden to a Woman for a Crown. Ibid.

59. When it was admired that Mary should be so implacable, to deny her Pardon
to one that had done nothing against her, nor had injured her either in Word or
Deed, when William, justly offended, had pardoned the Delinquent, she ordered
this Answer to be made, That had the Crime been committed against her, she
would not have been either severe, or inexorable; but that she could not forget
an Attempt against her Husband, nor grant her Pardon so easily to him, who had
so highly offended William. Who can sufficiently extol this Conjugal Fidelity,
this unusual Affection of a Queen toward a Husband? For my part, I am not able
to admire it as I ought to do.

Nor was the Queen beloved with less Affection by the King, that the King was
beloved by her; there was no need of falling out, to renew their Love; but such
was the harmonious Agreement of their Minds and Counsels from the first Day of
their auspicious Marriage, that their Wills were still the same, whatever
pleased, whatever disliked the one, always disliked, still pleased the other;
such an Agreement of Opinion in all Things, both private and public, that tho
in Persons divided by long Intervals of distant Leagues, yet by an
unaccountable Sympathy, they were always of one Mind in all Affairs most
difficult, and of dubious Event, which would have puzzled the most acute and
experienced Politicians. So that they might be said to be born under one
Constellation, or rather that one Soul resided in two Bodies. And that you may
not think I speak a Fiction; behold an Example of a real Harmony of Minds,
almost beyond belief.

When the King sent word, That Forty of the Men of Wwar, with the Admiral,
should steer away toward the Coast of France, with the Design, That if they
found an Opportunity, they should burn all the Enemies Transport-Ships. Before
the Yachts, and the Messenger who was sent with the King's Expresses, arrived
in England, the Queen's Letters were brought hither to the King, giving him an
Account, That she had ordered a Fleet of Forty Men of War, to sail away for the
Coast of France, and burn the Enemies Ships, which were reported to be designed
to infest the English Shore.

What Symphony could produce a more harmonious Harmony of Notes, than this of
the Opinions and Counsels of the King and Queen; when the one knew nothing of
the other's Mind: Insomuch, that Similitude of Manners, and Consent of Minds,
not Fortune, seemed to have joined William and Mary together. Ibid.

60. It wos a Saying of the King, before he thought of Marriage, to Charles the
Second's Ambassador, at a time when there happened an accidental Discourse
about the Choice of Wives, That of all the Qualities to be sought for in a
Wife, his first Care should be to find out the Best-Condition'd. And he himself
made himself the Master of his Wish: for he could not have found to better
Wife, had the Sun itself, according to the Proverb, been to have sought her out.

But as the King met with his chief Help and Assistance in the Queen's Love, so
not only her Subjects, but all others, for whom it was in her Power to do Good,
found more than ordinary Succor in her bountiful Nature. She thought the Day
lost, wherein she had not an Opportunity to do good to several. Ibid.

61. How many experienced the Bounty of the her Munificent and Liberal Hand, as
well in England as in Germany, the Low Countries, Piedmont, but more especially
the French Exiles, who rather chose to lose their Estates, than to hazard the
Loss of their Souls? And the Splendor of this Benevolence shined forth in
Mary's ^^st coming into this Country: For the Prince of Orange, so soon as Mary
became his Consort, ordered such a Sum of Money to be paid her for the
necessary Expenses of her Apparel, and Princely Ornaments. What did the Divine
Princess do with it at those Years? She did not stifle the Money in close and
dark Chest, nor did she lavish it out in gorgeous Attire, upon Pearls and Gems;
which other Women, far distant from her degree, are so mad after, that they
never cease this Fury 'till they have quite ruined their Husband's Patrimonies:
But moderate in her Layings-out, considering the Grandeur of her Fortune, upon
her Apparel, and other Ornaments, which the Dignity of so great a Princess
required, she introduced into the Court-Diligence, Frugality, Pasirmony,
Virtues most commonly unknown in Courts. The rest of that large Allowance she
consumed in Relieving the Distresses of honest and worthy People, who labored
under great Necessities, not through their own Extravagancy, but reduced
thereto by Misfortune, and the Hardness of the Times. Ibid.

62. What her Innoceny and Temperance was in the midst of so much Wealth, your
selves cannot be ignorant, who know how pious she was; nor have I any thing to
add as to her Chastity, when your have heard how entirely she loved the King.
She could not endure a wanton Word, nor the sight of a Woman, who was reported
or suspected to have violated her Modesty. Ibid.

63. As she excelled all in Majesty, so she suffered none to outdo her in
Humanity. I will give you one rare Example of her extraordinary Affability and
Goodness. An Ambassador of a great Prince, after he had paid his Duty to Mary
at the Hague, retiring out of the Chamber, lest he should turn his back to the
Princess, went backward, stopping and bowing two or three times, By chance it
happened, that after he had bowed a second time, still retreating backward, his
Perriwig caught hold of a Branch that hung in the Room, which either he had not
seen, or else had forgot, and pulling it off discovered his bald Head. The
Ambassador blushed, and the Ladies and Maids of Honor could not forbear
laughing; only the Princess did not so much as smile, but kept her Countenance
with the same Gravity, as when she heard the Embassador's Address. After the
Ambassador was gone, one of the Ladies, who was greatly in her favor, admiring
the Reservedness of the Princess, upon such a Jocular Accident, made bold to
ask her, how she could hold laughing? To whom the Princess, I should have done
the Ambassador an Injury, said she, should I by an unseasonable Fit of
Laughter, added to the Shame and Trouble of a Person who was in Confusion and
Perplexity enough at what had unhappily, and through no Fault of his, befallen
him: No, Madam, that had been ill done, and against my Duty. Ibid.

64. Now as she was always like herself, through the whole Course of her Life,
so neither did she swerve from herself at her Death. Ibid.

65. When the Right Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury, sent for some few Days
before she expired, gave her to understand the certain Approach of Death, that
she was to prepare for the Journey which all Mortals early or later are to
take, placidly, without any sign of a sick Mind, tho extremely weakened in Body
by the force of the Disease, she made answer, That that was not the first Day
of her Learning to prepare for Death; for that she had served God during the
whole Course of her Life. A Saying truly worthy of so great a Queen, worthy the
Remembrance of all Ages. She had learned, that then we begin to live when we
die. We die as soon as born; every Day something is imperceptibly cropped from
our Lives, 'till by degrees the whole be lopt away. And that this most pious
Queen neither deceived herself, nor the Archbishop, is apparent from that
memorable Saying of hers, about Six Years before her fatal Day, when she sat
by the Bedside of a Noble Person's Wife, whom she highly loved and valued, to
confirm and comfort her, then drawing her last Breath. They who were present
desired her, that she would turn away her Eyes from the expiring Lady. But the
Queen refused, saving withal, That it rarely fell out for Persons of her Rank
and Quality, to see such a Spectacle as now was offered her by the designed
Favor of Heaven, to make advantage of it in better understanding the Vanity of
our Life. What advantage she made of it, the Conclusion of her Days
sufficiently taught us. Ibid.

66. She bid the King Farewell in these Words: I leave the Earth: I hope, dear
King, you never mistrusted my Fidelity and Love. Moderate your Grief. I wish
that with the same Joy that I depart, with the same Easiness you may set Bounds
to your Sorrow. Soon after the Divine Mary expired in the Hands and Embraces of
the King, who never left her, nor stirred out of her Chamber Day or Night,
whilst she lay laboring under three most cruel Diseases, and Smallpox, an
Erisipelas, and a Pestilential Fever, either of which was enough to have
carried off the strongest of Men. Ibid.

67. Never any Man, whatever were the Madness of raging Disaster, could
perceive any change of Countenance in the King. But this same Grief he was not
able to withstand, vanquished by the force of his Love and Loss; as having lost
the most certain and faithful Companion of his Fortune, of his Counsels, this
Cares, his Labors, and his Thoughts; who far exceeded all the Excellencies of
the Female Sex, that hardly the Virtue of any Woman, in any Age, can be
compared to hers. For that Reason perhaps in was that Heaven denied her
Offspring, lest she should bring forth a worse than herself, and here Husband,
seeing Nature could go no further. Ibid.

68. Thou best and greatest of Queens, thou departest this Life in the Flower
of thy Age; but what remorsless Death has abstracted from the Number of thy
Years, Men will add as much, and more, to the Eternal Glory, Fame, and
Remembrance of thy Name. This Life will prolong thy Consecrated Memory to after
Ages. Nor Marble Mausoleum, nor Golden Urn shall hide thee; thy Tomb shall be
our Breasts. Ibid.

69. Being once put in Mind of her approaching End, with an undaunted
Countenance she returned this Masculine and truly Royal Expression, I am not
now to prepare for Death; it has been my Study all the Days of my Life.
Francius 's Oration upon the Death of the Queen.

70. Upon the Death of the Queen, His Majesty's otherwise invincible Courage,
gives way to raging Grief; and he who had so often contemned the Bullets and
Swords of his Enemies; he who dreaded neither Flames nor Steel, nor Death
itself, languishes, falls, and swoons away upon the Death of his dearest Queen.
He remembers himself to be but a King, finds himself a Man, and not unwilling,
acknowledges the Excess of his Grief. Miserable Man that I am, said he, I have
lost the best of Women, and the most pleasing Companion of my Life! Ibid.

71. When she was sometimes forced to rise at Midnight, by reason of the urgent
Affairs of the State, and could not afterward Sleep, she commanded either the
Holy-Scripture, or some other pious Book, to be brought her. If any Persons
came to visit her in a Morning before she had poured forth her Prayers, she
sent 'em back with this Expression, That she was first to serve the King of
Kings. If any Persons were said to seek her Life by Treachery and Conspiracy;
her Answer was, That she submitted to the Will of Heaven. Ibid.

72. When any new-fashion'd Garment, or costly Ornament was showed her, she
rejected 'em as superfluous, and answered, The Money might be better laid out
upon the Poor. Ibid.

73. The Mind of Man is better discerned by his Death, than by his Life: for
Man is apt in his Lifetime to conceal and dissemble his Affections; but at his
Death the Mask being removed, he appears what he is. What was more noble and
signal than the Death of this Queen? What more becoming a wise Man and a
Christian, than that Saying of hers, This is not the first time that I prepared
my self for Death. Ibid.

74. When the more solemn Duties of Religion were over, she never gave her Mind
to the frivolous Stories of Amadis, and impertinent Fictions of Amad. but
attentively studied the Volumes of those Authors, by which she might improve
her Knowledge and her Prudence. I shall relate not what I gathered from the
common Reports of Fame, but from the Lips of a most worthy Person, and my
Friend, who being admitted in the Morning to kiss her Hands, found before her,
Cambden's Annals of Queen Elizabeth, and Doctor Burnet's History of the
Reformation. But Piety is never to be accounted solidly accomplished, unless
accompanied with Liberality; otherwise it would be Piety only in Words, and not
in Deeds, as she herself would say upon the approach of her expiring Minutes.
Ortwinius's Oration upon the Death of the Queen.

75. While Her Majesty was sick, the King refused to stir from the languishing
Queen's Bedside, assiduous to serve her, and careless of the Infection that
many times accompanies the Malady she had; and being often requested to spare
His Royal Person, and not to inflict another Wound upon suffering Europe, made
answer, That when he Married the Queen, he Covenanted to be the Companion, not
only of her Prosperity, but of whatever Fortune befell her; and that he would
with the Hazard of his Life, receive from her Lips her last expiring Gasps.

All hope of Recovery now was fled away, and the most Reverend Father in God,
the Archbishop of Canterbury being admitted into the Room, in order to perform
the last Duties of his Function. Such harsh and disconsolate News would have
struck another Person with Horror and Trembling. But what said the Queen to
this? Full of Faith and Constancy, she received the Tidings with a cheerful and
undaunted Countenance, saying withal, That she did no way seek to shun the
Stroke of Death, but was ready prepared for the dark Mansion of the Grave: for
that she had always so led her Life; that whenever Death gave her his last
Summons, she should be a Gainer by it. Ibid.

76. In the first Years of her Youth, this Princess displayed the best Natural
Disposition in the World, a sweet Humor, agreeable and always equal; a Heart
upright and sincere; a solid and firm Judgment, and a Piety beyond her Age. And
it was upon this sincere Report, that the great Prince who espoused her,
desired to be united to her, declaring, That all the Circumstances of Fortune
and Interest did never engage him so much as those of her Humor and
Inclination. Funeral Orations upon the Queen, recited by the Learned Author of
The Collection of Canons. Printed at the Hague.

77. They who had the Honor to be acquainted with the Character of this great
Queen, well knew that the Luster of a Crown did never dazzle her.

78. She has been heard to say, and I have heard her myself, when she was
congratulated upon her Advancement to the Crown, That many times, so much
Grandeur was a Burden. That in such Stations People lived with less Consent to
themselves than others; and that she should wish she were in Holland again. And
indeed she had Reason to say so: For it may be said of those that Govern, that
they resemble the Stars that shine with a bright Luster, but are never at rest.
Ibid.

79. I have let no Day pass, said the pious Queen, when they told her what a
dangerous Condition her Life was in, I have let not Day pass, without thinking
upon Death. So that she did not look upon it, as the People of the World are
wont to look upon it, with dread and horror, but she looked upon it after a
most Christian-like manner, as the end of her Time, and the happy Entrance into
Eternity. She had frequently thought upon that Sentence, which will be
pronounced to every one of us at the Hour of Death, You shall be no more. Ibid.

80. With what Goodness did she still inform herself of the Wants and
Necessities of those that were in Affliction? With what Care did she order 'em
to be provided for? Her Alms had no other Bounds than those which God had given
to the Grandeur of her Power. We have seen Tears in her Eyes, for sorrow that
she could not do so much as she desired. With what Goodness, I will not say of
a Princess and a Queen, but of a Mother, did she take particular Accounts, and
make particular Enquiries for the succor of poor Families. Ibid.

81. 'Twas this Charity that made her shut her Ears against Calumny and
Backbiting. Never durst any one speak ill of any Body before the Queen. Neither
Flattery nor Calumny, two of the most dangerous Pests of Sovereign Courts,
durst never open their Mouths in her presence. Slander was utterly banished
from her sight and hearing.

Lord, says David, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? He that is pure in his
Life, whose Actions are just, who speaks always according to Truth, who
slanders not his Neighbor, and who lends not his Ear to the Backbiter. This is
then one more Encomium which it behooves us to give the Queen, and which you,
who had the Honor to be near her Person, knew that she most justly deserved.
Ibid.

82. There was something admirable in the Diligence of this excellent Queen,
and very extraordinary in a Person of her Sex, her Age and Degree: For she
spent every Hour of the Day to profit and advantage. She was wont to rise by
Six a Clock in the Morning, Winter and Summer: far different from most People,
who covetous of many Things, are so prodigal of that little time which is so
burdensome to 'em, that they seek always to waste it. Ibid.

83. The Queen concerned herself for all those who had quitted their Country
for the sake of Religion. Piety, and the Glory of God, which she had always
before her Eyes, made her continually wish, That Persons who had showed their
Zeal and Affection to the Service of God, might do nothing but what became the
Character of that Zeal which had inclined 'em. Let us fulfill these Wishes, so
just, and so Christian-like. The incorruptible Crown of Glory shall not be
given to him that begins, but to him that perseveres. Let us therefore labor
our Zeal and Fervency while we may, to the end we may find Grace and Mercy at
the Day of our Death; and that we may be made Partakers of that Bliss and
Eternal Glory which now the Queen enjoys. That Queen, who because she was a
Woman that truly feared the Lord, deserves far greater Praises than we have
been able to give her. Ibid.

84. I remember one Day, this pious and pensive Princess recalling to Mind her
Father, who had so lately Ruled most flourishing Kingdoms, but gone astray from
that Faith whch the Laws of God and Man had established, ever since the Reign
of Edward VI. the Josiah of his Age, and which his Father and Grandfather had
subscribed to; I remember, I say, that being admitted into her private Chapel,
after she had let fall a Shower of Tears, she gave Thanks to God, the Supreme
Parent of all Things, who sometimes forsook the Sons and Grandchildren of
Hero's, sometimes in them supplied what was wanting in their Parents,
correcting the Vice of Nature by the Benefit of Grace.

Which when I had confirmed by the examples of herself, and her Great
Grandfather, James, the Son of unfortunate Mary; and that it was done by the
same Miracle of Grace, as we daily see Nature produce Gold and Diamonds out of
stony and craggy Mountains, and sweet Juices out of bitter Roots; I added, by
way of Consolation of her afflicted Piety, that perhaps the Father of so many
Tears and Sighs would not be lost in Heaven. Ibid.

85. When first the News was brought of the inauspicious, but certain Nuptials,
of James the Father, with Mary of Modina, by the Mediation of Lewis, not only
she, together with Anne her Sister, with a cast-down Countenance, and watery
Eyes, received the Tidings, attended with a Deluge of Tears, which Doctor
Thomas Doughty, then Domestic Chaplain, could by no means put a stop to, but
our Mary also, after she somewhat alleviated her Sorrow with Weeping, brake
forth into these Expressions, worthy to be engraved in Cedar: However things
fall out, said she, I hope we shall preserve immaculate to God, our Faith and
our Religion; let all other things pass away, which we shall look upon as of
little consequence. Ibid.

86. From these Exercises of her Youth, she was called to greater and higher
Things, and to lay the Foundations of Empire and Council, under the Conduct of
William Henry. Her Mind being capable of Great Things, beyond her Sex, she
profited so well, by the Company of so Great a Prince, not only by his
Instructions, but by his Example, that she was taught to Reign before she could
know herself. I will faithfully relate what I only heard my self, and therefore
can attest. While she staid at the Hague, after the Expedition for England,
expecting a Wind, I was admitted to the Presence of the Royal Princess, and
found her turmoil'd with many Cares, and deep Cogitations. At what time she,
who was never wanting in any measure of Familiarity, casting a propitious Look
upon the Interpreters of the Holy bible, delivered herself in these Expressions
to me:

What a severe and cruel Necessity, said she, now lies upon me, either to
forsake a Father, whom my Grandmother first ruined, (hence France the Author
of our Parents Calamity) or to forsake a Husband, my Country; nay, God himself,
and my Soul, my nearest and my dearest Pledge.

It Is a cruel Necessity indeed, Madam, answered I, but not to be avoided;
Heaven not enduring divided Duty, nor divided Affections; Heaven, that has not
only joined you by an Eternal Tie to William, but calls you to succor your
laboring, if not perishing Country, the Church of God, your Religion, and
these your Batavians, over whole Necks the Sword, or Bondage hang. You forsake
a Father, Madam, it is true, but who first forsook himself, Nature, his
Children, Kingdoms, Religion, Laws, his Word, and the Hopes of his Subjects;
who departed himself from the Government, that he might serve the Conveniences
of those, who under the pretense of false Religions, measure all things, Divine
and Human, by their own Advantages. And when I added, that she was called by
the Voice of Heaven, from a most delightful Ease, to be the Companion of
William, in his Cares and Toyls, and unless our Wishes failed us, to the
Government of one of the greatest Empires in the World.

I, said the very Image of Modesty itself, I govern a People, and wield
Scepters! I who only learnt to handle, next the Sacred Bible, Books that either
may instruct or recreate the Mind, then to handle my Needle, Pen, or Pencil, or
to mind my Flowers, Garden, or whatever else belongs to my Family-Affairs, or
calls off our Sex from the Contagion of Idleness! And therefore be not deceived
in your Opinion, continued she, smiling, as if the Prince, by his Society, had
instructed me in the Arts of Peace and War. It Is true, after hard Hunting, or
wearied with continual Audiences, or tired with incessant Cares for the Good of
the Republic, he comes to my Chamber about Supper-time, upon this Condition,
that I should not tire him more with multiplicity of Questions, but rather
strive to recreate him, over-coil'd, and almost spent, with pleasing Jests,
that might revive him with innocent Mirth. Ibid.

87. William might justly exalt his single Mary, above all the Wives of former
Times; then whom no Woman greater for her Courage, more Religious in her
Affection, more amiable in her Countenance, more modest in here Habit, more
affable in her Discourse, or who with a more obedient readiness to serve her
Royal Consort, whether present or absent; was more his Counselor, his Hands,
his Ears, his Eyes, and every-way more assistant to him. And therefore the
August William told his mournful Bishops and Grandees, That Mary's outside was
known to them; but that her intrinsic and just Value was only known to
himself. Ibid.

88. Queen Mary looked upon Piety to be the Compendium, the Seasoning of all
Virtues, and the Support of Kingdoms; and therefore Religion was always her
first Care, and her Supreme Law; as it was also to her Glorious William. And
therefore it was the frequent Saying of those two August Princes, That neither
the Guards of Majesty, the Councils of Princes, Emperors Legions, Cities
Garrison, Courage of their Leaders, Well-disciplin'd and Veteran Armies, nor
the Sinews of War, any thing availed, to the Preservation of Sovereigns, or
their Subjects, without God's assistance. Ibid.

89. She was moderate in her Dress, sparing in her Train, but eager and humble
in her Attention: Who, whenever she entered the Church-doors, or happened to
sneeze in the time of Divine Service, impatiently brook'd the Bowings and
Cringes of the Sycophant Crowd, professing, That in the House of God, the
Distinction was the same of Meanest and Highest from the most Infinite Majesty.
Ibid.

90. The Queen being moved by the untimely Death of several Illustrious Women
in her Court, thought it high time more familiarly to converse with Death, and
meditate upon Eternity. And that she might always have him in her Eye, besides
the Sacred Books which she turned over more frequently than ever Alexander did
Homer's Iliads; she applied herself to other Books, no less familiar to her,
which taught the Art of Dying well; more especially the Treatise upon that
Subject, or Charles Drelincourt: which she confessed to his Son, then one of
her Physicians, That she had read above Seven times over. Ibid.

91. How many Things could I say of the Earnest Desires of our pious Queen, to
see extinguished, or, as much as could be, lessened the impious Divisions, too
deeply rooted, but first sown by the wicked Emissaries of Rome, to the Ruin of
her Country. How averse was she from the Severity of former times, which
decreed the Dissenters, if not to be exterminated by the Sword, yet to be
routed out by Excommunications, and macerated by Imprisonments, Fines, and
Banishment, for the only sake of their differing Discipline, free from all
other the least Stain or Pestilence of Heresy or false Doctrine? And how
earnestly has she wished in my hearing (that saving to the Church of England,
and the Bishops their ancient Rights, there might be a moderate way found, to
consolidate the common Safety of England, and the Universal Church, by the
Union of all Parties; all Offenses being removed, all Animosity being laid
aside, all Passion being moderated, and whatsoever on either side savoured too
much of Human Invention, being utterly rejected. Neither if we have any thing
of Prophetic in us, is all Hopes of such a Union cut off in the Loss of Mary,
while William still remains. Ibid.

92. When this most Noble Senate interposed their kind Offices of Condolement,
for the Death of King Charles II. by which her Father came to the Sovereignty,
but upon which most dark and dismal Storms threatened the Kingdom, the Church
and the Reformed Religion; she, as she was never without all the Marks of
Civility, after she had answered the Messengr, added these Expressions:

That it was the Will of God, through whose Providence, there was no reason to
despair of the Public Safety: That the best Consolation in Affliction, was a
reliance upon God: That there was a Threatening Cloud hung over her Father's
Kingdoms; but that he was able to bring forth a splendid and most acceptable
Cloud out of the thickest Darkness.

Oh Mary, a true Prophetess, and Words, a certain Augury of what was to come!
It Is now about two Years since, that the Fatal News reached the Ears of the
best of Queens, that News more especially doleful to our Merchants, that so
many Ships laden with rich Goods, and wealthy Treasure bound for the Levant,
either through Perfidiousness or supine Negligence, were either sunk or burnt,
or yielded up to the French; which penetrated so deeply to the Heart of the
compassionate Queen, that she could not forbear watering her Royal Cheeks,
before all the Standers by, with a Deluge of Tears; nor did she only with her
Tears bemoan the Losses of those who suffered after a more than ordinary
manner, but also testified her sympathizing in their Misery to the Widows and
Orphans that were hardly able to bear up under so great a Calamity. Nor shall I
ever forget that cruel Hour, when going to take my leave of the Princess
returning to her Country.

I am called, said she, to my Husband, to my Native Country, to my
Fellow-Citizens, and whither Providence leads me, I must follow. But when I
leave this Palace, I leave the Seat of my Leisure my Tranquillity and Delight:
And first shall my Right Hand forget itself, before I will ever forget this my
Belgium, after so many Proofs of the Affection and Judgment of this Republic.
Whose Losses, added she, without the least Commotion of Mind, whose Misfortunes
and Calamities, and also whatever prosperous and joyful befalls it, I shall look
upon as my own, as long as I remember my self. Ibid.

93. But here my Sorrow stops my Mouth, and I must put an end at length to my
most bitter Memorial of her Praises. But wherefore do I say an End, when dying
she was so much above all Praises, by how much the more she approached nearer
to Heaven and Eternity. Ibid.

THE Wonders of Nature.

PART II.

By WILLIAM TVRNER, M. A. Vicar of WALBERTON, in SUSSEX.

When I consider thy Heavens, the Work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars,
which thou have ordained;

What is Man that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of Man, that thou
visitest him?

Psalm. 8.3, 4. LONDON: Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven, in Jewen-Street.
MDCXCVII.

THE PREFACE TO THE Wonders of Nature.
THE Impression which the Almighty has made upon the several Pieces of the
Creation, and diversity of Species, Figures, Lineaments, Properties, and
Curiosity of Operation discernable in them, is enough to amuse and puzzle the
Reason of the most Ingenious and Gigantic Atheist in the World: For can any Man
in his right Wits and Senses conclude, that all these brave and curious Beings,
made themselves; or, that they happened casually by a fortuitous Concourse of
Atoms, and little Particles of Matter, accidentally jumbled together? Men have
lived now by Succession of Generations, several Thousands of Years in the
World; and yet we never read, or heard of any of them, that ever saw a House
built, or a Fly made, in this manner. We cannot bring the Herbs in our Garden,
into the due Form and Mixture of a Sallad; nor prevail with our Laboring
Cattle to come into their Harness, and draw in the Yoke; nor range Soldiers
into their due Order, without the Exercise of Care, and the Discipline of a
Superior: And shall the whole Universe be filled with such Plenty and Variety
of admirable Creatures, and those Creatures made with admirable Wisdom, and
able to produce admirable Effects, and nothing but what is common and visible,
and which occurs to our outward Senses, contribute and concur to the making of
them. Fie upon such Stupidity and Bruitishness of Thought! I do here present
the Reader, not with a Scheme of what is very common and obvious, Things that
we may see and hear of every Day, every Way we go; but the Rarities of Nature,
the most remarkable Particulars of the visible Creation, the Archives and
Treasury of this lower World, the Repository of Things more strange and
wonderful than ordinary. And this I do on purpose to rouse and awaken the
Reason of Men asleep, into a Thinking and Philosophical Temper; that if
possible, when they will wink and sleep, and scorn to spend a serious Thought
upon the Common Scheme of the World, they may startle at Extraordinaries, and
wind up their Reasons a little higher, upon the sight of Wonders. But this is
not all I aim at; the Footsteps of the Divinity are so conspicuous in the
Creation, that, methinks, it is very easy and natural for Human Reason to climb
the Porphyry-Tree, and ascend, as it were, by a Scala Coeli, from Earth to
Heaven, from the Individuals here below, to the Supreme Creator and Architect
above. And that Man that does not improve his Faculties in this Case, is
unworthy of that Rational Soul he is endowed with. And therefore I humbly
request my Reader, to shake himself, and rub his Eyes, and look about him first
of all, to see what Impressions of the Divine Attributes and Excellencies he
can meet with, upon the several Beings in the World, and then fall down upon
his Knees, in an humble and modest Address and Adoration, to the Great, Wise,
and Gracious Creator. The greatest Adversaries we have to deal with in this
Case, are the Wits of the Age, some of Epicurus's Litter, who deny all
Revelation and Scripture-Evidence, and take upon them to Philosophize upon the
World, and so professing themselves to be Wise, they become Fools: For I am
sure the Apostle was no Fool, when he tells us, The invisible Things of the
Godhead may be visibly seen, by the Creation of the Things which are made. No,
no, themselves, in the Judgment not only of St. Paul, but even of the Heathen
Poet, will be found faulty, through their Poverty of Wit, and their
Beggarliness of Reason.

Tentat enim dubiam mentem Rationis Egestas,
Ecquaenam fuerit mundi genitalis Origo.
Lucret. p. 227. And truly (as Bishop Fotherby says, concerning his
Athaeomastix) how the Reader will be affected in the Reading of this Book, I
cannot tell; but myself in Writing of it, was no less affected than Tully, in
Writing his De Senectute; being oftentimes so lively touched, that I never
found in myself a more quick Apprehension both of God's incomprehensible
Majesty and Goodness, and of Man's most contemptible Littleness and Baseness,
than by this Contemplation of God in his Creatures; finding in myself the Truth
of that in Tully, Est Animorum ingeniorumque pabulum, consideratio,
contemplatioque Naturae; Erigimur latiores fieri videmur, humana despicimus;
cogitantesque supera, atque coelestia, baec nostra, ut exigna and minima
contemnimus. Cic L 4. Acad. p. 38. The Contemplation of Nature is the Food and
Nutriment of the Mind; it lifts up the Soul, and does so brisk the Spirit, that
our Minds seem to be more dilated and spread, as it were, into a Paraphrase,
'till at last we scorn Earth, and our own Studies here, as too little and
narrow, and fall presenly upon the Consideration of Things more Divine and
Heavenly.

This, Reader, is the Design of the following Collections, to glut and satiate
the Mind with a Prospect of mere Nature, and to administer a fair Occasion for
the raising of the Soul to Higher and more Lofty and Noble Speculations, the
Study of Divinity, and the Glories of the Upper World, which will please, and
make us happy, without any Nauseousness, for ever and ever.

Wonders of Nature, PART II.
NAture ( says Dr. Barrow) offers her self, and her inexhaustible Store of
Appearances, to our Contemplation; we may without any Harm, and with much
Delight, survey her rich Varieties, examine her Proceedings, pierce into her
Secrets; every kind of Animals, of Plants, of Minerals, of Meteors, presents
Matter, wherewith innocently, pleasantly, and profitably, to entertain our
Minds: There are many Noble Sciences, by applying our Minds to the Study
whereof, we may not only Divert them, but Improve and Cultivate them, etc. To
do this, we have an Unquestionable Right, and by it we shall obtain vast
Benefit. [ Thus far Dr. Barrow, in his Sermons against Evil Speaking.] We shall
therefore here (for Method-sake) first relate the Wonders of Nature, and then
proceed to the Wonders of Art. In relating the Wonders of Nature, we shall
first begin with Instances of Sympathy.

CHAP. I Instances of Sympathy.
THE Sympathy of the Simple Qualities, and the Elements wherein they are found,
(say the Virtuosi of France,) are the Causes of the Temperament of mixed
Bodies, as Antipathy of their Dissolution: It Is they who unite and disunite
those Compounds, and by approximating or removing them one from another, cause
all their Motions. When these Causes are apparent, we take upon us to impute
them to certain Qualities, and discourse upon them with some Skill and
Confidence; but where we cannot by searching find out the Cause, we fly to
Occult Qualities, that is, Sympathy or Antipathy, for a Refuge and Honorable
Sanctuary for our Ignorance; of which sort may be these that follow.

1. Coral stays Bleeding, Amber draws Straws, the Loadstone Iron; Garlic is a
Friend to the Rose and Lilly, increasing one the others Odor; a Man's
Fasting-Spittle kills the Viper, Eels drowned in Wine make the Drinker
thenceforward hate it, Betony strengthens the Brain, Succory is proper to the
Liver, Bezoar a Friend to the Heart. The Lungs of a Fox are useful to such as
are Phthisical, the Intestines of the Wolf is good for the Colic, Eyebright
for the Eye, Solomon's-Seal for the Rupture, the Black Decoction of Sena for
Melancholy, Yellow Rhubarb for Choler, White Agaric for Phlegm. The Lote-Tree
follows the Motion of the Sun. Philos. Confer. of the Virtuosi of France, p.
122.

2. There is observed a Sympathy between the Feet and the Head, the one taking
cold, the other is affected; between the Mouth and the Stomach; between the
Heart, and the Hands or Wrists: So that Medicines are often applied to the one
for the Cure of the other. There is a Sympathy between the Light, and the
Spirits of Men; the Green Color, and the Eyes: All Cordials have a Sympathy
with the Heatt, as Pearls and precious Stones; Male-Peony with the Brain; the
Boodstone with the Blood: The Dog knows the Dog-killer. I Query here, What is
to be thought of the Lions in the Tower dying at the Smell of a Handkerchief
dipped in the Blood of King Charles the First.

3. I would have it thoroughly enquired, (says Sir Francis Bacon,) whether
there be not some secret Passages of Sympathy between Persons of near Blood, as
Parents, Children, Brothers, Sisters, Nurse-Children, Husbands, Wives, etc.
There be many Reports in History, that upon the Death of Persons of such
Nearness, Men have and an inward Feeling of it. I my self remember, that being
at Paris, and my Father dying in London, two or three days before my Father's
Death, I had a Dream, which I told to diverse English Gentlemen, that my
Father's House in the Country was plastered all over with Black Mortar. There
is an Opinion, that loving and kind Husbands have a Sense of their Wives
Breeding-Child by some Accident in their own Body. Bacon's Natural Hist. Cent.
10. p. 211.

4. Hither also may be referred the Effects of Imagination, of which, Authors
have said so much. A Sister of mine, says Gaffarella, had the Figure of a Fish
upon her left Leg, caused by the Desire my Mother had to eat Fish, when she was
great; and it is represented with so much Perfection and Rarity, that you would
take it to be drawn by some excellent Master. Now that, wherein the Wonder
lies, is this, That when ever the Girl eat any Fish, that upon her Leg put her
to a sensible Pain. And I had a Friend that had a Mulberry growing upon his
Forehead, caused likewise by his Mother's longing after them; and he never eat
Mulberries, but that on his Forehead put him to Pain by its extraordinary
Beating. This other Story, which I shall now relate, (says he,) is very well
known to all in Paris, that are curious Inquirers into these Things: The
Hostess of the Inn in the Suburbs of St. Michael, at Bois de Vincenne, who died
about two Years since, had likewise a Mulberry growing upon a Lower Lip; which
was smooth and plain all the Year long, till the time that Mulberries begin to
ripen; at which time hers also began to be red, and to swell more and more,
observing exactly the Season and Nature of other Mulberries. Gaffar, unheard of
Curios. par. 2. chapter 6.

5. Oysters taken out of Water, will open against the Flood-time, and close
upon the Ebb, Britan. Bacon. p. 18.

6. All Concords of Music are Sympathies; And it is observed, that if a Lute or
Viol be laid upon the Back with a small Straw upon one side of the Strings, and
another Lute or Viol be laid by it, the Unison of one being struck will make
the String move, and the Straw fall off. Bacon's Not. Hist. cent. 4.

7. There is a Sympathy between the Ear and Sounds, between the Spirit and the
Ear; insomuch that, according to the Variety of Notes and Tones, and Tunes, the
Mind is diversely affected; wild Creatures are tamed, Soldiers are provoked to
Courage, some moved to Fear and Sadness by this means. The Voice of an Orator
or Preacher has a great Influence upon the Hearers, according to the
Sweetness, Harshness, Lowness, Loudness, Mournsulness, etc. of it.

8. The Sympathetic Powder and Weapon-Salve, magnified by Sir Francis Bacon and
Sir Kenelm Digby, etc. is laughed at by Mr. Hales of Eaton, and looked upon as
a fond Conceit.

9. The Sympathy of Affections, and Strength of Imagination is admirable, when
the Mind is able to presage the Death or Dangers of a Friend, tho a great way
off. This also I found in my self: For once I suddenly fell into a Passion of
Weeping, upon the Apprehension I took that my dear Friend was dead, whom I
exceedingly loved for his Virtues, and it fell out accordingly as I presaged;
for he died about that same Hour that I fell into that Weeping Fit, and we were
at that time 60 Miles asunder; nor could I tell certainly, that he was dead,
till two Days after. Thus to some, the Death of Friends is presaged by bleeding
at the Nose, and sudden Sadness, by Dreams, and diverse other ways, which the
Learned Poet was not ignorant of, when he says, Agnovit long gemitum
praesagia mali men's; Aen. 1.10. So by the Greek Poet the Soul is called (...),
A Southsayer of Evil: The Cause of this the Gentiles ascribed to the Sun, which
they held to be the Soul; and our Souls, Sparks of that great Lamp. A
Platonical Conceit, which he thought Men's Souls to be material; we were better
to ascribe this to the Information of that Angel which attends us. Rosse Arcan.
Microcosin.

10. One Faber of Buxovil in Alsatia constantly acted the Part of his pregnant
Wife, being taken with Vomitings, and suffered those inordinate Longings that
usually attend Women in that Condition, his Wife all the while suffering no
such Inconveniences. Miscelan. Curios. Med. Phys. Germ. An. 2. Observe. 215.

11. That this has happened to some Persons in Oxford is very certain, and
that to knowing Ones too, very unlikely to be deceived, and of unquestionable
Veracity; whereof one of them told me, That they came upon him when he little
thought of his Wife, and that the Pangs were very odd ones, such as he never
felt in his Life; not like any Griping in the Guts, but lying in the Muscles of
the abdomen, which yet he should never have thought to have had relation to his
Wife, had they not suddenly, and beyond expectation, ceased as soon as his Wife
began to be in Labor. Thus far Dr. Plot, in his Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire, p.
193.

CHAP. II. Instances of Antipathy.
THIS is the Opposite of Sympathy, arising from the Contrariety of innate and
undiscoverable Qualities, a secret Vnsuitableness in the Nature of one Thing to
that of another; where the Properties clash together, and bid Battle, upon a
near approach of one to the other. As of the Horse and Camel, Elephant and
Swine, Lion and Cock, Bull and Fig Tree, Naked Man and Adder, Ape and Tortoise,
Ape and Eel, Cantharides and the Bladder, Plague and Quicksilver, Plague and
Arsnic, Birds and Scare-Crows; Things alive and Things dead and corrupted, as
Man and Man's Carcass, Beast and Beast's Blood, etc. But I shall especially
Instance in the Antipathies of Mankind against some particular Things.

1. Cardinal Don Henrique de Cardona would fall into a Swoon upon the Smell of
a Rose, (says Ingrassia;) and Laurentius, Bishop of Vratislavia, was done to
Death by the Smell of them. Schenk. Obs. Med. l. 7. p. 891.

2. Cardinal Oliverius Caraffa, during the Season of Roses, used to enclose
himself in a Chamber, not permitting any to enter his Palace, nor come near him
that had a Rose about him. Idem Obs. Med. l. 7. p. 891.

3. The Smell of a Rose, or Sight of it at a distance, would cause a Noble
Venetian, of the Family of Barbarigi, to swoon, and become like a dead Man.
Donat, H. M. c. 3. p. 305.

4. I know a stout Soldier, says Donatus, who was never able to bear the Smell
or Sight of the Herb Rue, but would evermore betake himself to flight at his
first Notice of its Presence. Do. His. Med. l. 6. c. 3. p. 307.

5. Johannes e Querceto, Secretary to Francis the First, King of France, was
forced to stop his Nostrils with Bread when there were any Apples at Table; and
so offensive was the Smell of them to him, that if an Apple had been near his
Nose, he would fall a bleeding. Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 3. p. 307.

6. I have seen, says Brassavolus, the younger Daughter of Frederick, King of
Naples, that could not eat any kind of Flesh, nor so much as taste of it; and
as often as she put any bit of it into her Mouth, she was seized with a vehement
Syncope, and falling to the Earth, and rolling her self thereupon, would
lamentably shriek out: This she would continue to do for the space of half an
Hour, after she was returned to her self. Schenk l. 7. p. 890.

7. Guainerius tells us of himself, That Hogs Flesh was so very great an Enemy
to him, that it produced the same Accidents in him that Poison would have done,
although he used but any part of it in Sawces: As also, that when his Mother (who
was desirous to accustom her Son to all kinds of Meats) had prepared for him
(without his knowledge) a Dish of that Flesh, minced into small bits, and
offered it to him to eat; within an Hour after he fell into a Palpitation of
the Heart, and thence into a Syncope, thence into a Vomiting, in which he
brought up pure Blood; so that they looked for no Life of him. Zach. Quest.
Med. l. 2. Tit. 2. p. 73.

8. Olaterius tells us, of a French Boy tabling with his Father, that would eat
nothing that was roasted, boiled, or fried, eating only Bread, Fruits and Milk;
nor could he eat the finer sort of Bread, but such only as had course Brans in
it; his Milk also must be cold, for he could eat nothing hot; yet he was of
good Habit of Body, fresh, and well colored. Plot. Obs. l. 1. p. 238.

9. Horstius says, He saw a Noble Countess tasting of an Udder of Beef, had
her Lips suddenly swelled thereby; and the Count told him, That as often as she
did eat of it, she was troubled in that manner, the Cause whereof they were
ignorant. Sche. Obs. Med. l. 7. p. 891.

10. A Learned Person told the same Author, of a Man at Antwerp that would
immediately swoon as often as a Pig was set before him. Sch. Obs. Ibid.

11. Another tells of a Man of Quality, who at the sight of an Eel is presently
cast into a Swoon; yea tho enclosed in a Pie, yet falls he down dead, and so
continues till the Eel be taken off from the Table. Hen. ab Heers. Obs. Med. l.
1. Ob. 29. p. 247.

12. Johan, Heurnicus, as often as he eat Pepper or Rhadish, was tortured with
the cruel Pains of the Cholick. Hen. ab. Heers. Obs. Med. l. 1. obs. 27. p. 249.

13. The mildest Medicines vehemently disturb some Persons, as it was observed in
an illustrious Lady; for if purged with Manna, she was suddenly taken with
Torments, Loathings, Belchings, etc. yet with stronger ones, she was purged
without Trouble. Also her Nephew (tho of a bilious Temperament) could never be
purged with Manna, so that it seemed a peculiar Property of that Family:
Schenck Obs. Med. l. 7. p. 891.

14. A whole Family (says Donatus) were never able to bear Diaphoenicon, tho
never so privately minced with other Medicines, but would straight reject it by
Vomit. Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 3. p. 308.

15. Scaliger tells of a whole Family that would die at the taking of a little
Cassia Fistula. Scal. de Subtle. ad Card. Exercit. 153. p. 531.

16. A Noble Man had such an Antipathy to Oyl-Olive, that all kind of Sawces
that were prepared with it, and set in the Room where he was, must suddenly be
taken thence, or else he would fall into deadly Faintings. Schen. Obs. l. 7. p.
891.

17. To another, all sweet Things were Poison, as Honey, Sugar; neither could
he eat Grapes, Figs, nor Pears, Quinces, etc. Of all kind of Fruits, he only
eat Nuts, Almonds, and Pine-Kernels: He delighted in Vinegar, sour Sawces, and
salt Things: And his usual Drink was Water. Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 7. p. 891.

18. Dr. Christianus Ostenfeld having prepared an Infusion of Antimony for a
very melancholy Person, the Party upon the sight of it immediately found such a
Loathing arise, that he besought him to take away the Medicine, and soon after
such an abundance of Humors were voided by him upwards and downwards, that in
a short time after he was cured. Bar. H. Anat. Cent. 5. H. 64. p. 134.

19. Rondeletius says, he knew a Bishop by no means able to take any Physic,
but when he had need, he prepared for him a great quantity, which he poured hot
into a clean Basin, where he used to stir it to and fro, and to hold his Mouth
and Nostrils over the Steam of it, by which he was purged as plentifully, as if
he had taken any convenient Medicine for that purpose. Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 3.
obs. 3. p. 384.

20. Fallopius prescribed to a certain Abbess Pills, which she never swallowed,
but crushed them flat, and so applied them to the Region of the Ventricle,
binding them on with a Swathing-Band; and in the space of 4 or 5 Hours she
would be as well purged, as if she had swallowed down the Pills. Sch. Obs. Med.
Ibid.

21. Donatus tells of a Boy, that if at any time he eat of an Egg, his Lips
would swell, his Face would rise with Purple and Black Spots, and he would
froth at Mouth after the same manner, as if he had swallowed Poison. Don. Hist.
Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 3. p. 305.

22. Schenckius tells of a Norman, who had never tasted Bread, Flesh or Fish,
but fed only upon Eggs, and was therefore called The Weasel. Sch. l. 7. p. 889.

23. Brugerinus says, he was an Eyewitness of a Maid, who being more than 16
Years of Age, had been brought up only with Milk, without any other Food, for
she could not so much as endure the smell of Bread; and if the smallest
Particle of it was put into her Milk, she would discover it by the Smell at a
distance. Sch. l. 7. p. 890. Who tells in the same Page of Jac. Foro-^viensis,
that if at any time he eat Garlic, he was no less tormented, than if he had
drank Poison.

24. A certain Spaniard, who had never tasted any sort of Fish, when a Friend
of his had invited him to a Supper, and had on purpose given him Fish wrapped in
Eggs, he immediately fell into fainting Pressures of the Heart, and Vomitings,
etc. so that little wanted but that he had died upon it. Schenck. l. 7. p. 890.

25. Germanicus could not endure the Voice or Sight of a Cock; and the Persian
Magi were possessed with an extreme Hatred to Mice. Sch. l. 7. p. 889.

26. Another was not able to bear, that an old Woman should look upon him, and
being forced to look upon one, intended for Merriment as to him, ended in his
Death. Ibid.

27. Another at the sight of a Dog, is not only affrighted, but seized with
Convulsions, Bart. Hist. Anat. Cent. 3 Hist. 28. p. 65.

28. A young Lady of Namur, as often as she heard the sound of a Bell, or any
loud Voice, so often was she cast into a Swound, so as that she differed not
from one dead, Hen. ab. H. 61. Obs. 29. p. 253.

29. A Nun in the Monastery of St. Clare, would be strangely affrighted at the
sight of a Beetle; it fell out that some young Girls, cast a Beetle into her
Bosom, betwixt her Breasts, which when perceived, she presently fell into a
Swound to the Earth, deprived of all Sense, and remained four hours in Cold
Sweats; when she came to her self, yet she recovered not her former strength in
many days after. Zach. Quest. Med. l. 2. tit. 2. p. 61.

30. A Noble Man of Mantua, would fall in a Syncope, and Cold Sweats, at the
sight of an Hedgehog. Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 3. p. 306.

30. A German coming in Winter time into an Inn to Sup, the Woman of the House
knowing his Temper, hid her young Cat in a Chest, in the same Room where he was
to Sup, but though he had neither seen, nor heard it, yet after some time that
he had sucked in the Air, infected by the Cats breath, he Sweat and a sudden
paleness came on his Face; he cried out, that in some corner or other of the
Room, there lay a Cat hid. Sch. l. 7. p. 889.

32. A Lady, as often as she tasted any Raisons, or Sugar, or any other sweet
thing, was afflicted with intolerable pain in her Teeth, nor was she freed from
it, till she had Eaten something bitter or sharp. Henric. ab Heers. Obs. Med.
l. 1. Obs 29. p. 254.

33. Mr. Baker, an ancient Minister in London, was not able to endure the sight
of a Cat.

CHAP. III. Examples of Superfoetation.
THere are some Mysteries in the Anomalies of Nature, which we cannot solve;
and this is one, which for the Difficulty of it, I do not care to play the
Philosopher upon; the Recesses of the Operation are so Secret, and the Acts
themselves so Sublime, that it is impossible for material Eyes to find out, by
the most accurate Disquisition, or mere Reason, to give a perfect Rational
upon. I must manum de Tabula, and leave it to the Studies of the Schools.

1..... Palmer, Esquire; of West-Angmering in Sussex: It happened, that his Wife
were a full Fortnight inclusively in Labor, and was on Whitsunday delivered
of..... her Eldest Son; on Sunday following, of.... her Second Son; and the
Sunday next after, of.... her Third Son. These Three were Knighted for their
Valor and Success, (as in their Nativities), by King Henry the Eighth.

2. Anno 1584. Died the Noble Lord, Philip Lewis of Hirshorn, at his
Mansion House in the Palatinate, three miles from Heydelberg; he left no Heir,
but his Lady was with Child; his Kindred forthwith enters upon the Rents and
Royalties, and to gain the more full and perfect knowledge of them, (soon after
the death of her Lord), they plucked from her Waste, the Keys of all private
Places, (and that not without Violence) the better to enable them for the
search they intended. This Outrage redoubled the Grief of the Lady, so that
within few days after, she fell in Travel, and brought forth a Son, but dead
and wanting the Scull. Now were the next Heirs of the Deceased Noble Man,
exceeding Jocund, as having attained to their utmost hopes, and therefore now
used the Estate as their own; but it pleased God to raise up a Son to that
desolate and disconsolate Widow; for though she was not speedily delivered of
him, after the first, yet she remained somewhat Big after her delivery,
suspecting nothing, but that it was some praeternatural Humor, or some Disease
that was remaining in her Body; she therefore consulted the Physicians, who all
thought any thing rather to be the cause of the Disease, then that in the least
they suspected, a second Birth, so long after the first. They therefore advised
her to go to the Baths by the Rhine; she accordingly did, as a sad and
comfortless Widow, attended only with one Maid, came thither July, 1584 where
(^t so fell out) she found Augustus, the Elector of Saxony, together with the
Princess his Wife, as also many other Princes and their Ladies; by which means,
all Lodgings were so taken up, that she could not find Entertainment in any
Inn, especially being not known of what Quality she was, coming thither with so
private a Retinue as a Maid. At last, discovering to the Governor of the place,
who she was, and her last Misfortunes, she procured Lodging in his House for
that Night, when it was the tenth Week from her former delivery; it pleased God
to send her (in her Affliction, and amongst Strangers), a lovely Boy, the Fame
of which came to the Ears of the Illustrious Princes, who were then in Town.
The Elector of Mentz made her a Noble Provision for her lying in. The Elector
of Saxony also sent her by way of present, 1000 Dollars; also all the Rents and
Royalties before seized upon, were restored to this Lawful Heir of her
Husbands, and Child of hers, who was then alive; says Caspar Bauhinus.
Schenck. Obs. Med. Obs. 1. p. 542.

A Dutch Woman in Southwark, having invited diverse of her Neighbors to her
upsitting, found her self not well on a sudden, and rising from the Table, was
forthwith brought to Bed of another. This falling on a time into Discourse, one
then present reported, that the like befell a Sister of his who three Months
after the Birth of her first Son, was delivered of a second Sandys, on Ovid
Metam. l. 11. p. 215.

4. Doctor Plot, tells of a Cow of Mrs. Dunches, of Newington near Dorchester,
that whilst a Calf, before she was 11 Months old, produced another; which
Animals, carrying their burden no less then 9 Months, we must either admit,
that she took Bull at about 10 or 11 Months old, or that the Cow her self was
first brought forth pregnant of another. Not. Hist. Oxfordsh. p. 189.

5. An. 1633. David Spilinbergerus, Physician of Leutschovia, tells us of a Cow
in Hungary, that brought forth a Calf with a great Belly, wherein was found
another Calf, with all its Limbs perfect, ibid. Bartholin tells us of a Female
still-born Child, pregnant, with another Female, duly placed in the Womb, about
a span in length, ibid. The same Author met with an Egg at Witney, containing
another imperfect one in it; like that Ovum in Ovo, of Doctor Harvey's, or that
kept in the King of Denmarks Repository, or the other Bartholin saw, 1669, or
which Schastin Jungius saw, 1671. ibid.

CHAP. IV. Examples of the Fruitfulness of some Women.
HE whose Wife is as a Fruitful Vine by the sides of his House, and his
Children like Olive Plants, round about his Table, is by the Psalmist
pronounced a happy Man, supposing, that he be withal one that fears the Lord:
Let Goodness and Fruitfulness go together, and they will Terminate in
Blessedness; every Virtuous Child being a Crown of Glory, and a particular
Comfort to his Parents. But Ill Fruit is certainly a Curse, and the more in
number, the more Reproachful and Burdensome; however they prove, when he that
carries the Keys of the Womb, opens so wide, and pours out so plentifully; let
none Fault the Supreme Governor for his Dispensations, but attend diligently
his own Office, in the Nurture and Education.

1. One of the Maidservants of Augustus the Emperor, was delivered of five
Children at a Birth; the Mother together with her Children, were buried in the
Laurentine-way, with an Inscription upon them, by the Order of Augustus,
relating the same Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 1 c. c. 3. p. 249.

2. Also Serapia, a Woman of Alexandria, brought forth five Children at one
Birth. Cael. Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 4. c. 23. p. 180.

3. Doctor Fuller, out of Ausonius, speaks of a Roman Matron called Callicrate,
and thus Translateth her Epitaph, as speaking in her own Person.

Twenty Nine Births, Callicrate I told;
And of both Sexes, saw none sent to Grave,
I was an Hundred and Five Summers Old,
Yet stay from staff, my Hands did never crave.
A rare instance, which yet in the former respects, you will find surpassed in
what follows. Fullers Worth, p. 138.

4. A Woman of Dunstable, who, as her Epitaph in the Church testifies, bore at
three several times, three Children at a Birth, and five at a Birth two other
times. Haker. Ap. p. 224.

5. Elionera Salviata, the Wife of Frescobald, a Citizen of Florence, was
delivered of 52 Children, never less then three at a Birth. Fullers Worth. p.
119.

6. Anno 1553. The Wife of John Gissinger, a Tigurine, was delivered of Twins,
and before the Year was out, brought at once five more, three Sons and two
Daughters. Schenck. Ob. 1 p. 563.

7. Julius Sentinarius, of Bononia, came into the World with six Births, and
was himself the seventh. Schenck. Obs. 1. p. 563.

8. Jane Pancica, Wife to Bernard, a Sicilian of Agrigentum, was so fruitful,
that in 30 Births, she was delivered of 73 Children. Camer. Hor. Subcis. Cent.
2. c. 66. p. 273.

9. The famous Story of the Welfs, is this; Irmentrudes, the Wife of Isenbbard,
Earl of Altorf, had unadvisedly accused of Adultery, a Woman that had three
Children at a Birth, being not able to believe that one Man could at one time
get so many Children; adding, that she deserved to be sowed up in a Sack, and
thrown into the River; and accusing her to her Husband, the Earl. It happened
that the next Year, the Countess felt her self with Child, and (the Earl being
from Home), she was brought to Bed of 12 Male Children, but all of them very
little: She fearing the reproach of Adultery, whereof yet she was not Guilty,
commanded that 11 of them should be taken and cast into a River, not far from
the House, and one only brought up; it so fell out, that Isenbard met the
Woman, that was carrying the little Infants to their Death, and asking her
whither she went with her Pail, she replied, she was going to drown a few
Whelps, in the River of Scherk. The Earl came to her, and in despite of her
resistance, would see what was there; and discovering the Children, pressed her
in such wise, that she told him all the matter. He caused them to be secretly
Educated; and so soon as they were grown great, and brought home to him, he set
them in the Hall, by him whom his Wife had brought up. Being thus by their
Faces all known to be Brethren, their Mother moved in Conscience, confessed the
Fact, and obtained Pardon for her Fault; in remembrance whereof, the Honorable
Race of Wolfs (that is Whelps) got their Name. Camer. ibid. p. 274.

10. John Francis, Earl of Mirandula, tells of one Dorothy, who at two several
Births, brought forth 20 Sons, 9 at the one, and 11 at the other; while she
went with this burden, by reason of the mighty weight: she was wont to tie a
swathing-band about her Neck and Shoulders, and with that to bear up her swolen
Belly, which fell down to her very Knees. Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 4. Obs. 1. p.
563.

11. Matthias Golancevius, Bishop of Vladislavia, in Poland; it is said of his
Mother, that she was delivered of 12 Sons at once, and that of all these, he
only lived, the rest dying as soon as they were born, ibid.

12. Alexander de Campo Fregosa, Bishop of Ventimilium, attested upon his
Faith, that at Lamaia, a Noble-woman brought forth 16 Humane Births of the
bigness of a Man's Palm all which had motion; and that besides these 16, which
had Humane likeness, she brought forth at the same time, a Creature in the
likeness of a Horse, which had all motion; all the 17 were wrapped in one and
the same Secondine, which is monstrous, ibid. p. 164.

13. Anno 1217. Upon the 20th of January, the Lady Margaret, Wife to the Earl
Virloslaus, was, in the Country of Cracovia, brought to Bed of 30 living
bodies, all at once, ibid.

14. Matilda, some say Margaret, (Wife to Count Herman of Henneberg), did see a
poor Widow Woman, begging her Bread for God's sake, having in either Arm a
Child, which she had at one Birth; this poor Woman craving her Alms, the
Countess rejected her, saying, That it was against Nature for a Woman that was
Honest, to conceive by her Husband, two Children of one birth; the poor Woman
prayed to God, that in Vindication of her Innocence, he would send the Lady at
one burden, so many Children as there are Days in a Year; a while after, the
Lady was brought to bed, on the Friday before Palm Sunday, Anno 1276 and was
delivered of 365 Children, half Sons and half Daughters, the odd one found to
be a Hermophradite: These were laid in two Basins, and Baptized by Guido,
Suffragan Bishop of Utrict; the Sons Named John, and the Daughters Elizabeth,
who presently died. Heylins Cosmogr. p. 384. Grimstons Hist. Nethel. l. 1. p.
52. Camerar. Hor. Subcis. cent. 2. c. 66.

CHAP. V. Examples of the Numerous Issue of some Persons.
BE Fruitful and Multiply, was a Blessing bestowed not only upon the rest of
the Animal World at the Creation, but upon Mankind, especially, and afterward
upon the Jewish Church, more then others; and it is certain, the more excellent
any Being is, the more desirable is its Increase, and the Multiplication of its
Species: We are pleased with profitable Cattle, and love to see our Orchards,
and Fields of Corn, Fruitful. Is it the glory of Man and Woman, only to be
barren? Or should we not have some Zeal to fill up the vacant spaces in the
Church of God, Militant first, and Triumphant afterward? And then happy they,
who produce most Fruit for Heaven.

1. In the History of the Acts of Augustus Caesar, it is Recorded, that in his
12th Consulship, upon the 11th day of April, C. Crispinus Hilarious, a Gentleman
of Fesule, came with a solemn Pomp into the Capitol, attended upon with his 9
Children, 7 Sons, and two Daughters, with 27 Grandchildren, that were the Sons
of his Children; and 39 more, who were his great Grandchildren, the Sons of
his Sons Sons; and besides these, with 12 Females, that were his Childrens
Daughters, and with all these, he solemnly Sacrificed. Plin. l. 7. p. 162.

2. There was a Noble Lady of the Family of the Dalburges, who saw of her own
Race, even to the sixth degree; whereof the Germans have made this Distict.

Matter ait Natae, dic Natae, Filia, Natam
Vt moneat Natae, plangere Filiolam.
Thus Englished by Hakwell. Apolog. l. 3. c. 5. p. 224. The Aged Mother, to her
Daughter spoke.
Daughter, said she, arise;
Thy Daughter to thy Daughter take,
Whose Daughter's, Daughter Cries.
3. Vives speaks of a Village in Spain, that had above a Hundred Houses,
whereof all the Inhabitants were issued from one certain Old Man, who then
lived; when as that Village was so Peopled: The Name of Propinquity, how the
youngest should call him, could not be given, for the Spanish affords not a
Name above the great Grandfathers Father. Vives in comment. Sup. lib. de
Civit. Dei. l. 1. 8. c. 15.

4. In the Borough of Leicester, in the Church of St. Martins, is a very
remarkable Epitaph, viz. Here lies the Body of John Heyrick, of this Parish,
who departed this Life the second of April, 1589, being about the Age of 76
years; he did Marry Mary the Daughter of John Bond, of Wardend, in the County
of Warwick, Esquire; he lived with the said Mary in one House, full 52 years; and
in all that time, never buried Man, Woman, nor Child, though they were
sometimes 20 in Household. He had Issue by the said Mary, 5 Sons, and 7
Daughters; the said John was Mayor of the Town, 1559. and again, Anno 1572, the
said Mary lived to 97 years, and departed the 8th of December, 1611. She did
see before her departure, of her Children, and Childrens Children, and their
Children, to the number of One Hundred Forty and two. ibid.

5. In St. Innocents Churchyard, in the City of Paris, is to be seen the
Epitaph of Yeoland Baily, which does show, that she had lived 84 years, and
might have seen 288 Verstegan says, 295 of her Children. and Childrens
Children; she died on the 17th of April, 1514. Hakewel ibid. p. 234. Versteg.
Restit. decayed Int. 1. p. 3.

6. In Markshal-Church, in Essex, on Mrs. Honywoods Tomb, is this Inscription.
Here lies the body of Mary Waters, the Daughter and Coheir of Robert Waters,
of Lenham, in Kent. Esquire; Wife of Robert Honywood, of Charing, in Kent, Esquire; her
only Husband, who had at her decease, lawfully descended from her 367, 16 of
her own body, 114 Grandchildren, 228 in the third Generation, and 9 in the
fourth. She lived a most Pious Life, and in a most Christian manner, died here
at Markshall, in the 93 year of her Age, and in the 44th of her Widowhood, May
11th 1620. Wanly. Hist, of Man. p. 41.

7. Dame Ester Temple, Daughter to Miles Sands, Esquire; was born at Latmos, in
Buckinghamshire, and was married to Sir Thomas Temple of Stow, Baronet; she had
4 Sons, and 9 Daughters, which lived to be married; and so exceedingly
multiplied, that this Lady saw 700 extracted from her Body. Doctor Fuller
says, he bought the Truth hereof by a Wager he lost; besides there was a new
Generation of Marriageable Females just at her Death. Had the Offspring of this
Lady been contracted into one place, they were enough to have peopled a City of
a competent proportion. The Lady Temple died Anno 1656. Fullers Worthies. p.
138. Buckinghamshire.

8. We read, says Mr. Ricaut, that the Eastern Parts of the World have
abounded with Children of diver; Mothers, and but one Father; and that
ordinarily, as great Personage in Egypt, has been attended with 100 lusty Sons
in the Field, proceeding from his own Loins, well Armed, and daring in all
Attempts of Was. Paul Ricaut, Esquire; present State of the Ottoman Empire. p. 292.

A Woman in Delph, three several days, voided three Worms out of her Navel, and
not long after, was delivered of a Boy; and then seven days after that of
another. Forest. 17. Obs. 35.

10. I have heard the Reverend dr. Annesley, has had 25 Children, for Dr.
Manton baptizing one of them, was asked, how many children the Doctor had, to
whom he returned this Answer, That he was not certain how many, but believed
'twas Two Dozen, or a Quarter of an Hundred.

CHAP. VI. Children crying in the Womb.
IT IS common for Infants, at their first Exit out of their Mothers Womb, to
give some Significations of their resentment of the Change; but to do it before
they come into the common Air of this World, is more rare and strange; one
would think it time enough for them to Cry, when they are born, and arrived at
the brink of Troubles; but some, whether through the Strength of Nature, or
some premature Eruption of the Amnion, or other Accident in the Womb, or an
extraordinary Sagacity in provident Nature, and foresight of the Evils to come,
Anticipate their time, and are heard to Cry, before either the Mother or
Midwife, go about to disturb them in their little Mansions.

1. At Heyford Purcel, there was a Child that Cyred very Audibly in its Mothers
Womb, sometime before the Birth. The People being frighted with it, and
expecting some Calamity should soon attend such a Prodigy, pernicious
(forsooth) not only to the place where heard, but to the state it self; whereas
the Learned Bartholin more rightly Notes, that the Ruin of Kingdoms depends
rather upon the Wickedness of People, than any such Vagitus. Dr. Plot. Not.
Hist. Oxf. p. 192.

2. Anno 1648. There was a Woman, the Wife of a Seaman, near to the Church of
Holmiana, who had been big for 8 Months, she was of a good habit of body, and
nor Old; this Woman upon the Eve of Christmas Day, upon the Calends in the year
following, and in Epiphany, all those several times, heard the Child that was
in her Womb, who Cried with that noise, that it was heard by the Neighbors;
they Thronged together in great Numbers, to hear so unusual a Crying, both such
as knew the Woman, and such as knew her not. The Magistrates in the mean time,
caused the Woman to be carefully watched, that afterward, the birth of that
Crier might be the more certain. Diverse spent their Judgments before hand, of
what shaped Monster she should be delivered; but at last, the Woman was safely
brought to Bed of a perfect Female Chlid, Bartholin, took this Relation from
the Mothers Mouth. Hist. Anat. c. 1. p. 4.

3. A Noble Lady in Cheshire, sitting after Meat in the Dining Room, with her
Husband, their Domestic Chaplain, and diverse others; She was sensible of an
extraordinary stirring in her Belly; which so lift up her Clothes, that it was
easily discernable to those that were present, (she was then with Child, and it
was the seventh Month), upon the sudden, there was a voice heard, but whence it
should come, they were not able to Conjecture; this was uttered a second and
third time, to the great Amazement of the Persons present; the third time it
was so manifest, that the Cry came from her Womb; that they doubted no longer
of it. The Girl was living at the Relation, which was made by the Lady her self
to Dr. Walter Needham, Disquisit Anat. c. 3 p. 84.

4. Anno 1640. In Belgia, a Woman near Vessalia, who then had gone 3 years
entire big with a Child; that Child of hers, was heard to Cry by many Persons
worthy of Credit. Barth. Hist. Anat. c. 1. Hist. 1 p. 3.

5. Bartholin tells of another at Wittenberg, Anno 1632. Another at Leyden, a
third near Argentina; all which had Children that Cried in their Wombs. ibid.
p. l. 1, 2, 3.

6. Schenckius, tells of another at Rath-stad, in the Noric Alps; Wanrichius,
of one in the City of Brescia; Sennertus, of one in his own Town, Anno 1596,
whose Child Cried once, the 42d day before its birth; the Mother dying in
Travel, but the Daughter living. The Author of the History of the Netherlands,
tells of a Child in Holland, that Cried 15 days before its Birth. Wanleys
Wonders, p. 1, 2.

I Query, whether any Males have been observed to Cry thus? For all, that I can
come to the knowledge of, have been Female Children.

CHAP. VII. Monstrous Births and Conceptions of Mankind.
SO long at Nature deviates on the plausible or less dishonorable Side, we can
bear with some Patience; but when the Aberrations are Opprobrious, and carry
some notable Deformity and Reproach in their Face; they are Affrightful and
Stupefactive; we stand and wonder at the Product, and enquire with some
Concernedness of Spirit, what God means by such an angry and partial or
imperfect Concurrence of his Providence, and the Exercise of his Divine
Attributes. And certainly it is every one's Duty in such Cases to make use of
his Intellectuals, and enquire seriously, whether he has done his part with
that Prudence and Piety as he ought, since the Almighty has not co-operated
with the same Wisdom, and Kindness or Power, as he commonly uses.

1. Buchanan tells of one, having beneath the Navel one Body, but above it two
distinct ones; when hurt beneath the Navel, both Bodies felt the Pain; if
above, that Body only felt that was hurt. These two would sometimes differ in
Opinions, and Quarrel; the one dying before the other, the Surviving pined away
by degrees. It lived 28 Years, could speak diverse Languages, and was by the
King's Command taught Music. Sandys on Ovid. Metam. l. 9. p. 173.

2. Anno 1538, there was one born that grew up to the Stature of a Man, he was
double as to the Head and Shoulders, in such a manner, as that one Face stood
opposite to the other; both were of a Likeness, and resembled each other in the
Beard and Eyes; both had the same Appetite, and both hungered alike; the Voice
of both was almost the same, and both loved the same Wife. Sch. Obs. Med. l. 1.
obs. 1. p. 7.

3. Bartholinus tells of a Genean, which he saw then 28 Years of Age, who had a
little Brother growing out at his Breast, who was in that Posture born with
him, the Bone (as he thought) called Xyphoides, in both of them grew together;
his lest Foot alone hung downwards; he had two Arms, only three Fingers upon
each Hand: Some appearance there was of the Secret Parts; he moved his Hands,
Ears, and Lips, and had a little beating in the Breast. This little Brother
voided no Excrements but by the Mouth, Nose, and Ears, and is nourished by that
which the greater takes: He has distinct Animal and Vital Parts from the
greater; since he sleeps, sweats, and moves when the other wakes, rests, and
sweats not. Both received their Names at the Font, the greater that of Lazarus,
the lesser Johannes Baptista. The Natural Bowels, as to Liver, Spleen, etc. are
the same in both; Johannes has his Eyes for the most part shut; his Breath
small, so that holding a Feather at his Mouth, it scarce moves; but holding the
Hand there, we find a small and warm Breath; his Mouth is usually open, and
always wet with Spittle; his Head is bigger than that of Lazarus, but deformed;
his Hair hanging down while his Face is in an upward Posture. Lazarus is of a
just Stature, a decent Body, courteous Deportment, and gallantly Attired; he
covers the Body of his Brother with his Cloak: Nor could you think a Monster
lay within at your first Discourse with him. Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist.
66. p. 103.

4. Lemnius tells of a Monster that a certain Woman was delivered of, which at
the appearing of the Day, filled all the Chamber with roaring and crying,
running all about to find some Hole to creep into; but the Women at length
stifled and smothered it with Pillows. Lem. de Not. Mir. l. 1. c. 8. p. 38.

5. A Noble Polonian tells Bartholin, That he had seen two little Fishes
without Scales which were brought forth by a Woman, and as soon as they came
out of her Womb, did swim in the Water as other Fish. Bar. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1.
Hist. 10. p. 20.

6. There lived a Woman at Elsingorn, who prepared all Things for Childbirth;
her time of Travail being come, she was delivered of a Creature very like unto
a Dormouse, of the greater size, which (to the amazement of the Women present)
with marvelous Celerity sought out, and found a Hole in the Chamber, into which
it crept, and was never more seen. Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 10. p. 19.

7. Anno 1639, Norway afforded an unheard of Example of a Woman, who having
often before been delivered of Humane Births; and again big, after strong
Labor, was delivered of two Eggs; one of them was broken, the other was sent
to Dr. Olaus Wormius, in whose Study it is reserved to be seen of as many as
please. This Relation is attested by many Religious Persons whose Names follow;
Ericus Westergard, Rotalph Rakestat, and Thor. Venes, Coadjutors of the Pastor
in the Parish of Niaess. That Anno 1639, upon the 20th Day of May (by Command
of the Lord President in Remerigi, the Lord Paulus Tranius Pastor in Niaess,)
we went to receive an Account of the monstrous Birth in Sundby, brought forth
by an honest Woman, Anna the Daughter of Amandus, the Wife of Gandbrandus
Erlandsonius, who had already been the Mother of Eleven, Children, the last of
which she was delivered of upon March 4. 1638. This Anna, in the Year 1639,
upon the 7th of April, began to grow ill, and being in great Pains in her
Belly, her Neighbors were called; the same Day at Evening, in the presence of
her Neighbors, she brought forth an Egg, in all respects like that of an Hen,
which being broken by the Women then present, Anna Grim, Elen Rudstad, Gyro
Rudstad, and Catharina Sundby, they found that in the Yolk and White it
answered directly to a common Egg. Upon the 18th Day of April, about Noon, in
the Presence of the same Persons, she was delivered of another Egg, which in
Figure differed nothing from the former. This was the Confession, as well of
the Mother, as of them that were present, we do Artest by our Seals in the
Presence of the Lord President, in the Parish of Niaess, the Day and Year
abovesaid. Bar. Hist. Anat. c. 1. n. 4. p. 10.

8. Anne Tromperin was delivered of a Boy and two Serpents upon St. John's Day,
Anno 1576. She said, That in a very hot Day she had drunk of a Spring, where
she suspected that she had drank of the Sperm of Serpents: The Child was so
lean, as that he was scarce any thing but Bones. The Serpents were each of them
an Ell in length, and thick as the Arm of an Infant; both which, alive as they
were, were buried by the Midwife in the Churchyard. Sennert Pract. Med. l. 4.
par. 2. sect. 4. cap. 10. p. 327.

9. The Concubine of Pope Nicholas the Third was delivered of a Monster, which
resembled a Bear: Martin the Fourth, in the First Year of his Popedom,
entertained this Lady, and fearing lest she should bring forth other
Bear-Whelps, he caused all the Bears which were painted or carved in the Pope's
Palace, whilst the Family of Vrsini bore sway in Rome, to be blotted out and
removed. Camer. Hor. Subs. Cen.

10. At a Procession in Bois le Duc in Brabant, some of the Citizens were
disguised according to the Custom of the Place; (some in the Habit of Angels,
and others in the Shape of Devils as they are painted: One of these Devils ran
home to his House in that Attire, took his Wife, and threw her upon a Bed,
saying, He would get a young Devil upon her. He was not much deceived, for his
Wife bore a Child in that Shape, which, at his coming into the World, began to
run and skip up and down all over the Chamber. Ibid.

11. Anno 1678, upon the 17th Day of January, at Eight of the Clock after Noon,
there was (at the Town of Quiro) an honest Matron, who was then delivered of a
Child, which had upon its Head five Horns opposite each to the other, and like
unto those of a Ram; also from the upper part of his Forehead there hung
backward a very long piece of Flesh that covered most part of his Back, in Form
like a Woman's Head-Tire; about his Neck there was a double Row of Flesh like
the Collar of an Horse; at the end of his Fingers were Claws, like to those
Tallons in Birds of Prey; his Knees were in the hinder part of his Leg; his
Right Leg and Foot were of a shining red Color; the rest of his Body all
swarthy. He is said to come into the World with a great Cry, which so frighted
the Midwife and the Women present, that they ran immediately out of the House.
Paraeus de Mons. l. 24.

12. Lithgow tells of a Monster, that below the Middle Part there was but one
Body, and above the Middle there were two living Souls, the one separated from
the other with several Members, their Heads both of one bigness, the belly of
the one joined with the Posterior Part of the other, and their Faces looked
both one way, as if the one had carried the other on his Back. Their Eyes were
exceeding big, and their Hands greater than an Infant of three times their Age.
The Excrements of both issued forth at one place; and their Thighs and Legs
were of a great Growth, not agreeable to their Age, which was but 36 Days.
Their Feet like the Foot of a Camel, round and cloven in the midst. They eat
insatiably, and continually mourned; when one slept, the other waked. Lithg.
par. 2. p. 52.

13. A Woman at Prague having felt a Commotion in her Bowels, while the Inwards
of a Calf were taking out, brought forth a Boy, whose Liver, Intestines,
Stomach, and Spleen, with the greatest part of the Mesentery, hung out beyond
the Navel. Fabrit. Obs. Chir. Cen. 3. Obs. 55. p. 239.

14. At Cracovia was born a Child, terrible to behold, with flaming and shining
Eyes; the Mouth and Nostrils were like to those of an Ox; it had long Horns,
and a Back hairy like a Dog's It had the Faces of Apes in the Breast where the
Teats should stand; it had Cats Eyes under the Navel, fastened to the
Hypogastrium, and they looked hideously. It had the Heads of Dogs upon both
Elbows, and at the Whire-Bones of each Knee, looking forwards. It was
Splay-footed and Splay-handed; the Feet like Swans Feet, and a Tail turned
upwards, that crook'd up backwards about half an Ell long. It lived four Hours
from its Birth; and near its Death, it spoke thus, Watch, for the Lord your God
comes. This was Anno 1543. Lycosten. de Prod, p. 582.

15. Anno 1573, at St. Lawrence in the West Indies, was a Child born, that had
two Horns on the Head like those of Kids, long Hair on the Body, a Fleshy
Girdle about his Middle double, from whence hung a piece of Flesh like a Purse,
and a Bell of Flesh in his Left Hand; white Boots of Flesh on its Legs, doubled
down. In brief, the whole Shape was horrid and diabolical, and conceived to
proceed from some Fright taken from the Antic Dance^ of the Indians, among
whom the Devil sometimes appears. Dr. More's Immortality of the Soul, l. 3. c.
7. p. 173.

16. At Boston in New England, Anno 1637, Mrs. Dyer was delivered of a Monster
which had no Head, the Face on the Breast, the Ears like Apes Ears growing on
the Shoulders, the Eyes and Mouth stood far out, the Nose hooking upward, the
Breast and Back full of Prickles, the Navel and Belly where the Hips should
have been; in stead of Toes, it had on each Foot three Claws; upon the Back it
had two great Holes like Mouths; above the Eyes it had four Horns, and was of
the Female Sex. The Father and Mother of it were great Familists. Clark's Mir.
c. 63. p. 249.

CHAP. VIII. Persons of a wonderful Strength.
STrength of Body is such an Endowment, that we ought not indeed to be proud
of, ^ if it were owing to our own Wit and Care for the procuring of it; but we
ought certainly to admire the Wisdom of God, and his Goodness to us, in making
such a slender Structure of Dust molded into Flesh and Blood, and Bones, and
tied together with small Ligaments, able to do such great matters and excellent
Feats.

1. Julius Valens, a Centurion of the Guard of Soldiers, about the body of
Augustus Caesar, was wont to bear up a Wagon laden with Hogs-heads, or a Butt
of Wine, until it was discharged thereof, and the Wine drawn out of it; he
would take up a Mule upon his back, and carry it away; also he used to stay a
Chariot against all the force of the Horses striving or straining to the
contrary; and other wonderful Mysteries, which are to be seen Engraven upon his
Tombstone, says Pliny. lib. 7. cap. 20. p. 166.

2. Fusius Salvius, having an Hundred Pounds weight at his Feet, as many in his
Hands, and twice as much on his Shoulders, went with all this up a pair of
Stairs, or Ladder. ibid. p. 166.

3. My self have seen, says Pliny, one athanatus do wonderful strange matters,
in the open view and face of the World, he would walk upon the Stage, with a
Cuirace of Lead, weighing Five hundred Pounds, and booted besides, with a pair
of Greaves upon his Legs, of the same weight.

4. Milo the great Wrestler of Crotona, was of that strength, that he-carried a
whole Ox, the length of a Furlong; when he stood firm on his Feet, no Man could
thrust him off from his standing; or if he grasped a Pomegranate in his Hand,
no Man was able to stretch a Finger of his, and force it out at length. Pliny.
ibid. p. 166.

5. Venetianello was of that strength and firmness, that he broke the thick
Shank-bones of Oxen upon his Knee, three Pins of Iron as thick as a Man's
Finger, wraping them about with a Napkin, he would twist and writh, as if they
were softened by Fire: A Beam of 20 Foot long, and a Foot thick, laid upon his
Shoulders, sometimes set on end there, he would carry without use of his Hands,
and shift from one Shoulder to another; my Son was an Eye witness. Wier^de
praestig. daem. lib. 1. c. 18. p. 57.

6. There lived in Messina, in Thuring, Nicholas Klumber, Provost of the great
Church, who was so strong, as without Cable or Pulley, or any other help, he
fetched up out of a Cellar a Pipe of Wine, carried it out of Doors, and laid it
upon a Cart. Hakewell, Ap. l. 3. c. 5. s. 4. p. 214.

7. Mayolus, an Italian Bishop, speaks of a Man, who in the Presence of the
Marquess of Pescara, handed a Pillar of Marble three Foot long, and one foot in
Diameter, the which, he cast high in the Air, then received it again in his
Arms, then lasht it up again, sometimes after on Fashion, sometimes after
another, as easily as if he had been playing with a Ball, or such like thing.
Hakewell, ibid.

8. The same Author speaks of one at Mantua, called Rodomas, so strong, that he
brake a Cable as big as a Man's Arm. Mounted upon a Horse, and leading another
by the Bridle, he would run a full Career, and stop in the midst of his Course,
or when it liked him. ibid.

9. He says, that Frogsard reports of Ornando Burg, a Spaniard, who was
Companion to the Earl of Foix; who lift up an Ass laden with Wood, upon his
Shoulder, and carried him into a Room, Ascended by 24 Steps, and cast both the
Ass and Wood into the Fire together. ibid.

10. George of Fransberg, Baron of Mindleheim, was able with the middle Finger
of his Right Hand, to remove a very strong Man out of his place, sat he never
so sure; he stopped a Horse suddenly, that ran in a full Career, by only
touching the Bridle; and with his Shoulder, would he easily shove a Canon,
whither he Listed. His Joints seemed to be made of Horn, and he wrested twisted
Ropes and Horse-shoes in sunder, by his bare Hands. Camer. Cent. c. 82. p. 380.

11. Cardan writes, that himself saw one dancing with two in his Arms, two upon
his Shoulders, and one hanging about his Neck. Fullers Worth. p. 215.

12. Mr. Carew of Cornwall, assures us, that one John Bray, his Tenant, carried
upon his back at one time, a good space, six Bushels of Wheaten Meal, reckoning
fifteen Gallons to the Bushel, and the Miller, a Lubber of 24 years of Age.
Upon the whole -- he adds, that John Roman, of the same Shire, a short
Clownish Grub, would bear the whole Carcass of an Ox. Fullers Worth. p. 205
Cornwall.

13. Scanderbeg, is said to have slain 2 or 3000 Men with his own Hand, never
giving but one blow, cleaving asunder whom he met with, or cutting them in two
by the Waste, cleaving Steel Helmets, etc. Jovius, etc.

CHAP. IX. Wonderful Eaters.
THE faculty of Eating or taking in much Food, and turning it to Chyle and
Nutriment, so as quite to alter the whole Mass, and Assimulate part of it to
the body, by such little curious Veins and Vessels and Humors as are within
us, and this by several distinct Offices and Operations, is very strange and
astonishing, and enough to make us look up with Praise and Wonder at him that
made us.

1. There was a Woman, Athenaeus speaks of, who eat 12 pound of Flesh, about 12
pounds of Bread, and drank above a Gallon of Wine at a Meal. Maximinus the
Emperor, would drink often in one day 9 Gallons of Wine, and eat 40 pound of
Flesh.

2. One Phagon in Vopiscus, devoured in one day, a whloe Bore, a Hundred
Loaves, a Wether, and a young Hog; and drank more then 9 Gallons of Wine.
Capitolin writes that Claudius Albinus the Emperor, devoured 500 dried Figs,
and 100 Peaches, and 10 Melons, and 20 pound of Grapes, and 100 Gnatsappers,
and 400 Oysters for a Breakfast. Johnston. p. 311.

3. Vguccio Fagiol, an old Man, told Scaliger, that when he was young, he eat 4
fat Capons, and so many Patridges, and the roasted hinder part of a Kid, and a
breast of Veal stuffed, besides salt Fish at one Supper. Caesar Maximilian, tells
of one that eat a raw Calf and a Sheep at one Meal. Suidrigellus Duke of
Lithuania, sat 6 hours at Supper, and fed on 130 Dishes. Sylv. l. 2. Com. in
Panormit. ibid.

4. Gemma Frisius, tells of a Woman that could not live one moment without
eating; he gives for Cause the greatness and peculiar Temperament of her Liver;
for her Fat being increased unmeasurably, and her heat choked, her belly was
opened, and about 20 pounds of Fat were taken out; her Liver was found to be
sound, swelling with blood and spirits, but extreme red, and huge great, ibid.

5. King Hardiknute, his Tables were spread every day four times, and furnished
with all kinds of curious Dishes, as delighting in nothing else but
gormandizing and swilling; but in a solemn Banquet, Reveling and Carousing, he
suddenly fell down without Speech or Breath. Bakers Chron. p. 25.

6. Schenckius, tells of a Man of 50 years of Age, who, from his Youth, with a
strange kind of greediness, was wont to eat all sorts of Food, and as speedily
to eject them; but his strong Appetite lasted not above 20 days, and for so
many days after, he had a loathing of all things; and for the rest of the year,
eat sparingly. p. 304.

7. Nicholas Wood, of Harrison, in the County of Kent, Yeoman; did with ease
eat a whole Sheep of 16 s. Price, and that raw, at one meal; another time, he
eat 30 dozen of Pigeons. At Sir William Sidleys, he eat as much as would have
sufficed 30 Men; at the Lord Wottons in Kent, he eat at one meal, Fourscore and
four Rabbets, which number would have sufficed 168 Men, allowing to each, half
a Rabbet; he suddenly devoured 18 yards of black-pudding; and when at once he
had 60. pound weight of Cherries, he said they were but wash-meat; he made an
end of a whole Hog at once, and after it for Fruit, swallowed three Pecks of
Damsons. After he had broken his Fast, having, as he said, eaten one Pottle of
Milk, one Pottle of Pottage, with Bread, Butter, and Cheese; he eat in my
presence, says Tailor, 6 penny wheaten Loaves, 3 six penny Veal Pies, one
Pound of sweet Butter, one good Dish of Thornback, and a shiver off a Peck
Household Loaf of an Inch thick, and all this in the space of an Hour, the House
yielding no more, he departed unsatisfied. One John Dale was too hard for him,
he laid a Wager, he would fill Woods belly with wholesome Victuals, for two
Shillings; another Wagered, that when he had eaten Dales two shillings, he
should forthwith eat up a good Sir-loin of Beef: Dale bought six Pots of mighty
Ale, and twelve new penny white Loaves, which he sop'd in the Ale; the powerful
Fume whereof, Conquered this Conqueror, and laid him in a Sleep, to the
preservation of the Roast-beef; and un-expected winning of the Wager. He spent
all his Estate to provide for his Belly, and though a Landed Man, and true
Labourer, died Poor about 1630. Wanleys Wonders, Book 4. p. 390.

8. Not long ago, there was here in England, a private Soldier, very famous for
digesting of Stones, and a very inquisitive Man assures me, that he knew him
familiarly, and had the curiosity to keep in his Company for 24 hours together,
to watch him, and not only observed that he eat nothing but Stones in that
time: but also, that his grosser excrement consisted chiefly of a Sandy
substance, as if the devoured Stones had been in his body dissolved and
crumbled into Sand. Mr. Boyles Exp. philo. par 2. Essay 3. p. 86.

9. Dr. Bulwer says, he saw the Man, and that he was an Italian, Francis
Battalia by name, at that time, about 30 years of Age; and that he was born
with two stones in one hand and one in the other; which the Child took for his
first Nourishment, upon the Physicians Advice; and afterward nothing else, but
3 or 4 pebbles in a spoon, once in 24 hours, and a draught of Beer after them;
and in the interim, now and then a pipe of Tobacco, for he had been a Soldier
in Ireland, and particularly at the Siege of Limerick; and upon his return to
London, was confined for some time upon suspicion of imposture, and falseness
of pretense. Bulwer's Anthropometamorphosis p. 307. He eat about half a peck of
Stones daily.

CHAP. X. Persons of Wonderful Shapes, Figures, Members, Entrails, etc.
IF we consider our Bodies according to their ordinary Form and Temper, we must
acknowledge (with the Psalmist), that they are curiously wrought in the Womb,
and Fearfully and Wonderfully made; but the commonness of our Natural
Composition, loses much its Remarkableness and Wonder, upon that very score,
because it is common; and therefore the God of Nature does sometimes remove his
Footsteps, and vary his Methods, and go out of his ordinary way, as if on
purpose to awaken Men into a more attentive and thinking Posture; that they may
be astonished into a serious Meditation of his Wisdom and Power and Goodness;
who is able, when he pleases, to shuffle his Counsels at this rate, and do,
even what he pleases, in the Structure of his Creatures.

I. The BRAIN, HEAD and SCVLL.
1. Nicolaus Ricardius, an Italian, had an Head unreasonably big, his Scull so
hard, that he would often break Nuts, or Peach-stones, with one blow of it.
Jan. Nicii Pinacoth. 1. p. 43. 2. Some time after the Battle of Plataea, when
the Bones were freed of the Flesh, the Plataeans found a Scull without any
Suture. Herod. l. 9. p. 544. 3. Bartholinus speaks of another. whose Scull was
so firm, it was able to endure Coach-wheels to pass over it. Hist. Anat. Cen.
5. Hist. 44. 4. Albertus Marquis of Brandenburg, and Cardinal Ximenes had no
Sutures. Korman. de Mir. Mort. l. 4. c. 78. p. 32. 5. The Head of a Giant
amongst the rarities of Pope Paul the Fourth, had the lower Jaw conjoined to
the Head, so fast, that it could never move. Columb. Anar. l. 15. p. 484. 6.
Zacutus, tells of a Man with a straight Horn in his Forehead, a span broad at
the Root. Prax. Adm. Hildauus of one, with a Horn like that of a Ram. Prax.
Adm. l. 3. Obs. 93. 7. Pfeil the Physician, found in a Patients Brain, a Stone
as big as a Mulbetry, the eating of which Fruit, brought his Disease. Melch.
Adm. in Vit. Germ. Medic. p. 41.
II. The HAIR.
1. Cardan speaks of one, that when he Combed his Head, sparks of Fire flew out
of his Hair; Scaliger tells of a Lady, whose Hair did the same thing. St.
Augustine speaks of some that would move all the Hair of their Heads forwards
and backwards, without moving of their Heads. Schot, Phis. curios. l. 3. c. 34.
p. 573. This is common.

2. Tamberlane wore his Hair long and Curled, contrary to the Tartars, who
shave their Hair, they believing, that in those long Hairs, there was some
fatal Destiny known. Among the Indians, the King causes the Hair of the
greatest Malefactors to be cut; the Persian and Canarian Women, cut their Hair
at the Funeral of their Friends. The People of Brasil, when they are Angry, let
their Hair grow long, and when they mourn, they Cut it. The Maxies wear their
Hair long, on the right side of the Head, and save the left side. The
Sasquesahanoughs, a Giant-like People of Virginia, wear the Hair on the one
side long, on the other short and close, with a Ridge over their Crowns like a
Cock's-comb. Man Transformed. p. 54.

III. The BEARD.
1. Thirty Miles from Madrid, the King of Spains Court, was a Woman aged 60
years, she had a Beard from her youth, which she suffered to grow, so that in
her Age it reached to the Pit of her Stomach. Zacut. Lusitan. l. 3. Obs 92. p.
394. Francis Alvares, a Father of the Jesuits; Procurator of China, upon his
return to Rome, had a Beard that reached down to his Feet, he used to have it
girt about with a Girdle. Bartho. Hist Anat. Cent. 1 Hist. 43. p. 61.

2. I my self saw a Dutch Woman of about 40 years Old at Oxford, with a great
Beard: She was carried about to be seen.

IV. The TEETH.
1. In the Reign of Christian the Fourth, King of Denmark, was brought to
Copenhagen a Greenlander, that had but one continued Tooth, which reached from
the one end of the Jaw to the other. Barth. Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 35. p.
48.

2. Lewis the XIII. King of France, had a double row of Teeth in one of his
Jaws; (and Lewis the XIV. was born with Teeth in his Mouth). Barth. ibid.

3. A Nobleman being above 90 years of Age, cast his Teeth and had a New Set in
the place of those that were fallen out. Korm. de mir. viv. p. 92. This is
pretty common.

V. The TONGVE, VOICE and SPEECH.
1. Maximilian, Son of the Emperor Ferdinand III. was Mute and Dumb till the
9th year of his Age; but afterward he spoke very Eloquently. Schenck. Obs.
Med. l. 1 Obs. 4. p. 180.

2. John the Dumb, being taken by the Turks, they cut off the rolling part of
his Tongue, and by that means deprived him of his Speech, and so he continued
three years; when being frighted with Lightning, which so affected his fearful
mind, that it freed his Tongue, that he recovered his Speech. Nich. Tulp. Obs.
Med. l. 1. c. 4. p. 77.

VI. The EYE.
1. Caesar Borgia, his Eyes were so Fiery and Sparkling; that his very Friends
were not able to look upon them; though when sporting among Ladies, he could
convert his cruel looks into Lenity. Jov. Elog. l. 4. p. 4. p. 201. Luther had
so vivacious an Eye, that Men could not look directly on him; and one being
sent to Pistol him, was so amazed and affrighted with the vigor of his Eyes
that he fled from him. Zuing. Theat. Vol. 2. l. 2. p. 295.

2. The Brasilians have, some of them, but one Eye. Petr. Appian. Descript.
Ind. Occid.

3. About blesgithea, near the Caspian Sea, there is an one Eyed Nation.
Solinus, etc.

VII. The NOSE.
The Tartarian Women cut and pare their Noses between their Eyes, that they may
seem more feat and saddle-Nosed, leaving themselves no Noses at all in that
place, anointing the place with a black Ointment, which makes them look most
ugly, the Queen her self is so. Purchase. Pilq. 3. l. 1. Cyrus had an Aquiline
or Hawks-Nose, and the Persians suffer none to Reign over them, but Princes
with such Imperial Noses; and they use Art to the young Princes to shape them
so. Mercur. l. de Decor. The Ancient Romans loved a prominent Nose, thence
called a Roman Nose, and the Austrian Nose bears sway now in Germany. ibid.

VIII. The EARS.
Some Indians, are said to have Ears hanging to the Ground. Strabo calls them,
(...), because they use their Ears for a Couch to sleep on. Strab. Geogr. l.
15. Solinus speaks of such a Nation likewise, called fanasii. So does Pliny,
Munster, Cosmogr. l. 5. c. 126. Isidore, Petrus Simon, Ant. Daca. Maximel.
Transylvanus, Purchase, etc. Bulver's Anthropometamorph. p. 142.

IX. The LIPS.
The Indians have, many of them holes in their Lips, beset with Precious
Stones; some wear Crystal, others Iron Rings there, hoops of Brass, Turquoises,
Emeralds, small Bones, ibid. p. 180 The Negroes have generally great Lips by
Nature.

X. The FACE.
1. The Caraqui in Pervacus, want an Occiput and Sinciput, with a most broad
Face; for as soon as the Children are born, they shut in their Heads behind,
and before in boards, on purpose to dilate the Face, and make it plain; this is
reported by diverse Authors, as Pet. Martyr. Decad. 8. Korn. de mirac. vivorum,
etc.

2. They have flat Faces in Java Major, says Scaliger, and Linschot. l. 1. c.
10. in Zanfera and Norimbega, says Leo, Hist, de Afric. etc. In the Island
D^dya, says Sir John Mande^ile, Fulwer's Anthrop. p. 240.

3. In some Countries, as Cumana, they have long and thin Cheeks; in China
square, as also in the Province of Old-Port; in Peugniu, some have Faces like
Dogs. ibid.

XI. The SHOVLDERS.
1. Plato was broad Shouldered, and Cresollius says in imitation of him, the
Italians bombasted their Doublets, that they might appear so; as the Women in
Ovid's time did, adhibere analectides, use Bolsters or Pillows for that
purpose. But Purchase says, the Wywapanami in the West Indies, had Shoulders
higher then their Heads, and Bulwer says, in all the parts of Tartaria, the
Men are naturly broad Shouldered. ibid. p. 280.

2. Franciscus Fernandus in his Manuscript reports, of certain Nations in
India, that are all bunch-back'd. ibid. p. 283.

XII. The HANDS.
I pass by all the Histories of Monstrosities in Nature, as of infants born
with four, three, or one Hand, etc. In Tartary. some are born with one Leg and
Foot; some have been born without any Hands. My fast cited Author speaks of a
Young Man in his time, born near Abington, named John Simon, born without Arms,
Hands, Thighs or Knees, with only one continued bone from his Hip unto his
Foot. ibid. p. 302. and we have seen, says Alex. Benedictus, a Woman born
without Arms, that could Spin and Sow with her Feet, ibid.

XIII. ENTRAILS, HEART, and GVTS, etc.
The Pancrea^ has a Passage spread sometimes in a strait, sometime in a
crooked Line; the Liver is sometime swelled, and causes shortness of breath;
sometime it is undivided and entire, with a little lob of softer Flesh, covered
with a thin membrane; it is bigger then ordinary, in bodies of a cold
Complexion, great Eaters, and fearful Persons, and some Consumptive Persons;
sometime it is consumed, or very small, and yet at the same time a great Spleen;
sometimes Worms are found in the Membranes of the Liver. The Spleen is for the
most part only one, sometimes two, sometimes three, sometimes none at all, as
Bartholinus, Schenckius, and Laurentius tells us; sometimes instead of Lungs,
there has been found only a bladder. The Kidneys have been found to rest upon
the backbone of the Loins. Pliny, and valerius Maximus tell of Aristomenes,
who had a Heart rough with Hair; Caelius, Rhodiginus, Benevenius, Zacutus,
Lusitanus and Murelus affirm, that they saw such hairy Hearts, in certain
famous Thieves; Aemilius, Parisanus, Veslingius, etc. have observed three
Ventricles in the Hearts of some; sometimes Fat, and sometimes Particles of
Flesh have been found in the Heart; Salvius has observed Worms, and so has
Horstius at Confl^cntia; May, a Twibladed Snake, at London; and Severinus, the
like at Naples; Hollerius, Stones; Gemma, and Riolanus, Bones, etc. Riolanus,
tells of a Child, well shaped and as long as a Man's Finger, voided by the
Mouth, and conceived in the Stomach, of a young Woman, an abominable Tailors
Wife. Sometimes the Testicles are Treble, sometimes the Pains double; etc.

CHAP. XI. Of Pigmies.
PIgmies are a kind of Dwarfs, but by Report of Authors, there is a whole
Nation, and Race of them; and why Mankind may not be shriveled through the
Propriety of the Climate, into a Degenerous and Small Dwarfish Stature, as well
as Horses, Kine, Trees, etc. It will not be very casie to assign a Reason.

That there is such a Nation as Pigmies, Authors, ancient and modern affirm, as
Philostratus, out of Apollonius, Homer, Aristotle; Sir John Mandevile in his
Travels, cap. 64. Jovius in Muscovita legatione; Olaus de Gent. Septent. lib.
2. The Portugals have discovered many Dwarfs in Tartary. Neiremb, in Hist. Not.
Odoricus de rebus Indicis, says, he found among the Indians Pigmies of three
Palms high. Delrio says, that Anno 1600, in Peruvio, there was found a
Province of Dwarfs. Gemma Frisiu^, writes of a Boat of Pigmies that were seen,
being driven by a Tempest, to the Kingdom of Norway. Photius out of Cresias
says, there are Negroes in the midst of India, whom he calls Pigmies, who are
at the most but two Cubits high, and most of them, but one Cubit long; few
exceeding the Altitude of one Cubit and an half; of which the King of that
Country entertaineth 3000 for his Guard. They are very Just, and use the same
Laws, as the Indians do. They Hunt Hares and Foxes, not with Dogs; but with
Crows, Kites, Rooks and Eagles. Jonston. p. 226.

CHAP. XII. Of Dwarfs, etc.
ALL Extremes are Wonderful, but those of Littleness or Defect, do oftentimes
dispose to Contempt and Ridicule; as if Nature had bestowed her Operations and
Favors; in too sparing and niggardly, a manner; yet even in this case, the
want of Stature is often supplied with a Compensation, by inward Endowments;
which are quickened and made more intense, by a kind of Antiperistasis, like
the Sunbeams, contracted in a Burning-glass, or (which comes nearer to
purpose), like the Animal Faculties in a little Ant or Be, or Wasp, or Spider.

1. Julia the Neice of Augustus, had a Dwarf called Canopas, he was not above
two Foot and an Hands breadth in height; and she had a freed Maid of the same
height. Plin. l. 7. cap. 16. p. 165.

2. Marcus Varro, reports, that Marius Maximus, and Marcus Tullius, were both
but two Cubits high, and yet were both Gentlemen and Knights of Rome; and Pliny
testifies, that he saw their Bodies embalmed. Pliny. l. 7. p. 165.

3. In the time of Theodosius, there was seen in Egypt, a Pigmey, so small of
body, that he resembled a Partridge, yet did he exercise all the Functions of a
Man, and could Sing Tuneably; he lived to the Age of 25. Niceph. Hist.
Ecclesiast. lib. 12. cap. 37. p. 379.

4. John de Estrix of Mechlen, was brought to the Duke of Parma in Flanders,
Anno 1592. he was Aged 35, he had a long Beard, and was no more then 3 Foot
high; he could not go up Stairs, much less, could he get up a Form, but was
always lift up by a Servant; he was skilled in three Tongues, Ingenious,
Industrious, and played well at Tables. Plater. Obs. l. 3. p. 581.

5. There was a Dwarf at the Court of Wirtemberg, at the Nuptials of the Duke
of Bavaria; the little Gentleman armed Cap-a-pee, girt with a short Sword, and
with the like Spear in his Hand, was put into a Pie, that he might not be seen,
and the Pie set upon the Table; at last raised the Lid, and breaking loose
thence, he stepped out, drew his Sword, and after the manner of a Fencer,
Traversed his Ground upon the Table, to the equal Wonder and Laughter of them
that were present. ibid.

6. Anno 1610. John Ducker, an Englishman, who was about 45 years of Age, had
a long Beard, and was only two Foot and a half high, he was of straight and
thick Limbs, and well proportioned. ibid. 582.

7. Augustus exhibited in his Plays, one Lucius, a young Man, he was not full
two Foot high; he weighed but 17 Pounds, yet had he a great and strong Voice
Sucton, p. 81. in Augusto.

8. In the time of Jamblicus, lived Alipius of Alexandria, a most excellent
Logician, and a famous Philosopher, but of so small and little a body, that he
little exceeded the Stature of those Pigmeys, who are said to be but a Cubit
high; such as beheld him, thought he was scarce any thing but Spirit and Soul,
so little grew that part of him that was syable to Corruption, that it seemed
to be consumed into a kind of Divine Nature. Zuing. Vol. 2. p. 278.

9. Caracus was a Man of exceeding small Stature, yet was he the Wisest
Counselor, that was about Saladine, that great Conqueror of the East. ibid.

10. Anno 1306. Vladislaus Cubitalis, that Pigmey King of Poland, Reigned and
Fought more Battles, and obtained more glorious Victories therein, then any of
his long-shank'd Predecessors. Virtue refuses no Stature, but commonly vast
Bodies, and extraordinary Statures, have sottish, dull, and leaden Spirits.
Burtons Melan. p. 2. sect. 3. p. 290.

11. Cardan says, that he saw a Man in Italy, not above a Cubit high, carried
about in a Parrots Cage. And a Gentleman of good. Reputation, told Mr. Sandys,
that he saw a Man at Siena, not exceeding the same Stature; he was a
Frenchman, of the Country of Limosins, with a formal Beard, who was also
shown in a Cage for Money, at the end whereof, was a little hutch, into which
he retired; and when the Assembly was full, came forth and played on an
Instrument. Sand. in Ovid. Met. lib. 6. p. 114.

12. Philippa French, born at Milcomb in Oxfordshire, Aged 36 or 37 years, of
perfect Symmetry and Parts, wanted half an Inch of a yard in height, being then
married, etc. Dr. Plot, in his Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. p. 195. One of much the
same Stature is to be seen by all Travelers that pass that way, at the upper
end of Guilford, in Surrey.

13. There was one Hans, a Swiss, brought over into England, but a few years
since, Aged 38, but two Foot and 7 Inches high.

14. A little Woman was here at Chichester in Sussex, lately, whom I saw my
self, not above two Cubits in height; but her Legs were not very perfect.

CHAP. XIII. Persons of a Wonderful Stature, Giants.
WE are apt in the Ideas and Conceptions we frame to our selves, of Natural
Bodies, to set and prescribe certain bounds to them, beyond which, they may not
exceed; not considering, that there are many Reasons, for which Nature may
extend her Dimensions, and stretch her Lines in the Structure or Augmentation
of Bodies, beyond the Reach of our common Apprehensions; either in the first
Seeds of Generation, or the Food and Aliment they are Nourished with, or the
Climate and present Constitution of the Air, or some uncommon Distemperature,
or some particular Design of Providence.

1. To mention the Giant spoken of by Solinus, might seem incredible, of the
length of 33 Cubits; yet he says, that Lucius Flaccus, the Legate, and Metellus
himself, allured with the Novelty of the Report, went on purpose to the place,
to sake view of it, and there saw with their Eyes, that which upon hearsay,
they had refuted as a Fable. Solin. c. 5. p. 188.

2. Artachaees, of the Family of the Achaemenidaes, a Person in great favor
with Xerxes, was the Tallest Man of all the rest of the Persians; for he lacked
but the breadth of 4 Fingers, of full 5 Cubits, by the Royal Standard. Herodot.
l. 7. p. 4. 419.

3. The Talest Man that had been seen in Plinies time, was Gabara, who in the
Days of Claudius, was brought out of arabia; he was 9 Foot and 9 Inches. Plin.
l. 7. c. 16. p. 165.

4. Jovinianus the Emperor, was of a vast and huge Stature, so that of a long
time, there was no Royal Robe that was found to answer the height of his Body.
Zuing Theat. Volum. 2. l. 2. p. 276.

5. Maximinus the Emperor was 8 Foot and a half in height; he used the
Bracelet or armlet of his Wife for a Ring for his Thumb. Zuing. Vol. 2. l. 2.
p. 276.

6. There were in the time of Augustus Caesar two Persons called Iducio and
Secundilla, each of them was 10 Foot high and more; their Bodies were kept
within the Salustian Gardens. Plin. l. 7. c. 16. p. 165.

7. There was a young Man carried about Germany to be seen Anno 1613, he was
then 22 Years of Age, beardless as yet, that was 8 Foot high complete; his Foot
was one Foot and one Third long. Plat. Obs. l. 3. p. 582.

8. Anno 1572, Delricus saw a Giant, full 9 Foot high. Del. Disq. Magic.

9. Walter Parsons, born in Staffordshire, when Prentice to a Smith, a Hole was
made for him in the Ground to stand therein up to the Knees, to make him
adequate with his Fellow-Workmen; he was afterward Porter to King James. He
was proportionable in all Parts, and had Strength equal to his Height, Valor
to his Strength, Temper to his Valor. He would make nothing to take two of the
tallest Yeomen of the Guard (like the Gizard and Liver) under his Arms at once,
and order them as he pleased. Fuller's Worthies, p. 48. Staffordshire.

10. William Evans, born in Monmouthshire, two Yards and a half in height; he
was Porter to King Charles the First, exceeded Walter Parsons two Inches in
height. At an Antimask at Court he drew little Jeffery the Dwarf out of his
Pocket, first to the Wonder, then to the Laughter, of the Beholders. Ibid.
Wales, p. 54. Monm.

11. Magellan came to the Country of the Patagons, two of them he made his
Prisoners by Policy, who thereupon roared like Bulls: Their Feeding was
answerable to their vast Bulks; (they were of such a Stature, that the
Spaniards Heads reached but to their Wastes.) One of them did eat at a Meal a
whole Basket of Biskets, and drank a great Bowl of Water at each Draught.
Purch. Pilg. Vol. p. 35.

12. Thuanus tells of a Tartar slain by a Polander, Anno 1575, of a prodigious
Bulk; his Forehead was 24 Inches in breadth, and the rest of his Body of that
magnitude, that the Carcass, as it lay upon the Ground, would reach to the
Navel of any ordinary Person that stood by it. Thu. Hist. l. 61. Anno 1575.

13. Manley tells of one Mr. Thomas Brittle, a Cheshire Man, that he saw, Anno
1671, that was about 7 Foot high; his Father (he said) was a Man of moderate
Stature, his Mother was near 2 Yards high; and he himself has a Daughter, who
being 16 Years of Age, is arrived already to the height of 6 Foot complea^.
Manley, p. 36.

CHAP. XIV. Of such Persons as have changed their Sex.
I Confess, in my Opinion, this is one of the hardest Chapters I have
undertaken, not only in respect of my own Faith, but perhaps of my Reader's
too; however, I will not obtrude it morosely upon any one: But I am of Opinion,
it is the most likely to find Credit with Physicians and Anatomists, whose
Profession it is to pry more into the Secrets of Nature than other Persons, and
can solve such Phenomenon sometimes, as appear incredible to Persons of but
common Improvements.

1. Pliny, in his Natural History, l. 7. c. 4. p. 158. and Livy, Hist. l. 4.
and other ancient Authors, do tell us of Women amongst the Romans turned into
Men.

2. Fulgosus says, that when Ferdinand the First was King of Naples, Ludovicus
Guarna, a Citizen of Salerne, had five Daughters; of which, the two eldest were
called Francisca and Carola, both which, at 15 Years of Age, found such
alteration in themselves, that they changed their Feminine Habits and Names
also, the one being called Fanciscus, and the other Carolus. Full. l. 1. Ob. p.
187.

3. A Noble Portuguese, named Maria Pachecha, by a like Accident with the
former, proving to be a young Man, changed her Habit, and called her self
Manuel Pachecha, who after made a Voyage into the Indies, became a valiant
Soldier, attained to much Wealth and Honor, and returning, married a Lady of a
Noble Family, but never attained to have Issue. Amat. Lusit, Cons. Med. Cent.
2. Curat. 39.

4. In the City of Rhemes in France, Anno 1560, there was a Man, ever reputed a
Female to the 14th Year of her Age; at which time it fell out, that wantoning
in Bed with a Maid that lay with her, the Signs broke out of her; which when
her Parents were informed of, by the interposition of Ecclesiastical Authority,
her Name was changed from Joan to John, and from thenceforth she wore the Habit
of a Man. Paraeus, l. 4. c. 5. p. Sch. Obs. l. 4. p. 503.

5. At Vitriac in France was a Man called German Garnier, by some Gernd. Maria,
who was taken for a Virgin till the 15th Year of his Age, at which time running
after Hogs, (which had gotten into the Corn,) and leaping over a Ditch with
great Violence, it came to pass that the Membranes being broke, the hidden
Evidences of a Man suddenly descended, and discovered themselves, not without
Pain. returning to the Cottage, with Tears complained to her Mother, that her
Bowels fell out; at which Spectacle her Mother astonished, (consulting with
Surgeons,) was informed, that her Daughter was become a Man. The whole
Matter being represented to the Cardinal Bishop of Lenuncurium, he called an
Assembly, where he received the Name and Habit of a Man. Paraeus, ibid.
Schenck. ibid.

6. Donatus tells, that Anno 1574, in the City of Spoleto, a Girl of 18 Years
of Age was changed into a Man, as diverse of that Place can witness. De Hist.
Mir. l. 6. p. 298.

7. Cuelmanus tells of one at Corbeil in France, who for 14 Years had been
educated among the Maids, and habited as they; yet about that Age she had such
Testimonies about her, that pleaded she was no longer a Woman; that she
thereupon altered her Name and Apparel into those of a Man. Cuelmanus relates
this upon the Credit of a Physician in the Lecture of Anatomy, Cellarius and
Wolphius, eminent Physicians, being present. Sch. Obs. Med. l. 4. obs. 6. p.
503.

8. That is wonderful which is told by Pontanus, of a Woman, who, after she had
been delivered of a Son, became a Man, which yet he confirms by the Testimony
of Antonius Colotius the Vmbrian; and (says he) this fell out about Anno 1496.
Donat. Hist. Mirab. l. 6. c. 2. p. 297.

9. Antonius Diuna tells of a Nun of St. Dominick's Order, in the City of
Vbeda, her Name was Magdalena Magnoz: This Woman in the 7th Year after she had
taken upon her the Profession of a Nun, was from a Woman turned into a Man.
Being hereupon expelled the Nunnery, she put on Man's Clothes; a Beard grew
upon her Chin, and she was called Franciscus Magnoz. This very Francis (says
he) was my Client, and I pleaded for him in a Cause of Rape; for a certain
Woman accused him, that she was known by him by Violence, and got with Child.
John Choker. Fax. Hist. cent. 1. cap. 23.

10. Ausonius tells of a Boy at Beneventum, who suddenly became a Girl.

11. Bartholinus discourses more upon this Point, and shows the Possibility of
it in his Anatomy.

12. Dr. Burnet, in his Letters, relates a Story which he had from Cardinal
Howard at Rome, of two Nuns which were in a few Years converted into the
Masculine Gender; but having not the Book by me, I must leave it to my Reader's
further Inquiry for the Particulars.

CHAP. XV. Instances of Skill in Physiognomy.
WHen Socrates was told by a Physiognomist his natural Inclinations to Vice,
and some of the Company that were then present laughed at the Error; he very
ingenuously rebuked them, saying, That there was more Truth in it, than they
were sensible of; Nature disposing him strongly to those Immoralities, which he
had by Culture, and his own Improvements, conquered in great measure, and
corrected. There is certainly somewhat in the Faces and Gestures, and Aspects
of Persons, that may be an Index of the Mind; according to that Proverbial
Saying, Ex Oculo, Poculo, Loculo, cognosciter Homo; but especially, Oculus est
Animi fenestra.

1. Gregory Nazianzen, by observing Julian's Physiognomy when he was at Athens,
his running Head, wagging Shoulders, rolling Eyes, staring Countenance, sliding
and limping Pace, scornful Visage, immoderate Laughter, etc. declared, That he
saw not one good Sign in him, but cried out, Good God, what a Monster the
Empire of Rome does nourish! When I uttered these Words, says he, I desired of
God, that in this Matter I might be found a Liar. Clark's Mar, of Eccl. Hist.

2. Gaffarel tells us, if a Man endeavor to counterfeit any other Man's
Countenance, and that he fancy himself to have his Hair, Eyes, Nose, Mouth, and
all other Parts like him; he may by this means come to know, what his natural
Inclinations, and what his Thoughts are, by what he finds in himself during the
time of his making of Faces. This Opinion, says he, is grounded upon the
Experience of Campanella, who expresses himself in these Words: Cum quis
hominem videt, statim imaginari oportet, se nosum habere, ut alter hebet, and
pilum, and vnltum, and frontem, and locutionem: Et tunc qui affectus and
cogitationes in hac cogitatione illi obrepunt, judicat homini illi esse
proprios, quem ita imaginando contuetur; hoc non absque ratione and
experientia. Spiritus enim format corpus, and juxta affectus innatos ipsum
fingit, exprimitque. I always thought, (says Gaffarel) that the Opinion of
Campanella was, That a Man should only imagine himself to have the same
Countenance with the other; as his Words seem to mean: But when I was at Rome,
understanding that he was brought into the Inquisition, I did, out of Cariosity
to be satisfied in this Particular, take the Pains to visit him there. Being
therefore in Company of some Abbots we were brought to the Chamber where he
was; who as soon as he perceived us, came to us, and entreated us to have a
little Patience, till he had ended a little Note, which he was writing to
Cardinal Magaloti. When we were sat down, we observed him oftentimes to make
certain wry Faces; which we conceived to proceed either from Folly, or else
from some Pain, that the Violence of the Torments which he had endured, put him
to: The Calves of his Legs being all beaten black and blue, and his Buttocks
having hardly and Flesh on them; it having been torn from him by piecemeal, to
make him confess what he was accused of. One of our Company asked, If he felt
no Pain? He smiling, answered, No. And supposing, that we had been something
troubled at the wry Faces which he made, he told us. That, at our coming in, he
fancied himself to be Cardinal Magalotti, as he bad heard him described: And he
asked us withal, If he were not a hairy Man. So far my Author Gaffarel's
unheard of Curiosities, par. 2. chapter 6.

3. One Mrs. Powel, Wife to Mr. Powel of Forrest-Hill, near Oxford, (a Justice
of Peace at that time) told me about Five and twenty Years ago, when I preached
in the Parish, That a young lusty Fellow coming to her Door for an Alms; she
looking sharply upon him, told him, He was a guilty Person; upon which, the
Fellow run away from her to the Gate: But she calling upon him to stay, he
turned back again, and asked her, In the Name of Christ, who told you so? She
making Answer, Christ, whom you have Offended by your ill Actions; and
therefore turn back again, make an ingenuous Confession of thy Crime, and, upon
my Reputation, I Will make no Discovery of it to thy Hurt, etc. Upon which, he
returned in a very submissive manner, and acknowledged, That he was (as I
remember) a Devonshire-man, and coming one Night in Drink from a Fair, and
asking a Fellow, that he met, Which was the way to such a Place? he answering,
He should follow his Nose: Upon that they went to hard Words, and thence to
Blows, till at last he killed the Man; for which he was upon Suspicion
committed to Prison, but sufficient Evidence being wanting, he was discharged.
Whereupon she advised him to this purpose; Well! thou art uneasy under the
Remorse of a guilty Conscience at home, and therefore think to allay thy
Troubles abroad; Assure thy self, thou will be in danger of ill Company, and
fresh Temptations, and more guilty by Travel; and therefore do take my Advice,
return home, use thy Endeavor to get an honest Livelihood, and show thy self
as kind as possible to the surviving Relations of the murdered Person: And if
thou will promise so to do, I will give thee somewhat toward bearing thy
Charges, and accordingly she gave him a Crown. Another Story of the like Nature
she told me.

CHAP. XVI. Great Sleepers.
THE Essence of Sleep ( according to Dr. Willis) consists in this, That the
Corporeal Soul withdrawing it self a little, and contracting its Irradiation
into a narrower Sphere, leave^ the Cortex of the Brain for some time destitute,
and in the mean while the Nervous Liquor distilled from the Blood, rushes in
for new Supplies. In Natural Sleep, he says, these two Causes conspire
together by some mutual Compact of Nature, viz. at the same time the Spirits
recede, and the Nervous Humor enters. In Non-natural or Extraordinary Sleep,
sometimes this Cause, sometimes that, is first: But in Praeternatural or
Insatiable Sleep, there is a greater Energy of the same Causes, so that the
Brain is flooded with the Influx of Nervous, Serous, and other Vicious Humors.

1. Timon's Nurse, used Yearly, after the manner of some wild Beasts, to lie
hid for two Months together, without any other evidence of Life all that while,
save only that she breathed. Plut. Symp. l. 8. qu. 9. p. 780.

2. Epimenides of Creet, when he was a Boy, being wearied with Heat and Travel,
laid him down in a certain Cave, and there slept 57 Years; being awaked, he
returned home, wondering at the Changes he found in the World, and was at last
difficultly known by his younger Brother growing old. It is said, that he lived
in all 175 Years: And from him it was, that the Sleep of Epimenides became a
Proverb. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 52. p. 184. But this Story I offer rather
for the sake of its Antiquity, than Credibility.

3. Platerus tells of one that slept three Days and three Nights together, upon
foregoing weariness, without the occasion of precedent Drunkenness, or the
taking of any Soporiferous Medicine. Plat. Obs. l. 1. p. 6.

4. William Foxly, Potmaker for the Mint in the Tower of London, fell asleep on
Tuesday in Easter Week, and could not be waked with pinching or burning till
the First Day of the next Term, which was full 14 Days; and when he was then
awaked, he was found in all points as if he had slept but one Night. He lived
40 Years after. This Matter fell out in the 37th Year of King Henry the
Eighth's Reign. Baker's Chron.

5. Crantzius tells of a young Scholar of Lubeck, who (that he might sleep
without Disturbance) betook himself to a Chest: There passed 7 Years from the
time of his lying down there till that one determined to see what was in the
Chest, where he found this young Man asleep there, whom he shook with such
Violence, that he awaked him. His Face was without change, he was easily known
to his Acquaintance, who were amazed at what had passed; he supposing that he
had slept but one Night, and some part of a Day. Cran. V^ndal. l. 8. c. 39.
Donat. Hist. Mir. l. 4. c. 12. p. 214.

6. M. Damascen speaks of one that slept a whole Autumn and Winter under a Rick
of Hay, and then arose as a Man half dead and distracted, Zuing. Theat. Vol. 2.
l. 5. p. 415.

7. The Lucomorians, in the further part of Samaria, are reported to die, as it
were, in the manner of Swallows and Frogs, from the 27th of November, to the
24th of April following; and then again awake and arise. This was witnessed to
Henry the Third, when in Poland, by several Princes worthy of Credit; diverse
Nobles of France, many Physicians of the Court, particularly the famous
Pid^xius, being present, It Is related also by Alex. Guagninas of Verona,
Colonel of Foot in the Castle of Vitelaska, in the Frontiers of Muscovy, in his
Description of Muscovy. Mers. Qu. and Com. in Gen Qu. 30. p. 1222. Joh. Licat.
l. 1. c. 6. Hen. Kornman. de Mirac. Mort. par. 2. c. 41. Delr. Disq. Mag. etc.
Zacch. Qu. Mad. Leg. l. 4. tit. 1. qu 11. p. 241. Treas. l. 6. c. 10. p. 565.
Schot. Phys. Curios. l. 1. c. 36. p. 176.

8. The Story of the Seven Sleepers, who, to avoid Martyrdom, fled into a Cave,
and slept from the Reign of Decius, till the 30th Year of Theodosius the
Younger, i. e. 196 Years, will seem incredible; and yet it is mentioned by
Nicephorus, Eccl. Hist. l. 14. c. 45. By Lonicer. Theatr. p. 230. Schot. Phys.
Curros. l. 3. etc. As also by Mahomet, in his worshipful Alcoran, tho with some
Addition and Variation; for he says, they slept 300 Years.

CHAP. XVII. Instances of such as have used to walk and perform strange things,
in their Sleep.
'TWas the Opinion of some of the Ancient Philosophers, that our Natural Life
was but a Sleep, and all our Actions are performed in a Dream; and that we did
not awake, till Death came and plucked our Souls out of the Cradle, and sent us
rubbing up our Intellectuals, and shaking our Spirits into the other World. And
surely such instances as follow here, seem to make a fit Emblem for such an
Hypothesis, where Men Sleep by halves, and employ at the same time, some of the
Animal Spirits, as Cursitors of the Brain, to move and act, and discharge their
Functions, whilst ^hers of them sleep, and rest, and refresh themselves.

1. A young Man, arose from his sleep, took a Sword, opened the Doors, and
muttering to himself, went into the Street, where he quarreled alone, and
fancying that he was in Fight with his Enemy, he made diverse passes, till he
fell down, and through an unhappy slip of his Sword, gave himself such a Wound
on his Breast, that was like to be his Death. Hereupon being awaked and
affrighted, and dreading greater dangers, he sent for me to be his Physician,
and was cured, says, Zacutus Lusitan, in his Prax. admirand. l. 1. Obs. 43. p.
33, etc.

2. John Poultney, would in his sleep, usually rise out of his Bed, dress him,
open the Doors, walk about the Fields, and return to his Bed not awaked; he
would rise in his sleep, take a Staff, Fork, or other Weapon, and therewith lay
about him, now striking, now defending himself, as if charged with an Enemy, ot
knowing when awaked, what had passed. He was of Leicestershire. Fullers Work.
p. 133. Leicestershire.

3. Henricus ab Heeres says, he knew a young Student, who having certain
Verses to finish while awake, rising in the Night, has opened his Desk, he
has writ, and often read over, what he has written; which done, he has
applauded himself with Laughter, called to his Chamber-fellow to praise him
also, then putting off his Shoes and Clothes, shutting his Desk, and laying up
his Papers, he returned to his Bed and slept, till called up, utterly Ignorant
what he had done in the Night. In the Morning returning to his Studies, not
having yet seen his Papers, and being careful how to fill up the Gap in his
Verses, taking his Papers, when he found them supplied to his desire, and that
with his own hand, he has been strangely amazed, and would not believe his
Companions, who waking, had seen what he did. The Night after, his Companions
after his waking, led him to another Bed, lay his Head on a Pillow, on the
Beds-feet, and in his Gown, they commit him to his Rest; when he waked, in the
Morning they stood by him, and when he denied that he had risen, and read, and
written such things, they convinced him by so many circumstances. It Is
wonderful that he remembered nothing that he read and writ in his Sleep; he
says, he observed him for 3 or 4 hours at a time, walking in the Night,
reading and writing, and which was more wonderful, his Pronounciations was the
same as in the day: Having left the Schools a long time, he married a Virtuous
Wife, yet concealed it from her; he would rise, take his Child, walk about his
House, his Wife, following him, being asked by her, he would answer to her
demands, and discover the Secrets of his Heart with exact Truth, etc. Henab.
Heers. Obs. Med. l. 1. Obs. 2. p. 32. 33.

4. Platerus says, that Johan. Oporinus, (an excellent Printer), Night growing
on, was shut out of the City, together with his Father, and that they might
pass the Night the better, they set upon the Correction of a Greek Copy.
Opirinus read the Text, and though falling asleep, yet ^^e continued reading;
being afterward awaked, he remembered nothing that he had read, although it was
an entire Page. Plater. Obs. l. 1. p. 12.

5. Horstius writes of one in his Sleep, that rose up in his Clothes, Boots,
and Spurs, got up into the Window, where he sat stradling, smiting the Walls
with his Spurs, till he awaked. Schenck. Obs. l. 1. p. 65.

6. Schenchius writes of a Man at Helmestadt, who rose in his Sleep, went down
the Stairs into a Court, from thence toward the Kitchen, near which there was
a deep Well, into this he went down, holding fast to the Stones by his Hands
and Feet; but when he touched the Water, with the Cold thereof, he was awaked,
and finding in what danger he was, made a pitiful Outcry, which awaked those
in the House, who having found him, got him out, and brought him into his Bed,
where he lay many days Speechless and immovable, being extremely weakened with
Fear, Cold, and Crying. ibid.

7. Strange is the Story of a young Gentleman, who in his sleep arose Naked,
carrying his Shirt in his Hand, and by the help of a Rope, clambered up to a
high Turret in the Castle, where he was at that time; here he found a Nest of
Magpies, which he Robbed and put the young ones into his Shirt, and so by the
same Rope descended and returned to his Bed. The next morning being awaked, he
told his Brother, how he dreamed, that he had Robbed a Pies Nest, and withal
wondered, what was become of his Shirt, rose, and found it at his Beds-feet,
with the young-ones wrapped up in it. Schenck. Obs. l. 1. Obs. 1. p. 65.

8. Horstius tells of a Kinsman that dwelt with him at Wittenberg, who came
home in the Evening somewhat in Drink; to bed he went, slept till Midnight,
then he got up in his Sleep, walked to and fro for a while, then hastily went
to the Window, and got out. He lying in the same Chamber awoke, called his
Servant, and asked him, if the young man was in Bed with him; who replying, no,
they got up, went to the Window, hoping to have found him sticking there, and
to have pulled him back; but just as they came, he fell into the Paved Street
below, 14 Else high, where he lay for sometime, Speechless and Immovable, and
though much hurt, yet after sometime he was recovered. Fabrit. Obs. Chirurg. t.
2. Obs. 84. p. 159.

CHAP. XVIII. Persons, remarkable for Waking long.
HEre certainly the Causes must be contrary to those of the foregoing Chapter,
and therefore there is less necessity of Descant and Commentary; for Opposites
set one against the other, give a mutual Illustration one to the other, and
methinks, this may suggest to us an occasion of Complaining, that we spend too
much of our Life in unnecessary repose; Nature certainly would be content with
much less, than we take. Lust is a Great Tyrant, and an unmerciful Devourer of
our Time and Spirits.

1. Fernelius, speaks of one, who lived without sleep 14 Months; but this Man
was possessed with Madness, and his Brain, it should seem, being heated with
Melancholy, did beget Animal Spirits without much wasting of them. Schenck.
Obs. Med. l. 1 p. 64.

2. Arsenius, the Tutor of Arcadius, and Honoricus the Emperors, being made a
Monk, did satisfy Nature with so short a sleep, that he was used to say, that
for a Monk it was enough, if he slept but one hour in a Night. Zuing. Tha. Vol.
2. l. 5. p. 415.

3. George Castriot, called Scanderberg, was content with so little sleep, that
it is reported of him, that for the whole time he Governed Epirus, he never
slept above two hours in one Night, yet he died in the 63 year of his Age. ibid.

4. Seneca reports of Maecanas, Augustus's Favorite, that he lived three years
entire without sleep, and was at last cured of the Distemper by Music. Sen. de
Providentia.

5. It is reported of Nizolus, the Treasurer of Ciceroes Words and Phrases,
that he lived 10 years without sleep Schenck. Obs. l. 1. p. 64. Heurinus prax.
l. 2. c. 7. Ross. arcan. Microcosm. p. 99.

6. We Read of a Noble Lady, (says Schenkius), that for 35 years, lived
without sleep, and in good Health. as her Husband and Family could and did
Witness, but we leave this to the Faith of the Reader, who may take his
liberty. ibid.

CHAP. XIX. Abstainers from Drink.
THE two Grand Precepts of the Stoic Philosophers were (...), Sustine Abstine,
^ea^ and forbear, or abstain; certainly it is worthy of Remark, how far Powers
of Nature and ^^^will, will go with a Man, even upon the Stock of Common Grace.
The Government of the Sensitive Appetite, especially in respect of Drinks, is
none of the easiest ^asks incumbent upon Humane Nature, and yet we shall find
some in this respect, commanding themselves to Admiration; tho sometime, it
must be confessed, the very Texture and Mixtion of Humors with their
Constitutions, gives an Advantage, and sometimes fear of some imminent Danger,
adds a Sp^r to their Nature.

1. A Noble Man of Piedmont, being Sick of the Dropsy, sent for Doctor
Albertus Roscius, who finding the Dropsy confirmed, and the Patient averse
from all Remedies; he told him that he must abstain from all Liquors: The
Nobleman at the hearing of this, did so far abstain from all kind of Drinks,
that he did not so much as taste of any thing that was Liquid for a Month's
time, by which means he was restored to his former Health. Fab. Obs. Chirurg.
Cent. 4. Obs. 41. p. 319.

2. It is said of Abraames Bishop of Carras, that he drank not, nor made use of
Water, wherein to boil his Herbs, but his manner was to feed on Endive,
Lettuce, and Frui^; and from these also he used to abstain till the Evening,
yet was he a Person of great Liberalit to others. Drex. Oper. Tom. ^. p. 796.

3. Theophrastus tells of one Philinus, who in the whole course of his Life,
never made use of any manner of Drink, or Food, except Milk only. Celi. Rhod.
l. 11. c. 13. p. 500.

4. Pontanus writes of a Woman, who in all her Life time did never Drink either
Wine or Water; and being once enforced to Drink Wine by the Command of
Ladislaus King of Naples, she received much hurt thereby. Bow. Hist. Med. Mir.
l. 6. c. 3. p. 306.

5. There was one in Naples, of the Family of Fernacelli, that never Drank. c.
Rhod. l. 13 p. 309.

CHAP. XX. Immoderate Drinkers.
IT IS strange to observe, how a Continuation of Acts begets a Habit, and that
Habit by Custom becomes so fixed and in^eterate, that Nature it self seems at
length to Challenge it as her own; for which Reason, the Wise Solomon forbids
us to look upon Wine, when it is Red, when it sparkles in the Cup; and
Moralists to give the least Countenance to the first Principles and beginnings
of any Vice: for it is much easier to Prohibit the first entrance of a foreseen
Disease, and shut the Door against a Rude Guest, then to Cure the Disease, when
it has seized us, or restrain the Exorbitant Humors of an Ill Guest, when he
is entered.

1. In that Public drinking before Alexander, one Promachus drank 4 Congii,
that is 40 pound; we Read the same of Protcus of Macedonia, in Athanaeus. Nov.
Torquatus of Milan, drank 30 Pints at one Draught; Tiberius the Emperor stood
by to see the Wonder. Pliny says, that he never failed of his Speech, nor did
he Vomit, nor did he Sleep; he drank most at one Draught, and drank many more
little ones. Bonaesus, as Spartianus says, drank more then any Man. Aurelianus
said of him, he was not born to live, but to drink: Yet he Honored him for
military Affairs. He drank with barbarous Ambassadors to make them drunk, and
so would know their Secrets; he drank what he pleased, and was always Sober. A
certain Man drank 6 Gallons at a Nobleman's Marriage, in the days of Lipsius:
Jobnst. Clas. 10. p. 312.

2. Maximinus often drank in one day an Amphora of the Capitol, which is 9
Gallons our measure Capitolin. p. 602.

3. Lipsius tells of one at a Noble Bavarian's Wedding, that to exhilarate the
Guests, drank little less then 6 Congies in a short space, that is 60 pound.
Lips. Epist. Misc. Ep. 51. p. 456.

4. The Son of Marcus Tullius Cicero would ordinarily fetch off the quantity of
two Congies at once, that is to say 2 Gallons and a Quart, Din. Mem. l. 6. p.
448.

5. Bartholinus tells of one P^^^us of Malta who from place to place made Trial
of his Artifice, he having drank 20 or 30 Cups of Water, at the pleasure of the
Spectators, he would suddenly restore them all by Vomit; and Water running out
of a Fountain, he would orderly fill up the Cu^s as he drank them off; at other
times he would suddenly spout out the whole quantity, at the distance of 20
Foot or more; besides, if the Company desired it, he would not only restore the
clear Water, but so as that it should be of different both Color and Taste;
one while Rosewater, another, Spirit of Wine, Sack, Claret, White wine, etc.
and thus he filled several Cups, with several sorts of drinks at the same time.
He confessed that he could do this with the most ease, when he was Pasting, and
his Stomach empty; for if soon after Dinner he was called by great Persons to
see this T^yal, he used to Vomit up his Meat before his Ventricle would be
rightly disposed for the Reception of such a quantity of Water; when he was to
discharge himself of the Liquor he had drunk up, he performed it, only with the
pressure of his Hand, on his Stomach or Breast, that he might not be suspected
of Magic; and to obtain License of show his Art Publicly, he revealed his
Secret to Pope Urban VIII. at Rome, to Cardinal Richelieu, at Paris, and to the
Prince of Orange at the Hague, when some suspected, that the Glasses gave the
several Colors, he caused them first to be clearly washed with Water, and to
show he had no such Fraud, he not only received Glasses at the Hand of the
Spectators themselves; but also offered his several Vomits, as well to the
Taste, as to the Eye of any, that desired to make the Experiment. Bar^h. Hist.
Anat. Cent. 1. Hist. 39. p. 54, 55.

6. And Aelian tells of a Woman too much addicted to this desire of drinking,
to her Eternal Infamy, that not only she used to contend with her own Sex in
drinking, but also used to provoke Men thereunto; with such success in her
Bestiality, that she was known to be able to drink, and bear away a greater
quantity of drink, then any Man she could meet with Ael. var. His. l. 2. c. 41
p. 82.

CHAP. XXI. Great Fasters.
MR. Reynold's well observes, that the long Finger of Powerful Providence is to
be observed in these wonderful Effects, and Doctor Willis, that the Parent of
Nature, orders Natural Principles, as to their Quantity, Mixture, and
Operations; and it is as evident, when higher Causes put asunder, what Nature
has joined together, very astonishing results appear upon the Stage of Humane
Nature. Now to supply the Defect of Aliment, it is observable, that at such
Times and Cases a^ these are, the Expenses of the ^^crocosm by Stool, Urine,
Spittle, Menses, (and it may be Transpiration), are in great measure
Retrench'd^ the Igneous Parts of the Body restrained from Excursion, and a
fresh supply made by the continual entrance of Breach and Air, together with
Pituitous Humors, and a Viscous Oil produced by a Colliquation of the
Emaciated Parts; but I leave it to my Reader to judge of.

1. In St. Austin's days, one lived 40 days without eating any thing; another
in the time of Olimpiodorus the Platonish, for so long as he lived, he neither
slept nor fed, but only stood in the Sun to refresh himself, The Daughter of
the Emperor Cloturius, fasted eleven years. Petrus Aponus, saw one fasted 18
years; Rondeletius, saw one fasted 10, and afterward became a fruitful Mother.
Hermolus knew a Priest, who lived in Health 40 years, without any thing, but by
sucking in the Air. One Nicholaus Helvetius, Anno 1640. after that he had 5
Children by his Wife, lived a solitary life, and neither eat nor drank in 15
years; he predicted several things that came to pass, and by his austere Life,
made the belief of his fasting unquestionable: Certain it is, that the Bishop
of Constantia, in whose Diocese he lived, went to him on purpose to see him,
and after diligent Observation, confirmed the Truth of his Report by his
Letters; and for the greater certainty compelled him to taste some food, tho
very little, which caused him to have extreme Pain in his Stomach, for 3 days
after, the which Nicholaus told him beforehand was his fear; diverse Princes
of France and Germany went to him, and found it accoringly. Zach. Quest. Med.
leg. l. 4. tit. 1. p. 218. Johnston. Not. Hist. c. 10. p. 316.

2. Anno 1595. A Maid of about 13 years of Age, was brought to Cologne, whose
Parents affirmed, that she had lived without any kind of food or drink, for the
space of three years; she was of a Melancholy Countenance, her whole body was
fleshy, except only her belly. As for Excrements, she voided none; she
immediately swounded at the Taste of a little Sugar; yet this Maid walked up and
down, played with other Girls, danced, and did all other things that are done
by Girls of her Age, neither had she any difficulty of Breath. Fabric. Obs.
Chirurg. Cent. 2. Obs. 40. p. 116.

3. Paulus Lentulus, tells of a Maid of the Canton of Hearn, in Swisserland,
who was by the Command of the Magistrates, strictly Guarded, and all kinds of
Trials put in Practice, for the discovery of any kind of Collusion in the
business; they found none, but dismissed her fairly; in the first year of her
fasting she slept very little, in the second, nto at all, and so continued for
a long time after. Schenck Obs. l. 3. p. 306.

4. Anno 1539. A Girl of about Ten years of Age, born near Spires, began to
abstain from all kind of sustenance; and so continued for three years, walking,
and talking, and laughing, and sporting as other Children use to do, yet was
she narrowly observed by the Command of the Emperor Maximilian, and at the end
of 12 days, finding that there could be no juggling in the business, he gave her
leave to return to her Friends, not without great Admiration and Princely
Gifts. ibid. Horstius in Donat. l. 7. c. 1. p. 646.

5. Anno 1585. We have the like Narration of Katharine Binder, born in the
Palatinate, committed to the search of a Divine, Statesman, and two Doctors of
Physic; she is said to have fed only upon Air for the space of 9 years and
more. Schenck obs. l. 3. p. 306. Zacch. Qu. Med. legal l. 4. tit. 1. p. 217.

6. Doctor Hakewell, speaks of Eve Fleigen, who being born at Meurs, is said to
have taken no kind of sustenance, by the space of 14 years together, that is,
from the year of her Age, 22 to 36, and from the year 1597, to 1611, and this
we have confirmed by the Magistrates of the Town of Meurs; as also by the
Minister, who made Trial of her in his House 13 days together, by all the means
he could devise, but could detect no Imposture. Hakew. Apol. adv. 3. p. 6.
Horst. ad Don. l. 7. p. 654.

7. Melancthon wondered at Luther, who being large of body, and strong withal,
that he could live with so little Food; for he says, that when he was in good
Health, he has continued 4 days together without eating or drinking any thing
at all, and many days together with a little bread and one single Herring. Mel.
in vit. Lutheri.

8. Anno 1639. A Scot being overthrown in a Suit at Law, took Sanctuary in
Halyrood House, where out of discontent, he abstained from all Meat and Drink,
by the space of 30 or 40 days together; the King hearing of it, caused him to
be shut up in Edinburgh Castle, where he fasted 32 days; upon this he was
dismissed, and after a short time, he went to Rome, where he gave the like
Proof of his Fasting, to Pope Clement, VII. from whence he went to Venice,
carrying with him a Testimony under the Popes Seal, and there he gave the like
proof thereof, and returning into England, he inveighed bitterly against King
Henry VIII. whereupon he was thrust into Prison, where he continued Fasting for
the space of 50 days; his Name was John Scot. Spotswood's Hist. chapter of
Scotland. l. 2. p. 69. Clarks Mir. c. 104. p. 505.

9. Joan the Daughter of John Balaam, of the City of Constance in France, Anno
159^. was seized with great Sickness, after that grew Speechless for 24 days;
then her Speech returned, but the passage for Meat and Drink was resolved; nor
could the Girl be persuaded to take any Food; the parts of her belly were
contracted and clung together, other parts of her body remaining in good
plight. The Maid continued thus Fasting for almost 3 years entire, and
afterward by degrees returned to her Food, and to a laudible habit of body.
Fra. Citesius op. Med. p. 64. Horstii ad Donat. l. 7. c. 1. p. 648. Tr. often
Times l. 6. p. 550.

10. Febritius tells of a Maid, that lived 15 years without either Meat or
Drink, and was living in Anno 1612. Fab. Obs. Cent. 4. Obs. 29. p. 310.

11. Doctor Plot, in his Natural History of Oxfordshire, relates a strange
Accident that befell one Rebeccah Smith, the Servant Maid of one Thomas White,
of Minster Lovel, who being of a Robust Constitution, though she seldom eat
Flesh, (it scarce agreeing with her,) and about to years of Age; after she came
from the Communion on Palm Sunday, April 16, 1671, was taken with such a
Dryness in her Throat, that she could not swallow her Spittle, nor any thing
else, to supply the decays of Nature; and in this Case, she continued without
eating or drinking, to the Amazement of all, for about 10 Weeks, viz. to the
29th of June, being both St. Peter's day, and Witney-fair-day; by which time
being brought very low her Master enquired and found out a Person who gave him
an Amulet, (for it was supposed she was bewitched,) against this evil, after
the Application whereof, within two or three days time, (though it is not to be
supposed, that there was any dependence between the medicine and Disease,) she
first drank a little Water, then warm broths, in small quantities at a time,
and nothing else till Palm Sunday again 12 Months after, when she began to eat
bread, and other Food again, as formerly she had done, and was at the ^^^e of
the Relation, about the Age of 60, and then living at the same place, ready to
testify the Truth of the thing, as well as Tho. White and his Wife, who were
all that lived in the House with her, and did confidently assert (for they
carefully observed,) that they believed, she never took any thing in those 10
Weeks time, nor any thing more all the year following, but what, was
abovementioned; wherein he believes, they may the rather be credited, because
there was never any advantage made of this Wonder, which Argues it clear of all
Juggle or Design. Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire. p. 196.

12. Sennertus tells of 3 Persons, that fasted each of 'em two years; one 3
years, another 4, one 7, another 15, another 18, another 20, another 28,
another 30, another 36, and another 40 years. Sennert. Pract. l. 3. Part, 1.
Sect. 2. c. 2. de longa abstin.

13. Martha Taylour, of Bakewell in Darbyshire, who upon the occasion of a blow
on her back from a Miller, Anno 1667, fasted a Twelve Month; is no Wonder, in
comparison with the former Stories; nor that of the Shropshire Maid, whose
Mother I was acquainted with, who fasted as ^ong, mentioned in the former part
of this Book.

CHAP. XXII. Children Petrified in the Womb.
THE Story of Niobe turned into a Marble Statue, is a Fable: Children are often
converted into Stones in the Womb; and I would to God, Men were not so in their
ripe Age, at least in a Metaphorical Sense; but as to the Petrification of
Infants, it is not much more strange, that a Juice fit for Concretion should be
carried to the Womb, than to the Reins or Bladder, or that a Spiritus
Lapidificus should prevail in the one, and never in the other.

1. Columba Chatry, of Sens in Burgundy, Wise to Ludovicus Chatry, by the
report of Mr. John Alibaux an Eminent Physicians, and who also was present at
the Dissection of her, went 28 years with a Dead Child in her Womb: When she
was dead, and her Belly opened, there was found a Stone, having all the Limbs,
and exact proportion of a Child of 9 Months old. This happened Anno 1582.
Sennertus confesses this accident so rare, that he never met with the like
instance in the whole History of Physic. Sennert. Prax. Med. l. 4. par. 2.
Sect. 4. c. 7. p. 311.

2. Horstius tells of a Woman, aged 37. at the time of his Writing, whose Womb
was all turned to Stone, to the weight of 7 pound: Her Spleen Globular, her
Bladder Stony, and her Peritonaeum so very hard, that it could scarce be cut
with a Knife; and yet this Woman lived without any manifest sign of Sickness
all her life time. Addit. ad Donat. per Greg. Horst. l. 7. c. 2. p. 663.

3. Hearnius affirms, That he saw at Padua, a Woman, whose Breast was turned
into Stone; by this means, as she lay dead, that Breast of hers lay covered in
the Water of a certain Spring there Ibid. p. 664.

4. Pompilius Placentinus, tells of a Venetian Woman, who being Poisoned by an
Apple, when Dead, she grew so stiff and congealed, that she seemed to be
transformed into a Statute of Stone, nor could they cut open her Belly by Knife
or Sword. Zacch. qu. Medico-Legal. c. 4. Tit. 1. p. 235.

5. The Body of a Man that was killed and cast into the River Anien, having
lain some time at the Root of a Tree that grew upon the Bank-side; when it was
found and taken up, it was turned into Stone. Titus Celsus a Patrician of Rome,
affirmed that he had seen it. Cornman. de Mir. Morc. par. 3. cap. 36. p. 18.

6. I my self saw a Maid, born in Ireland, exposed to view at Arundel in
Sussex, a few years ago, who besides strange Moles upon her Body, had a great
Excressence growing between her Legs, hard as Stone, very bulky and weighty, so
that was not able to carry it about without a Truss.

CHAP. XXIII. Accidents upon Persons Birth-Days, etc.
I Am not sure, that the Matter of Fact in all the Cases hearafter mentioned
was in right Judgment so remarkable, as is pretended: Perhaps Persons may
sometimes be too fond in the Observation of such Days, out of a peculiar
respect to them; and at the same time pass over a hundred Accidents more worthy
of Note upon other days of their Life. See what follows in the end of the
Chapter.

1. The Poet Antipater Sidonius, every year upon his Birthday, was seized with
a Fever; and when he had lived to a great Age, he Died upon his Birthday.
Schenck. Obs. Med. 1.6. Obs. 1. p. 721.

2. The like befell Johan. Architectus, who, spent with Age, Died upon his
Birthday. Ibid.

3. Elizabeth Wife of King Henry VII. Died in Childbed, the 11th of February,
the very day of her Birth. Bak. Chron.

4. Amatu^ Lisitanus tells of one who every year on his Birthday, was seized
with a Fit of a Fever. Thom. a Veiga of another, who every year had a Fever for
three days and no longer. Schenck. Ibid. p. 721.

5. Alexander the Great was Born upon the 6th day of February, and Died on the
6th day of February, Alex. l. 4. c. 20, fol. 233.

6. Attalus King of Pergamum, and Pompeins the Great, both Died on their
Birth-Days. Plut. in Camilo. p. 135.

7. Julius Caesar was Born and Slain on the Ides of March. Sabel. l. 9. c. 4.
Zuin. Thaat. p. 561.

8. Antonius Caracalla the Emperor, was Slain at Carris on the 6th of the Ides
of April, being his Birthday. Zuin. Ibid.

9. Pope Gregory the Great, was Born, and Died on the 4th of the Ides of March.
Zuin. Theat. Ibid.

10. Garsias, Great Grandfather to Petrarch, having lived 104 years, died (as
also did Plato) on his Birthday, and in the same Chamber where he was Born.
Zuin. Theat. vol. 2. l. 7. p. 561.

11. The Emperor Charles the Great was Buried at Aquisgrane on his Birthday,
Anno 810. Ibid.

12. Ph. Melancthon, Died Anno 1560. in the 63th year of his Age, and on his
Birthday, being 13 Call. May. Ibid.

13. The Emperor, Charles V. was Born on St. Matthias's Day; on which day also
(in the course of his Life) was King Francis taken by him in Battle; and the
Victory likewise won at Bic^^que, he was also Elected, and Crowned Emperor on
the same day, and many other great Fortunes befell him still on that day.
Treasury of Ancient and Modern times, l. 4. c. 12. p. 330.

14. Augustus had certain Anniversary Sicknesses, which did return at a stated
and certain time. He commonly languished at the time of his Birth, which was
the 9th of the Calends of October, a little before Sunrise. Sweton in August.
p. 55. 105.

15. Timoleon obtained most of his Victories on his Birthday, which was
therefore Celebrated Annually by the Syracusans. Alex. ab Alex, de Genesis l. 4.
c. 20.

16. Philip King of Macedon had a Triplicity of Good Tidings on his Birthday;
That he was Victor in the Olympicks, that Parmenio his General had gained a
Conquest, and that his Queen was Delivered of Alexander. Ibid.

17. Baudinus, an Abbot and Citizen of Florence, Died upon his Birthday.
Coman. de Mir. Mort.

18. On Wednesday, Pope Sixtus V. was Born, made Monk, General of his Order,
Cardinal, Pope, and Inaugurated. Heyl. Geogr.

19. On Thursday, Henry VIII. Died, Edward VI. Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth.

20. Friday was observed to be fortunate to the Great Captain Gonsalvo; and
Saturday to Henry VII. etc.

CHAP. XXIV. Children marked in the Womb.
WHEN we read the Story in Genesis of Jacob 's Success in his Pastoral Office,
by the help of his straked, striped hazels and poplars, etc. we wonder at the
effects, and are puzzled in quest of the Cause: Certainly, though there was a
special Providence concerned in the Fact, yet there seems too a concurrence of
inferior Nature in the Agency. Imagination is strong and operative even in
Bruits, but much more in Mankind, where Reason gives a vigor and energy to it,
beyond common Sense.

1. Marinus Barl^tins reports of Scanderberg, That he brought with him into the
World, a notable mark of Warlike Glory; for he had upon his Right Arm, a Sword
so well set on, as if it had been drawn with the Pencil of the most curious and
skillful Painter in the World. Camer. Hor. Subscis. l. 1. c. 60. p. 308.

2. Camerarius says, that he always heard it reported, That the Counts of
Habsburg have each of them (from the Womb) a Golden Cross upon his Back, viz.
certain Hairs after a wonderful manner formed into the Figure of a Cross. Ibid.
l. 3. c. 42. p. 145.

3. M. Venetus, in his 45 years Itinerary in Asia, reports, That the Kings of
Corzani boast of a Nobility beyond that of all other Kings of the Earth; upon
this account, that they are Born into the World with the Impress of a Black
Eagle upon their Shoulder, which continues with them to their Deaths. Ibid.

4. Camerarius says, that it was related, That King James I. brought with him
from his Mother's Womb, certain Royal Signatures; for, at his Birth there was
beheld imprinted on his Body, a Lion and Crown, and some also add, a Sword.
Ibid.

5. Abraham Buckoltzerus says, That John Frederick Elector of Saxony, who was
Born June 30. Anno 1503. brought with him from his Mother's Womb, an Omen of
his future State: For he was Born with a Cross of a splendid and golden Color
on his Back; upon the sight of which, a pious and ancient Priest was sent for
by the Ladies of the Court, who thereupon said, This Child shall carry a Cross
conspicuous to all the World; the Emblem of which is thus apparent in his
Birth. The Event did declare and confirm the Truth of the Presage. Camerur.
Ibid. p. 146.

6. Gaffarel tells of his Sister born with a Fish on her Leg, (caused by the
desire of his Mother when Pregnant) that it was drawn with so much perfection
and rarity, as if drawn by some excellent Master; and the wonder was, that when
the Girl eat Fish, that on her Leg put her to sensible pain. Gaff. Curiosities,
c. 5. p. 143.

7. The Hostess of the Inn in the Suburbs of St. Mich. at Bois de Vicenne, had
a Mulberry growing upon her Nether Lip, which was smooth till the time that
Mulberries began to ripen, at which time hers began to be red, and to swell,
observin the Season, and Nature of other Mulberries till it came to their just
bigness and redness. Ibid. p. 144.

8. A Woman in the seventh Month of her Pregnancy, longed to Eat Rosebuds,
which being difficult to be procured, at last a Bough of them was found; she
greedily devoured the green Buds of two Roses, and kept the rest in her Bosom.
In the ninth Month, being delivered of a Boy, upon his Ribs there appeared the
likeness of three Roses very red; upon his Forehead and either Cheek he had
also he resemblances of a red Rose. He was therefore commonly called, the
Rose-Boy. Zasut. Lusit. adm. l. 2. Obs. 133.

CHAP. XXV. Childen abiding in the Womb beyond their time.
THere is not one of the Actions of Nature, that I can think of, which is not
subject to Anomaly and Disorder. Sometimes our Tongue stammers, our Eyes fail
us, our Memory is deficient, our Feet stumble: Sometimes there is a fault in
Conception, sometimes in Parturition: One while the Infant comes too soon,
before its Natural time into the World, another while it is detained a prisoner
too long, and cannot be set at liberty for many years, and it may be the Soul
go into another World, before the Body can be admitted into this; and sometimes
the Womb that bore it, must be the Grave to bury it, a miserable case, and
unhappy for Mother and infant both.

1. Catherine the Wife of Michael de Men, a poor Conntryman, for 12 years
together carried a dead Child, or rather the Skeleton of one in her Womb. It
was manifest to the touch, says Aegidius de Hertoge, who with many other, both
Men and illustrious Women are witnesses hereof; Henricus Cornelius Mathisius,
Domestic Physician to the Emperor Charle V. who having handled the Woman both
standing and lying, by touch, easily distinguished all the Bones of the Dead
Infant, in a great Amazement cried out, nothing is impossible to God and
Nature. She Conceived of this Child, Anno 1549. Schenck. Obs. l. 4. p. 575.

2. In the Town of Sindelfingen, a Woman of 30 years or thereabouts, being with
Child, 6 or 7 weeks before her expected Delivery, upon occasion of a, fall on
the Ice, never afterward felt her Child to stir: After which, she Conceived
twice or thrice, and has been as often Delivered; yet still the usual bigness
of her Belly continued, and the Dead Child was supposed to continue in her
Womb. Ibid. p. 577.

3. Anno 1545. Margarita Carlinia, Wife of Geo. Volzerus of Vienna, in her
Travel, perceiving somewhat to Crack within her, and never after feeling her
Child to stir, for four years afterward she lived with much pain, till at
length, Anno 1549. an Ulcer appearing about her Navel, and the Bone of the
Child's Elbow at the Orifice, she was by Incision Delivered of a Male Child
half Putrid, which was drawn out thence piecemeal, and afterward happily
Cured. Zuing. Theat. vol. 2. l. 4. p. 357. Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. l. 2. c. 22.
p. 239.

4. Zacutus Lusitanus has set down the History of a Woman of mean Fortune, and
16 years of Age, who being with Child, and the time of her Travail come, could
not be delivered by reason of the narrowness of her Womb; the Chirurgions
advised Section, which they said was ordinary in such Cases, but she refused
it; the Dead Child therefore Putrified in her Womb? After three years the
smaller Bones of it came from her, and so by little and little for ten years
together, there came forth pieces of corrupted Flesh, and Fragments of the
Skull: At last, in the twelfth year, there issued forth piecemeal the greater
Bones, and then her Belly fell; and after some years she Conceived again, and
was happily delivered of a living Boy. Zacut. Lusit. praxis Med. Admir. lib. 2.
Obs. 357. p. 276.

5. Donatus tells of one Paula, the Wife of Mr. Naso an Innkeeper in the Street
of Pont Merlian in Mantua, who voided by way of Siege, a Dead Child, with a
great deal of Pain; the Bones coming forth by piecemeal for several months and
years together. Donat. Hist. Med. Mir. l. 2. c. 22. p. 241. For this, the
Author cites the Testimony of Hippolitus Genifortus, a Surgeon, and Joseph
Arancus, a Physician.

CHAP. XXVI. Children Born Preternaturally.
THAT the Births of Children are sometimes attended with strange, either
precedent, or concomitant, or consequent Symptoms or Accidents, may be
attributed to variety of infetiour and natural Causes, as in the following
Examples: But surely there is a Finger of Omnipotence that overrules Nature in
these and all other Operations; which ought to attract our Thoughts to
particular Disquisitions and Meditations, especially in Cases where we our
selves are more nearly concerned.

1. Zoroastres, Laughed the same day wherein he was Born; his Brain also did
pant and beat, that it would bear up their Hands that laid them on his Head.
Solinus. cap. p. 181.

2. M. Tullius Cicero, is said to have been Born without any of those Pangs
usual in Childbearing Plut. par in Cicerone.

3. Nero was Born with his Feet forwards. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 8. p. 160.

4. M. Curious Dentatus, and Cn^ Papyrius Carbo, were Born with Teeth in their
Mouths. Ibid.

5. Scipio Affricanus, was cut out of his Mother's Womb: So was Julius Caesar.
Thus (says Schenck.) was that Manlius Born, who entered Cartbage with an Army;
And so was that Mackduff Earl of Fife, who slew Mackbeth the Usurper of
Scotland. Edward VI. of England, is said by Baker to be so, but that is
doubtful. Also Buchardus, Earl of Lintsgow. etc. Anno 959. Also Gebbardus, Son
of Otho, Earl of Brigentz, Anno 1001. Cornelius Gemma says, He has cut out of
the Womb six living Children. Schenck Obs. Med. p. 580.

6. I saw, says Horatius Augonius, a poor Woman of a fleshy and good habit of
Body, who for nine months had an Exulceration of the Ventricle, and for twenty
days together Vomited up all she took, and so Died; a living Boy being taken
out of her Womb afterward. Ibid.

7. When Spinola Besieged Bergopsoma, a Woman near her Reckoning going forth to
draw Water, was taken off in the middle by a Cannon Bullet, so that the lower
part of her fell into the Water; those that were by, ran to her, and saw there
a Child moving it self in the Bowels of the Mother; which was afterward
Baptized by the Infanta Isabella at Antwerp, by the name of Alb. Ambrosius, one
of her Fathers Captains. Barth. Hist. Anat. Cer. 2. Hist. 8. p. 159.

8. Lewis the 9th King of Hungary, etc. was Born without a Skin, Crowned in his
second year, Married a Wife at nine, took upon him the Government at ten, had a
Beard before his time, was Gray before eighteen, and Slain at twenty, Anno
1526. Camerar. Hor. Subscis. Cen. 1. c. 55. p. 241.

9. Anno. 1647. Jacob Egh in the City of Sarda in Belgia, had a Bull which he
fed, tying him in a Close near his House; but provoked by the Boys, he brake
his Bonds, and ran to the Cows, the Herdsman endeavored with his Staff to
return him to his former place; The Bull ^ing incensed with his blows, ran upon
him, and with his Horns born him to the ground: His (...) being now in the last
month of her Count, seeing the danger of her Husband, ran into his assistance:
The Bull with his Horns hoisted her up into the Air, the height of one Story,
and tore the Belly of the Woman: From the Wound in her Belly forthwith came the
Birth with its Secondine; and was thrown at some distance upon a soft place,
was carried home, diligently looked after by a Midwife; and was Baptized, and
lived to be a Man. Bartholin. Ibid. Cent. 2. Hist. 8. p. 157.

9. Gorgias, a Gallant Man of Epirus, is said to be Born in the Coffin while
his Mother was carrying to the Grace. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 20.

10. Carsias, King of Navarre, being with Vrracha his Queen at Larumbe, was
surprised by Moors and Slain; they wounded the Queen in the Belly with a Lance;
who being put to flight; The Queen at the wound was delivered of a Son and
Died; the Child to all Men's wonder was safe, and was named Sasias Garsia, who
succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, Anno 918. Zuing. Theat. vol. 2. l. 1. p.
270.

11. Schenckius speaks of a Woman that voided a Child a Finger long at her
Mouth.

CHAP. XXVII. Monstrous Animals.
I Do not pretend here to give a new Edition of Aldrovandus, nor write a large
Voluminous Treatise of of all the Monsters within ken of a well-read Historian,
but to give a few of the latest Instances of the greatest Errors of Nature in
this kind, that I could meet with; just enough to awaken, and put a man's
Brains into Fermentation, and dispose him to some Gravity and Seriousness, and
Sublimity of Thought.

1. At Rome, in the River of Tyber, a Monster was found with a Man's Body, an
Ass's Head, one of whole Hands was like a Man's, but the other like an Elephants
Foot, one of his Feet was as the foot of an Eagle, the other resembled another
Beast: He had a Woman's Belly trimly set out with Breasts, and his Body was
covered all over with Scales, except his Belly and Breast, having in his hinder
parts an old Man's Head bearded, and another besides spitting out Flames like a
Dragon. Doom's Warning to Judgment, p. 288. This happened, Anno 1496.

2. Anno 1530. in January, a Monstrous Serpent, with seven Crowned Heads like a
Dragon, was brought out of Turkey to Venice, and afterward given to Francis
the French King, and for the rareness was valued at 6000 Ducats. Batmans Doom,
p. 312.

3. A Butcher having killed a Cow at Limington in Hampshire, found she was big
with a Calf which began to be hairy; its hind Legs had no joints, and its feet
were divided like the Claws of a Dog, his Tongue was tripple, and after the
manner that Cerberus's is described, one in the middle of its Mouth, and two
others on the sides: Between the fore and hind Feet, there was a great Stone
upon which it was laid: This Stone weighed 20 pound and a half; its color was
greyish, like to a cut Stone, which is commonly called the Grison; the
Superficies thereof was unequal, and full of little Cavilia's: When it was
broken, they perceived small Grains of Stone of an Oval Figure, and its color
was mixed with yellow and black Veins, which are all over it. Dr. Haughton of
Salisbury keeps this Stone, of which he has sent a part to Mr. Boil, who
communicated it, together with a Letter, to the Royal Society. The Young
Students Library, p. 210.

4. At Burdham near Chichester in Sussex, about 23 years ago, there was a
Monster found upon the Common, having the Form and Figure of a Man in the
forepart, having two Arms and Hands, and a human visage, with only one Eye in
the middle of the Forehead; the hinder part was like a Lamb. A young Man of the
Neighborhood was supposed to have Generated this Monster by a Bestial
Copulation, and that the rather, because he was afterward found in the like
Beastly Act with a Mare; upon discovery whereof, he fled out of the Country.
This young Monster was nailed up in the Church Porch of the said Parish, and
exposed to public view a long time, as a Monument of Divine Judgment. Attested
by Henry Read of Barnham, an Eye witness.

5. Anno 1511. At Ravena, a Monster was Born with a Horn on his Head; He had
Wings, no Arms, one Foot as a Bird of Prey, an Eye on his Knee, and both Kinds
Ypsilon amidst his Breast, and the form of a Cross. This I have read, (says my
Author) in John Multi Vallis, and Gasper Hedio, in the History Synopsis after
Sabellicus. I have seen another Portracture of the like Monster, but somewhat
differing, and not answering the first in all Points, with the Interpretation
set out in Verse. Batman's Doom, p. 294.

6. Anno 1531. At Ausburg, a Woman brought forth three Monsters, first a Man's
Head wrapped in a Caul; secondly, a Serpent with two Legs, which had a great Head
like unto a Pike, the Body and Feet of a Frog, and the Tail of a Lizard;
thirdly, a Pig whole in all Parts. Batman's Doom, p. 315.

7. In the same year, a horrible Monster, very wild, having four Feet, a Man's
Head Bearded and Combed, Eagles Feet, Hands almost like a Lions Paws, a Dogs
Tail, and his Body of a dark yellow color somewhat shining, was taken in the
Lordship of the Bishop of Saltsburg in the Forest of Hanesberg: He did fly
Men's sight, and hid himself in dark Corners; and length, when he could be
neither compelled nor allured to Eat, he Died for Hunger. Ibid. 316.

8. Anno 1540. At Milan, a Cow brought forth a Calf with two perfect Heads,
with Tongue, Teeth, Eyes, and Ears, but the Heads were joined together in the
Nap, the one a Bull's Head, the other a Cow's Head. Idem, ex Cardan. l. 14. c.
37.

9. Anno 1543. in Flanders, upon the day of St. Paul's Conversion, (others
write at Cracovia.) their was Born a Child of honest and gentile Parents, very
hideous and horrible to behold, with turning and sparkling Eyes, having a Mouth
and Nostrils standing out with the form of a Horn, and a Back rough with Dog's
Hair, Ape's Faces appearing on his Breast where his Dugs should stand, Cats
Eyes under the Navel, cruel and currish Dog's Heads at both Elbows and Knees,
looking forward, the form of Toads Feet, a Tail bending upward, and turning
again crooked of an Ell long; he is said to have lived four hours after he was
Born, and at length, (after he had uttered these words, Vigilate, Dominus Deu;
vester advenit, that is, Watch, your Lord is a coming) to have Died. Batman,
ibid. p. 537. Out of Gasper Pucer and Munster's Cosmography.

10. Anno 1546. At Bitterfield, a Calf was found in the Field, with Man's Eyes,
Nostrils and Ears, having his Head shaven, and as it were covered with
Vermilion, in Mouth and Breast like a Calf; his fore Legs like a Calf, and his
hinder like a Man and very short, but both were partly Hoved like a Calf, and
partly Toed and Fingered like a Man, which Fingers were under the Hoof, and
hung out severally. This Monster Gasper Pucerus describes in his Book
Teratascopia, Ibid. p. 346.

11. The same Author writes, That he saw in the year 1553. a Calf fearful and
horrible to behold, looking like a Cat, having a great swelling hanging from
under his Jaw, long like a Bladder, white and soft; his Hair was black like a
Dogs; his Stones were of no common greatness, like unto them of a Ram, double
Codded. Ibid. p. 36.

12. Anno 1534. At Stetin a Monster was Born having this Form: In the place of
his Head was a deformed lump moveable, as the Intrails of a Sheep; in the place
of one of his Ears stood an Arm; in the place of the Face, curled Locks like to
Cats Hair, and sticking thereon like the Spawn of a Pike, through which,
beneath, there appeared glassy bright little Eyes; his Mouth was a very small
hole without Lips; his Nose little, and without a Neck; The other Arm grew out
of his side, but there was no likeness of Breast nor Back: He was of no Kind,
his Arms and long Feet had Houghs, whole Bone through, without Joints, Elbows;
and Hams; his Hands and Feet tender, and hanging down as it were twice broken,
like unto crooked and bending Claws. Batman. Ibid. Ex Fincelio.

13. Anno 1551. Febr. 18. A Lamb was yeaned at Halberstadt with a round Head,
and with three Eyes, three Mouths, two Noses, with his Ears hanging to his back
ward, like to Dogs Ears, (but which is to be accounted a great Prodigy) in his
three Mouths he had a great Eye greater than the other, and there he put forth
a long Tongue; He lived one day with continual crying. Ibid. Ex Fincelio, p.
372.

14. Anno 1554. In Marchia, not far from Regemont, a Mare brought forth a
Monstrous Colt, having the Skin gagged every where, hanging Breeches and Dublet
cut, like to the fashion of the Lance Knights. Batman, p. 373. Ex Fincelio.

15. Anno 1556. The day before the Nones of January, in Germany, at a Village
belonging to the Bishop of Dilling, called Overhassen, a Cow brought a Calf
that had but two hinder Feet, yet of so great swiftness, that running with the
Body upright, he surpassed all other Calves on foot Batman's Doom, p. 375.

16. The same year, July 24. at Clesdorf, 3 miles from Pabenberg, a Cow brought
forth a Calf, with a Man's-head, a black Beard, two Men's Ears, indifferently
well haired; likewise a Man's Breast with Dugs. Idem. ex Fincelio.

17. The same year a Child was Born of a Woman, by Copulation with a Dog,
having a Man's shape in the upper part, but in the lower the full form of a
Dog; and to purge the Sin he was brought to the Pope. Cardan. de Varietate
Rerum, l. 14. c. 64.

18. Anno 1563. A monstrous Fish was cast on shore at Grimsby in Lincolnshire,
in length 19 yards, his Tail 15 Foot long, and 6 yards between his two Eyes,
Batmans Doom, p. 391. out of Dr. Coopers Chron.

19. Anno 1577. in June, was seen in London, a Mare having a Colt, brought from
the Parish of Emeley in Worcestershire, the Mare was 22 years old, and Foaled
such a Colt as forthwith gave Milk, which my Author says, he saw; adding, that
one Mrs. Dawson endeavoring to take away the House of the Poor Man, and the
Man having spent almost all that he had in defense of his own Right, this
abundance of Milk continually flowing from the Colt, was for the time, a great
cherishing to him. Ibid. p. 403.

20. Anno 1581. Feb. 1. One Annis Fig, an Adultress of Chichester in Sussex,
brought forth a monstrous Child of little shape of Body, trussed together, the
Head very great, bigger than the Body; the Body in compass 9 Inches, the Arm an
Inch long, and two Inches about the Face; on the Cheek and Chin the likeness of
a black Beard, the Legs wanted Thighs, the Toes crooked. Idem. p. 415.

21. Anno 1680. May 19. in Somersetshire near Taunton Dean, a Woman was brought
to Bed of two Children: They grew together side to side from the Armpits to the
Hip Bone; they had two Fundaments whereby to avoid their Excrements; they had
also two passages for their Urine, yet had they but one Navel, by which both
were nourished while in the Womb; both Suck together, or are both equally
desirous of Nourishment together: They were Christened by the Names of Aquila
and Priscilla. See the Printed Relation.

22. Anno 1691. March 25. There was Calved about 8 miles from Bath in
Somersetshire, a Calf, having the resemblance of a Woman's Head-dress, called a
Commode, near half a yard in height growing on its Head, which has been
exposed to public view in the Tower of London.

CHAP. XXVIII. Instances of an Early, or rather Ripe Wit.
THere is something in earliness of Parts, that pleases mightily; whether it
be the preciousness of time, much whereof is saved by this means; or the hopes
it gives of growing apace toward an Excellency and Perfection; or the security
of a present improvement, which future A^cidents of Life cannot endanger:
Whatever it is, it delights and obliges, and allureth both Eye, Admiration,
and Affection. And I was the more willing to insert this Chapter, and muster up
these instances, for a spur to Childhood and Youth, to provoke tender years to
a virtuous Emulation; and to make dull Phlegmatic Souls that are overtaken with
the Noon-Sun, before they have done any thing of any value, Ashamed and
Penitent.

1. Salmasius interpreted Pindar very exactly in the 10th year of his Age. L.
Ant. Clement. de ejus Laud. and Vita.

2. Avicenna, (born at Bochara), at 10 understood human Sciences, and the
Alchoran; and went through all the Encyclopedia before 18: during which time he
slept not one whole night, and minded nothing but Reading. In and difficulty he
went to the Temple and Prayed. Hottinger.

3. Thomas Aquinas is reported, when a Child, to take his Book always to Bed
with him. Pontan. Attic. Bellar.

4. Cardinal Bellarmine, whilst at School, Interpreted publicly Cicero's
Oration pro Milone; at 16 began to Preach, and openly Read the Grounds of
Divinity. Author of the Education of Young Gentlemen.

5. Torquato Tasso spoke plain at 6 months old, at 3 years went to Schook, at 7
he understood Latin and Greek, and made Verses; before 12 he finished his
Course of Rhetoric, Poetry, Logic, and Ethics: At 17 he received his Degrees
in Philosophy, Laws and Divinity; and then printed his. Rinaldo. Idem.

6. Cardinal du Perron, Read over all the Almagest of Ptolomy in 13 days,
before he was 18 years old. Ibid.

7. Augustus, at 19, contrary to the Advice of his Friends, put himself upon
the Management of Affairs, claimed his Fathers Inheritance, and Succession of
his Uncle Julius. Ibid.

8. Cosmo Medici took upon him the Government of Florence at 17. Ibid.

9. Vesalius, when a Child, began to cut up Rats and Mice. Ibid.

10. Mich. Angelo, when a Child, began to draw Figures. Ibid.

11. Galen, when a Child, began to compose Medicines. Ibid.

12. Joha. P.c. Mirandula, out-went his Teachers: The 900 Conclusions, which he
proposed to Defend against all Opposers, he being but 21 years of Age, show
what he was; and he never retired till his Death. Ibid.

13. Jos. Sealiger, all the time he lived with his Father in his Youth, ever
day Declaimed, and before 17 he made his Tragedy of Oedipus. Ibid.

14. Grotius, at 8 years old, made Verses, and performed his public Exercises
in Philosophy; before 15, he put forth his Comment upon Martianus Capella; at
16 he pleaded Causes; and at 17, he put forth his Comment upon Aratus. Idem.
See his Life.

15. Lipsius writ his Books Variarum Lectionum, at 18 years old, Ingenium
habuit Docile and omnium capax praeter Musices. Ibid.

16. Sir Philip Sidney, (says Sir Foulk Grevill) though I knew him from a
Child, yet I never knew him other than a Man, with such staidness of Mind, and
early and familiar Gravity, as carried Grace and Reverence above greater years.
Lanquet, and William Prince of Orange, kept a Correspondence with him, when a
Boy.

17. Calvin Printed his Iustitutions before he was 25.

18. Tostatus learned all the Liberal Sciences without being Taught, and writ
in the 40 years he lived, as much as most in that time can Read: And yet at the
same time, he was Councellor to the King, Refendary Major of Spain, and
Professor of Philosophy, Divinity, and Law, in Salamanca.

19. Chreighton the Scotch-man, at 21. understood 12 Languages, and had Read
over all the Poets and Fathers, disputed de omni Scibili, and answered ex
tempore in Verse.

20. Monsieur Pascal, observing the Sound of an Earthen Dish at Table, enquired
the Reason, and presently after made a Treatise concerning Sounds, about 11
years of Age: At 12, he read and comprehended Euclid's Elements with great
Facility, without and Master: At 16 he composed a Treatise of Conics: At 19 he
invented that Instrument of Arithmetic, now in Print: At 23, he added a great
number of Experiments to those of Torricelli.

21. Mr. J. Janeway, (of Hertfordshire, born Anno 1633.) at 11 years of Age
took a great fancy to Arithmetic, and the Hebrew Tongue; Before he was 13, he
read over Oughtred with understanding; whilst a Scholar at Eaton, he made an
Almanac; at 17 was chosen Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. See his Life.

22. King Edward VI. with his Sister Elizabeth, in his tender years, was
committed to the Tuition of Dr. Cox and Sir John Cheek, wherein he profited to
Admiration; having in a short time attained to speak most usual Languages, as
Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, and Dutch; and also to know many other
Sciences; that he seemed rather to be Born, than Brought up to them: Nor was he
ignorant in Logic, Natural Philosophy, or Music; and as he wanted not
Happiness of Wit, Dexterity of Nature, nor good Instructions; so neither was he
himself wanting in Diligence to receive their Instructions; for in the midst of
his Recreations, he would always be sure to observe his hours for Study; where
he was serious and intent during that time; and would then return to his
Pastime again. Bishop Cranmer observing his readiness in the Greek and Latin
Tongues, declared to Dr. Cox, That he could never have thought that to have
been in him if he had not seen it himself.

When he was not above 7 years of Age, he wrote two Letters to his Godfather,
Archbishop Cranmer, in Latin: Thus Englished.

Most Reverend Father, and my most Dear Godfather,
I Wish you all Health and Happiness; having been a good while from you, I
should be glad to hear of your good Health; however, my Prayers are continually
for you, that you may live long, and may go on to promote the Gospel of God.
Farewell.

Your Son in Christ, Edward Prince.


Another Letter of King Edward's, to Archbishop Cranmer, written in Latin;
which is thus Englished.

Most Reverend Godfather,
ALthough I am but a Child, yet I am not altogether insensible or unmindful of
your great love and kindness toward me, and of your daily care for promoting
my Good and Benefit. Your kind and loving Letters came not to my hands till the
Eve of St. Peter; and the reason that I did not answer them all this while, was
not because I forgot or neglected them, but that I might have the daily
happiness of meditating upon them; and might so imprint them in my Mind and
Memory, that I might afterward answer them with all the Power and Skill I
have: I do therofore joyfully observe and honor that tender and fatherly
Affection which you do therein express toward me; and do beseech God that you
may live many years, and that you would still continue as my Godly Father to
instruct me with your wholesome and godly Counsel and Advice; for I desire to
embrace Religion and Godliness above all other things; for St. Paul says, That
Godliness is profitable for all things. I wish your Fatherhood many years of
Health and happiness.

Your well-affected Son, Edward Prince.


He had a particular Reverence for the Scriptures; For he took it very ill,
when one about him laid a great Bible on the Floor, to step upon, for somewhat
that was out of his reach. He at 8 years old writ Latin Letters frequently to
his Father King Henry VIII. and to Queen Katherine Parre, and his Uncle the
Earl of Hartford, etc. Young Man's Calling, p. 204. Dr. Burnet's Abridgment
Hist. Ref. Book 2. p. 2.

23. Queen Elizabeth writ a good hand before she was 4 years old, and
understood Italian; for there are Letters extant written by her in that
Language to Queen Jane when she was with Child, in which she subscribed,
Daughter. Ibid.

24. Zebertus Th. D. testifies, That Delrius, at 19 years of Age, quoted 1100
diverse Authors in diverse Languages, with very great Labor and Judgment in his
Adversaria, which he published for the Illustration of Seneca. Drexel. Aurif.

CHAP. XXIX. Instances of An Extraordinary Memory.
WIsdom is the Daughter of Experience, Memory the Repository of Experiences;
certainly then those have an Advantage by Nature above others, who excel in
this Faculty; and it is very strange, that a little Cell or Apartment of Brain
should be able to receive so many Ideas of Things, and histories of Life,
without disorder and confusion, as would be enough to fill a Volume of the
largest Folio; and yet such there are, Persons of a good Commixture of Humors,
and a dry Brain, that can carry in their Heads more than some can take in.

1. Avicenna, could repeat Aristotle's Metaphysics without Book, Zuin. Theat.
vol. 1. lib. 1. page 34.

2. Cineas, the Ambassador of King Pyrrhus. the very next day after he came to
Rome, both knew, and also saluted by their Names, all the Senate, and the whole
Order of the Gentlemen in Rome. Solinus, c. 7. p. 195.

3. Hortensius, sitting at Rome in the Marketplace for a whole day together,
recited in order all the things that were sold there, their Price, and the
Names of the Buyers.

4. Lucius Lucullus, a great Captain and Philosopher, was able to give a ready
account of all Affairs at home and abroad. Cicero Commends Hortensius's Memory
for Words, Lucullus's for Things. Zuing. v. 1. l. 1. p. 34. etc.

5. Carneades, a Grecian, is Celebrated for his singular Memory, by Pliny, l.
7. c. 24. So is Pertius Latro by Seneca and Zuinger, etc.

6. Antheny Walleus, in 6 months learned by heart the whole Epitome of Pagnine.
Clarks Mar. of Eccles. Hist.

7. Antonius the Egyptian Eremite, without knowledge of Letters, had the whole
Scriptures without Book. Zuing. v. 1. l. 1. p. 33. Ex Aug. de Dectr. Christ.

8. Cardulus was able to write two Pages entire, which any other man should
read, in due order; or, if they pleased, repeat them backwards. Ibid. p. 34.

9. J. Lipsius, offered in the presence of a German Prince thus, Set one here
with a Poynard, and if in repeating of Tacitus all over, I shall miss but in
one Word, let him Stab me, and I will freely open my Breast or Thorat for him
to strike at. Jani Nicii pina Coth. 2. Imag. 1. page 2.

10. Pomp Gariglianus, could repeat on occasion any Sentence of Plato,
Aristotle, Hippocrates, Galen, Theinistius, Tho. Aquinas, etc. Ibid. p. 69.

11. I could repeat, says Seneca, 2000 Names in the same Order as they were
spoken, and when as my Masters Scholars (above 200 in all) brought each of them
several Verses to him, beginning at the last, I could recite them orderly unto
the first, etc. Senec. Controv. l. 1. Proaemio.

12. Joseph Scaliger, in 21 days, committed all Homer to his Memory. Wanley's
Wonders, l. 2. c. 2.

13. Mr. Humphry Burton of Coventry, aged 83. Anno 1676. could give the sum of
any Chapter in the New Testament, and of the Chapters in diverse Books of the
Old Testament, in a Latin Distich, with great readiness. Ibid.

14. Pontanus of Spoleto, a Lawyer, could recite not only the Titles, but the
entire Bodies of the Laws. Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 6. Sect. 1. p. 226.

15. Fr. Suarez, had St. Augustine ready by heart, alleging every where, as
there was occasion, fully and faithfully his Sentences, and, which is very
strange, his Words. Strada prolus. Acad. l. 1. Prolus. 1. p. 7.

16. Dr. Raynold's excelled this way, to the astonishment of all that were
inwardly acquainted with him, not only for St. Augustine's Works, but also all
Classical Authors. Hakew. Apol. l. 3. c. 6. Sect. 1. p. 226.

17. Bishop Jewel, was raised by Art and Industry to the highest pitch of human
possibility: for he could readily repeat any thing that he had Penned after
once Reading: And therefore usually at the Ringing of the Bell, he began to
commit his Sermons to Heart, and kept what he had learned so firmly, that he
used to say, That if he were to make a Speech premeditated, before a thousand
Auditors, shouting or fighting all the while, yet could he say whatsoever he
had provided to speak. Many barbarous and hard Names out of a Calendar, and 40
strange words, Welsh, Irish, etc. after once or twice Reading, and short
Meditation, he could repeat both forwards and backwards without any hesitation.
Sir Fr. Bacon reading to him only the last Clauses of ten lines in Erasmus his
Paraphrase in a confused and dismembered manner, he after a small pause
rehearsed all those broken parcels of Sentences the right way, and the
contrary, without stumbling. clark's Mirror, c. 81. p. 356.

18. Murctus tells of a young Man of Corsica, Student in the Civil Law at
Padua, who could repeat 36000 Latin, Greek, or barbarous Words, significant or
insignificant, upon once hearing, without any Hesitation, in what order so ever
a Person pleased. Muretus says, he made trial of him several times, and avers
it to be true. Murct. Variar. lect, l. 3. c. 1. p. 54. etc.

19. Francis King of France, Jerome of Prague, Longolius Matochites, etc. are
mentioned as Persons of an excellent Memory by Zuinger: As was also Dr. Fuller.
Ve ejus vita.

CHAP. XXX. Instances of extraordinary Fatness, etc.
EVery thing in the extremes (in natural Bodies) is an irregularity and
distemper, whether it be excess or defect, a due nutriment and augmentation is
decent and salutary, and conducive to action, and the proper offices of nature;
but either a Redundancy or Deficiency are hurtful and obstructive.
Extraordinary fatness on the one hand, devours up or overwhelms the Animal
Spirits, so that they must move, like Travelers in the Wilds of Kent and
Sussex: Leanness impoverishes Nature, and sets her upon a poor Horse that is
hardly able to carry himself.

1. Zacutus speaks of a young Man so fat, that he could scarce move himself, or
go, or set one step forward, but continually sat in a Chair, in perpetual fear
of being Choked. Zacutus cured him. Zacut. prox. Adm. l. 3. Obs. 108. p. 416.

2. Dionisius, Son of Clearchus the Tyrant of Heraclea, was by reason of his
Fat, pressed with difficulty of Breathing and fear of Suffocation: He could no
feel very long and sharp Needles pricked into his Sides and Belly, (upon adivce
of his Physicians) whilst they passed through the Fat, till they touched upon
the sensible Flesh. Athenaeus, l. 12. c. 12. p. 549.

3. Vitus a Matera, a Learned Philosopher and Divine, was so Fat, that he was
not able to get up a pair of Stairs: He breathed with great difficulty; nor
could he Sleep lying along, without danger of Suffocation, Donat. Hist. Mirab.
l. 5. c. 2. p. 274.

4. I have seen, says the same Author, ayoung Englishman carried through all
Italy to be seen for Money; who was of that monstrous Fatness and Thickness,
that the Duke of Mantua and Mountferrat commanded him to be Portrayed naked to
the Life. Ibid.

5. Anno 1520. a Nobleman born in Diethmarsia, but sometimes living in
Stockholme, being sent to Prison by the Command of Christiern II. could not be
thrust in at the Prison Door by reason of his extreme Corpulency; but was
thrown aside into a Corner near it. Zuing. Theat. v. 2. l. 2. p. 279.

6. Pope Leo X. was Fat to a Proverb. Ibid.

7. Polyeusus Sphettius, an Athenian, mentioned by Plutarch in Photion;
Ptolomeus Energes Magan, who reigned 50 years in Cirene, etc. are taken notice
of by Authors for their Extraordinary Corpulency.

CHAP. XXXI. Instances of extraordinary Leanness.
1. CYnesias called Philyrinus, because he girt himself round within boards of
the Wood Philyra least through his exceeding Talness and Slenderness, he should
break in the Waste. Athen, l. 12. c. 13. p. 551.

2. Panaretus was exceeding lean and thin, notwithstanding which, he passed his
whole Life in a most entire and perfect Health. Ibid. p. 562.

3. Philetas of Coos, was an Excellent Critic and Poet, in the time of
Alexander the Great, but withal, he had a body of that exceeding leaness and
lightness, that he commonly wore Shoes of Lead, and carried Lead about him,
least at sometime or other, he should be blown away by the Wind. Ibid. p. 552.

CHAP. XXXII. Persons Long-lived.
IT IS reported of Paracelsus, that he would undertake, if he had the Nurture of
a Well-humour'd and Complexien'd Infant from his Nativity, to put him in a way
of living Everlastingly; but that was a brag, fit only for such a bold
Thrasonical Smatterer in Chemistry and Magic, as he was; no doubt, but Old Age
and Death, might be retarded and kept off much longer, then they are in the
Cases of some Persons, where Nature has given a due Contexture, a fit
Complexion of Humors, with the Observation of a suitable Diet; and where
Divine Providence, does not resist.

1. There is a Memorial entered upon the Wall of the Cathedral of Peterborough,
for one, who being Sexton thereof, Interred two Queen's therein, Katherine
Dowager, and Mary of Scotland, more then 50 years interceeding betwixt their
several Sepultures. this Vivacious Sexton, also buried two Generations, or the
People on that place twice over. Fullers Worthies. p. 293. Northamp.

2. Richard Chamond, Esquire; served in the Office of Justice of Peace, almost 60
years; he saw above 50 several Judges of the Western Circuit; was Uncle and
great Uncle to 300 at the least, and saw his youngest Child above 40 years of
Age. Fullers Worth. p. 211. Cornwall. Carew's Survey of Cornwall. p. 18.

3. In Herefordshire, (says my Lord St. Albans,) there was a Morris Dance of
8 Men, whose years put together, made up 800, that which was wanting in one,
superabounded in others. Verulam Hist. Life and Death. p. 135.

4. William Paulet, Marquis of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer of England 20
years together, (who died in the 10th year of Queen Elizabeth,) was born in the
last years of Henry VI. He lived in all, 106 years, and three Quarters and odd
days, during the Reign of 9 Kings and Queens of England. He saw the Children of
his Childrens Children, to the number of 103, and died 1572. Bakers Chron. p.
502. fullers Worth. Hantshire. p. 8.

5. One Polezew, says Mr. Carew of Cornwall, reached to 130 years; one
Beauchamp, to 106. And in the Parish where himself dwelt, he professed to have
remembered the Decease of 4, within 14 Weeks space, whose years added together,
made up the Sum of 340; the same Gentleman made this Epitaph upon one Brawne an
Irishman, but Cornish Beggar.

Here Brawne, the Quondam Beggar lies,
who counted by his Tale,
Some Sixscore Winters and above,
Such Virtue is in Ale.
Ale, was his Meat, his Drink, his Cloth,
Ale did his Death reprieve;
And could he still have drank his Ale,
he had been still Alive.
6. Democritus of Abdera, a most Studious and Learned Philosopher, who sent all
his Life in the Contemplation and Investigation of things, who lived in great
Solitude and Poverty, yet did arrive to 109 years. Fulgos. l. 8. c. 14. p. 1095.

7. Simeon the Son of Cleophas. called the Brother of our Lord, and Bishop of
Jerusalem, lived 120 years, though he was cut short by Martyrdom.

8. Aquila and Priscilla, first St. Paul's Hosts, and afterward, his fellow
Laborers, lived together in Wedlock, at least 100 years a piece. Verulam. p.
116.

9. Johannes Summer Matterus, (says Platerus,) my great Grandfather by the
Mother's side, of an ancient Family, after the Hundredth year of his Age,
Married a Wife of 30 years, by whom he had a Son; at whose sedding, which was
20 years after, the Old man was present, and lived 6 years after that; so that
he completed 126 years. Plateri. Obs. l. 1. p. 233.

10. Galen, the great Physician, who flourished about the Reign of Antoninus
the Emperor, is said to have lived 140 years; from the time of his 28th year,
he was never seized with any Sickness, save only a Fever for one day only.
Fulgos. l. 8. c. 14. p. 1096.

11. James Sands, near Brimingham in Seaffordshire, lived 140 years, and his
Wife 120. He outlived 5 Leases of 21 years a piece, made unto him after he was
Married. Fullers Engl. Worth. p. 47.

12. Sir Walter Rawleigh, knew the Old Countess of Desmond, who lived in the
year 1589, and many years since, who was Married in Edward IV's. time, and held
her Jointure from all the Earls of Desmond since them. The Lord Bacon casts up
her Age to be 140 at least; adding withal, that she recovered her Teeth (after
casting them) 3 several times. Rawleigh Hist. World. l. 1. c. 5. p. 166.
Fuller. p. 310

13. Garsius Aretinus, lived to 194 years in good state of Health, and deceased
without being seized with any apparent Disease, only perceiving this Strength
somewhat weakened. Thus writes Petranch of him, to whom Garsias was great
Grandfather by the Fathers side. Fulgos. l. 8. c. 14. p. 1096.

14. Thomas Parre, Son of John Parre, born at Alderbury, in the Parish of
Winninton in Shropshire, he was born in the Reign of King Edward IV. Anno 1483.
at 80 years, he married his first Wife Jane; and in the space of 32 years, had
but two Children by her, both of them short lived; the one lived but a Month,
the other but a few years, being Aged 120, he fell in Love with Katherine
Milton, and got her with Child. He lived to above 150 years; two Months before
his Death, he was brought up by thomas Earl of Arundel, to Westminster; he
slept away most of his time, and is thus Characterised by an Eye Witness of
him; From Head to Heel, his body had all over
A Quick set, Thick set, Natural Hairy Cover.


change of Air and Diet, are conceived to Accelerate his Death, which happened
November 15, Anno 1634, and was buried in the Abbey Church at Westminster.
Fullers Worthies. p. 11. Shropshire.

15. John of Times, was Armor-bearer to Charles the Great, by whom he was also
made Knight: being a Man of great Temperance, Sobriety, and Contentment of Mind
in his Condition of Life, lived unto the 9th year of the Emperor Conrade, and
died at the Age of 361 years, Anno 1128. (1146, says Fulgosus.) Bakers Chron.
p. 73.

16. Guido Bonatus, a Man of great Learning, says, he saw a Man whose name was
Richard, Anno 1223, who told him, that he was a Soldier under Charlemain, and
that he had now lived to the 400th year of his Age. Fulgos. l. 8. c. 14. p.
1098.

CHAP. XXXIII. Examples of a Vegete and Healthful Old Age.
I have often looked upon Old Age, as the very Dregs of Life, the Sediment of
our Natural Humour's a Complex of Infirmities; but the following Instances
would tempt one to love Temperance for Life's sake, and Life for it self; for no
doubt, but the Sweetness of Life consists much in the Healthful and Vegete
Temper of our Bodies, and a Virtuous course of Life, and due Abstinence
Conduces much thereto; when the Debauched Sensualist lies down under the
Burden of his Carelessness, and the Sins of his Youth, never able to retrieve
the Damages of his former Lusts.

1. Sir Walter Rawleigh, in his Discovery of Guiana, reports of the King of
Aromaia, being 110 years Old, came in a Morning on foot to him, from his House,
which was 14 English Miles, and returned on foot the same day. Hakew. Apolog.
l. 3. c. 1. p. 166.

2. Buchanan in his Scottish History, speaks of one Lawrence, who dwelling in
one of the Orcades, married a Wife after he was 100 years of Age and more; and
that when he was 140 years old, he doubted not to go a Fishing alone, in his
little Boat, though in a rough and Tempestuous Sea. Camor. Hor Subs. c. 2. cap.
68. p. 277.

3. Sigismemd Polcastrus, a Physician and Philosopher of Padua, Read there 50
years; in his Old Age, he buried 4 Sons in a short time; at 70 years of Age, he
married again, and by his second Wife, he had 3 Sons, the eldest of which
called Anronius, he saw dignified with a Degree in both Laws. Jerome, another
of his Sons, had his Cap set upon his Head, by his Aged Father, who Trembled
and Wept for Joy; not long after which, the Old Man died, Aged 94 years,
Schenck. p. 539.

4. Platerus, tells of Thomas Platerus His Father, upon the Death of his first
Wife, Anno 1572. and the 73 year of his Age, married a second time (within the
compass of 10 years) he had 6 Children by her, 2 Sons and 4 Daughters; the
youngest of his Daughters was born in the 81 year of his Age, two years before
he died, J Foelix was born, Anno 1536, and my Brother Thomas, 1574; the
distance between us being 38 years; and yet my Brother is all Gray, and seems
Elder then my self; possibly, because he was gotten when my Father was stricken
in years. Pl. Obs. p. 275.

5. M. Valerllus Corvinus, attained to the fulfilling of 100 years; betwixt
whose first and sixth Consulship, there was the distance of 47 years, yet was
he sufficient (in respect of the entireness of his bodily Strength,) not only
for the most important Matters of the Commonwealth, but also for the exactest
Culture of his Fields; a Memorable Example. Val. Max. l. 8. c. 13. p. 236.

6. Metellus, equalled the length of his Life, and in extreme Age was created
Pontiffe, for 22 years he had the ordering of the Ceremonies; in all which
time, his Tongue never faultred in Solemn Prayers, nor did his Hand tremble in
the Offering of the Sacrifices. Val. Max. ibid. p. 238.

7. Nicholaut Leonicenus, was in the 96 year of his Age, when Langius heard him
at Ferrara, where he had Taught more then 70 years; he used to say, that he
enjoyed a Green and Vegete Age, because he had delivered up his Youth chaste,
unto Man's Estate. Melch. Adam in Vit. Germ. Med. p. 141.

8. Massanissa was the King of Numidia for 60 years together, and excelled all
other Men, in respect of Strength, and of an admirable Old Age; that for no
Rein or Cold he would be induced to cover his Head; they say of him, that when
he was on Horseback, he would lead his Army for the most part, both a complete
day, and the whole Night also; nor would he in extreme Age omit any thing of
that, which he had accustomed to do when young; and after the 86th year of his
Age, he begat a Son; and whereas his Land was was waste and desert; he left it
fruitful by his continual Endeavors, in the Cultivation of it; he lived till
he was above 90 years of Age. Val. M. p. 236.

9. Cornarus the Venetian, was in his Youth of a Sickly body, began to eat and
drink, first by measure, to a certain weight, thereby to recover his Health;
this Cure turned by use into a Diet, that Diet into an extraordinary long Life,
even of 100 years and better, without any decay of his Senses, and with a
constant, enjoyment of Health Verulam's Hist. of Life and Death. p. 134.

10. Appius Claudius Coecus, was blind for the space of very many years; yet
notwithstanding, he was burdened with this mischance, he governed 4 Sons, and
five Daughters, very many Dependants upon him; yea, and the Commonwealth it
self, with abundance of Prudence and Magnanimity; when he had lived so long,
that he was even tired with living, caused himself to be carried to the Senate
for no other purpose, then to persuade them from making a Dishonorable Peace
with King Pyrrhus. Val Mar. l. 8. c. 13. p.c 236.

11. Gorgias Leontinus, the Master of Isocrates, when he was in the 107 year of
his Age, being asked, why he would tarry solong in this Life? because, says
he, I have nothing whereof I can accuse my Old Age Val. Max. l. 8. c. 13. p.
237.

12. Lemnius tells of one at Stockholm in Sweden, who at the Age of 100,
married a Wife of 30 years, and begat Children of her, this Man was of so fresh
and green Old Age, that he scarce seemed to have reached more then 50 years.
Came. Hor. Sub. Cent. 2. p. 277.

13. Isocrates, in the 94th year of his Age, put forth his Book, Entitled,
Panathenaicus; he lived 15 years after it, and in that extreme Age of his, he
was sufficient for any work he undertook, both in Strength, Judgment, and
Memory. Zuin. Theat. Vol. 2. l. 4. p. 337.

14. Agesilaus, King of Sparta, though he had attained to a very great Age, yet
was often seen to walk without Shoes on his Feet, or Coat on his back, in
Frost and Snow, and this for no other cause, then that being now an Old Man, he
might give those that were young, and Example of Patience and Tolerance. Ibid.

15. Asclepiades the Prusian, gave it out Publicly; that no Man should esteem
him as a Physician, if ever he should be Sick of any Disease whatsoever; and
ideed he credited his Art, for having lived to Old Age, without Alteration in
his Health, he at last fell down a pair of Stairs, and died of the fall. Ibid.

16. Mithridates King of Pontus, who for 40 years, managed a War against the
Romans, enjoyed a prosperous Health, to the last of his Life, used to Ride, to
throw Javelins, and on Horses disposed at several Stages, Rode 1000 Furlongs in
one day; and also could drive a Chariot, that was drawn with 16 Horses. Cel.
Rhod. Ant. lect. l. 29. c. 17. p. 1365.

17. Mr. Patrick Wian, Minister of Lesbury, Read the Divine Service, David's
Psalms, one Chapter out of the Old Testament, and one out of the New; without
the use of Spectacles; he had two New Teeth, his Sight much decayed, was
restored unto him, about the 110th year of his Age; Hair was restored to his
bald Scull, and he could Preach a Sermon without the help of Notes; he gave
this Accunt of himself, October 19. 1657.

18. A certain German, living in Italy, had at 60 years of Age recovered his
Teeth and black Hair, and had extended his Life to a great many years, with the
only use of black Helebore, White Wind and Roses. Bartholin. Hist. Anat. cent.
5. Hist. 28. p. 51.

19. At Tarenturn, there lived an Old Man, who at the Age of 100 years, was
grown young again; he had changed his Skin like unto a Snake, and had recovered
a New Being; withal, he was become so young and fresh, that hose who had seen
him before, could then scarce believe their own Eyes; and having continued
above 50 years in this Estate, he grew at length to be so Old, as he seemed to
be made of Barks of Trees. Hakewell's Apol. l. 3. c. 1. p. 167.

20. in Anno 1536. No^nio de Cugne, being Viceroy of the Indies, for the King
of Portugal, it was averred by good Proofs, and sufficient Testimony, that an
Indian brought unto him, was 340 years Old. he had grown young again 4 times,
changing his white Hair, and recovering his New Teeth; when the Viceroy did
see him, he then had the Hair of his Head and Beard black. This Man was born in
the Realm of Bengala, and did affirm, that he at times, 700 Wives, whereof some
were dead, and some were put away. The King of Portugal being advertised of
this wonder, did often enquire, and had Yearly News of him by the Fleet, which
came from thence. He lived about 370 years. Camerar. Hor. Subs. c. 2. cap. 68.
p. 278.

22. An Old Abbatess, being decrepit, suddenly became Young, her Monthly
Courses returned, her rugged and wrinkled Skin grew smooth, her hoary Hairs
grew black, and New Teeth in her Head, and Paps swelled after the manner of
Virgins. Donat. Hisi. Med. Mir. l. 6. c. 2. p. 300.

21. Mr. John Craig of Scorland, a great Divine, and excellent Preacher,
sincere, and inclining to no Faction; lived 88 years, tho he endured many
Toffings, Troubles, and Dangers in his Life time; after many Troubles for his
Religion, in his own Country, he went to France, and from thence to Rome;
where by the favor of Cardinal Pool, he was received among the Dominions of
Bononia, he was employed in all their Affairs throughout Italy, and was sent in
Commission to Chios, where he behaved himself so well, that at his return, he
was made Rector of their School, where having access to their Libraries, he met
with Calvin's Institutions, by which, and the Advice of a Reverend Old Man, he
was confirmed in the Opinion he had entertained, for which being accused of
Heresy, and sent to Rome, where after 9 Months Miserable Imprisonment, he was
condemned to be burnt the next Day. But the same Night Pope Paul the Fourth
died, upon the Noise whereof, the People in a Tumult broke open the Prisons, by
which means Mr. Craig had his Liberty: As he sought to escape, he met with one
of the Banditi, who remembering a Charity received from him, gave him Money to
bear his Charge to Bononia, trusting to find Friendship from his Acquaintance,
but fearing to be intrapt, fled from thence. And being in a wild Desert,
Pensive and without Money, a Dog with a Purse in his Teeth fawned upon him, and
gave it him: From thence he came to a Village, and meeting Travelers to
Vienna, he went with them; whilst at Vienna, professing to be a Dominican, he
was brought to preach before the Emperor Maximilian the Second, from whence
Pope Pius the Third sent for him, but the Emperor sent him away with Letters
of safe Conduct, so returning to Scotland, where he preached painfully many
Years, till spent with Age, he died in Peace, Anno 1600. Archbishop Spotswood
's Hist. Church of Scotland, p. 461.

22. The Reverend Dr. Annesley appeared of a hale and hardy Constitution of
Body, which was such, as to endure the coldest Weather without Hat, Gloves, or
Fire. For many Years he seldom drank any thing besides Water; His Sight so
strong, that to his Death he read the smallest Print without Spectacles; and in
a Life lengthened do his 77th Year, he was rarely Sick; His Natural Capacity
was good, and his Temper vigorous and warm, which his Grace overruled (mostly)
to undertake those most excessive Labors, and sustain the Difficulties, which,
without a Body and Mind so fashioned, had been impossible in so long a course
of Service. And this Vigor he so retained to his very Death, as if God would
give an Instance, that the Fervor of some Men's Souls in his Work were either
in dependent on the Body, or their Bodies (with Moses) were still repaired even
to old Age, when he designeth extraordinary Services by them. Dr. Annesley 's
Funeral Sermon preached by Mr. Daniel Williams.

CHAP. XXXIV. Persons reviving after a supposed Death.
I Expect this Title will be quarrelled at, both by Naturalists and Divines;
the former will object the Impossibility of a habit returning into the subject
after a perfect Privation; the latter will fetch an Argument from the Decree of
the Almighty, and allege the Determination of the Immortal Soul immediately
after a Dissolution and Separation to its Eternal State and Abode. To both
which I make only this short Answer, That I conceive, that in some of the Cases
hereafter mentioned, the Privation was not perfect, in others the Return was
not Natural.

1. Anno 1537, when the Plague raged at Colen, one Richmet Adolick, a Noble
Lady, died in Appearance, and, as the Fashion was then, had her Rings and
Jewels buried with her, of which the covetous Sexton having notice, came with a
Companion of his to dig her up; that being done, they opened the Coffin, and
going about to pull off her Rings, she rose up in her Shroud, at which the
Sacrilegious Villains being conscious of Guilt, and oppressed with Fear, fled,
and for haste left the Lanthorn and the Church Door open, so that the Lday
loosing her self, took up the Lanthorn and went home; her Husband hearing her
Voice, was as much terrified as the others had been, but by degrees lessening
his Fears, he received her with Joy, when he perceived she was a living Corpse,
and not a Ghost or Spectre; and she confessed to him, that she had all that
time been as one in a Sleep, till two Men came rudely and waked her, but when
she was made sensible that she had been buried, she started, and then praised
GOD that those Men's Evil Purposes had been the Means of her Safety; and being
thereupon taken great Care of, she recovered her Health, and lived to have
three Sons afterward, as appears by her Monument erected in Memory of so
strange a Deliverance, and standing now in the Entrance of the Apostle's Church
in Colen. The Ladies Dictionary, p. 491.

2. In the same City John Duns, called Scotus, falling into an Apoplexy, was
buried alive, but had not the good Fortune as the other to be timely relieved,
for before he could be taken up, he had beat his Brains against the
Gravestone. Ibid.

3. Anno 1661, (to the Knowledge of many Hundred about London) one Lawrence
Cawthorn a Butcher in St. Nicholas Shambles, who having provided all Things to
his Marriage, it is doubtful, whether too much Strong Water, or Opium given
him by his Landlady, who aimed at what Moneys he had got, and knew she should
not be the better for it if he married, cast him into a profound Sleep, so
sleeping all that Night, and all the next Day, she got some of her Confederates
to give out he was dead, so buried him; but the next Day being Sunday, as the
People passed to Church they heard a strange Groaning in the Ground, but for a
time could not tell what to make of it, growing louder, tho a kind of hollow
Sound, they informed the Churchwardens of it, who only flouted at it as a
Delusion of the Senses; but the next Day being better informed, and all
Circumstances considered, this new Grave was opened, and the Body found warm,
tho dead with the stifling Vapors and violent Beatings against the Sides of
the Coffin; upon News of which the barbarous old Woman fled, and we do not hear
she ever was found agains Ibid.

4. The Story of Anne Green hanged at Oxford, and returning to Life again, is
already related in the former part of this Book.

5. Anno 1658, Elizabeth, the Servant of one Mrs. Cope of Magdalen Parish in
Oxford, was indicted at the City Sessions for killing her Bastard-Child, and
putting it in the House of Office; of which being convicted, she was condemned
to die, and accordingly was hanged at Green-Ditch, the place appointed for the
Execution of the City-Malefactors, where she hung so long, that one of the
Bystanders scrupled not to say, If she were not dead, he would be hanged for
her: Being out down, put into a Coffin, and brought to the George Inn, Life was
found in her; and after breathing a Vein, being put to bed with another young
Wench by her, she came quickly to her self; but was the Night following
barbarously carried to Glocester-Green, and there hanged a second time. Dr.
Plot's Not. Hist. of Oxford, chapter 8. p. 119.

6. I have a Relation by me from Coventry well attested, concerning a young
Damosel who was given for dead by her Parents, laid forth, and Cakes baked for
her Funeral, and other Preparations made for the Solemnity; yet afterward
returned to Life again. But having misplaced the Paper, and not being able to
find it presently, I cannot be exact in Particulars. Mr. Richard Harris, who
lives there, and is employed commonly in dispersing and collecting Letters
Patents in several Counties of England, is by Marriage related to the Family.

7. I have mentioned another Example out of Dr. Marc Casauben, of a Person who
revived again before he was buried, on purpose to discover a Murder of a former
Wife.

8. Mrs. Anna Atherton being about 14 Years of Age, fell sick in November,
1669; whereupon several Physicians were called to her Assistance, who consulted
about her Distemper, and judged it to be something of an Ague, tho the Symptoms
thereof were somewhat different from those that were usual in that Distemper.

Her Disease proved too hard for their Skill and Medicines, and brought the
Patient to a thinness of Body, paleness of Countenance, and stupidness to any
thing but her Devotions. She was before of a full habit of Body, of a brisk and
lively Temper, and prone to all kind of Exercise befitting her Age.

Under this strong Alteration she continued till the beginning of February
ensuing, when by little and little she felt a sensible Decay of her whole Body,
which daily increasing, prevailed at length upon all the Organs of Life and
Motion, so that in appearance she lay void of either; whereupon she was
concluded to be really dead.

The Women who came to do their last Office to her Body, perceived more heat
and warmth in her than they thought to be usual in dead Bodies, upon which they
desisted a while; and because the Room was close, and a Fire had been always in
it, (thinking the usual Warmth might proceed from thence) they opened the
Casements to let in what Air they could, and put out the Fire, and then left
her sometime to her self.

But returning, they found the same warmth to continue; then they left her in
this manner one whole Day, yet could find no Alteration; whereupon they applied
a Looking-glass to her Mouth, but not the least Cloud appeared: They put live
Coals to her Feet, which discovered not the least sign of Life or Sense.

Notwithstanding her Mother was very timorous, which made her delay her Burial,
and kept her uncoffin'd till seven Days were expired; at the end of which time,
her Heat, which was before so languid and obscure that it could scarcely be
discerned, began more manifestly to discover it self.

Upon which, Rubbings and other artificial Helps were used, which proved so
effectual, that in a short time they found a trembling Vibration of the Pulse;
afterward she began to breathe, and so at last gradually recovered all her
Senses. The first Thing she spoke of was, that she desired to see her Mother,
who coming to her, she thus uttered her Mind.

O Mother! since I was absent from you, I have been in Heaven, and Angel went
before me to conduct me thither; I passed through three several Gates, and at
length I came to Heaven Gate, where I saw Things very Glorious and Unutterable,
as Saints, Angels, and the like in glorious Apparel, and heard unparalleled
Music, Divine Anthems and Hallelujahs.

I would fain have entered that glorious Place, but the Angel that went before
me withstood me, yet I thought my self half in; but he told me, I could not be
admitted now, but I must go bacik and take leave of my Friends, and after some
short time I should be admitted.

So he brought me hither again, and is now standing at the Bed's-feet; Mother!
you must needs see him, he is all in White. Her Mother told her, It was but a
Dream or Fancy, and that she knew not what she said. Whereupon she answered
with a great deal of Vehemence, that it was as true as that she was there at
present. She took notice also of several Persons in the Room by their Names, to
show she did not Dream, but spoke with Understanding.

But for the greater Confirmation, she told them of three or four Persons that
were dead since she was deprived of her Senses, and named each Person; (one of
them was dead, and they knew not of it before they sent to enquire:) She said,
she saw them passing by her, while she stood at the Gate.

One whom she named was reputed a vicious Person, came as far as the Gate, but
was sent back again another way. All the Persons she named, died in the time
she lay in this Trance.

She lived about two Years after this, enjoying a perfect Health, and then died
in great Assurance of her Salvation; speaking comfortable Words, and giving
wholesome Instructions to all who came to Visit her.

It is worthy Observation, That during the whole time of her first Sickness,
which was about a quarter of a Year, she neither eat nor drank any thing
besides the Juice of an Orange, and the Yolk of an Egg. Attested by her
Brother, Dr. Atherton, Physician of Caermarthen,

9. Mrs. Lydiah Dunton (Wife to Mr. John Dunton, then Rector of Graffham in
Huntingdonshire,) was laid out for dead several Days, yet came to Life again,
to the great Admitation of all that saw her in that Condition. This Passage was
related by her Husband to a Friend of mine.

CHAP. XXXV. Women Excellent in the Arts.
WHen Amesia stood forth to plead her own Cause in the Senate, the Romans sent
to the Oracle, to enquire what it protended to the State; as if Females were no
Relation to the Muses, or Minerva, or capable of those Improvements in
Literature, and the Sciences, as Men are. Whether they are or no, I desire my
Reader not to judge, till he has first perused the few. Examples which follow.

1. Gilberta Anglica, born in Mentz in Germany, where she was beloved of a
young Scholar, for whose sake, lest the Love should come to the Ears of her
Parents, all Modesty set aside, she put her self into a young Man's Habit; fled
from her Father's House, and came into England with her Paramour, where she
gave her self to Study. At length the young Man dying, (finding her self entered
into some Knowledge, and desirous of more.) she continued her Habit and Study,
as well in the Scriptures, as in Humane Learning. At length coming to Rome, she
read publicly in the Schools, where she had a frequent Auditory; and besides
her singular Wisdom, being much admired for her Sanctity, and Austerity of
Life, she was, after the Death of Leo the Fifth, elected and confirmed in the
Papal Dignity, and is commonly called by the Name of Pope Joan. Platin.

2. Constantia, the Wife of Alexander Sforza, had so improved her self in
Learning by her indefatigable Industry, that upon the sudden, without any
Premeditation, she was able sufficiently to discourse upon any Subject. either
of Divinity or Philosophy; besides, she was well seen in the Works of Hierom,
Ambrose, Gregory, Lactantius, and Cicero. Heymond.

3. ^osuida was born in Germany, and a Saxon by Nation; she lived under
Lotharius the First in the Diocese of Hildesheim: She was Eloquent in the Greek
and Latin Tongues, and practiced in all good Arts. She composed many Books, not
without great Commendations from the Readers; one especially to her
Fellow-Nuns, exhorting them to Chastity, Virtue, and Divine Worship. She
published six Comedies, besides a Noble Poem in Hexameter Verse, of the Books
and Noble Acts done by the other Caesar's. She wrote the Lives of Holy Men but
chiefly a Divine Work of the Pious and Chaste Life of the Blessed Virgin.
Fulgos. l. 8. c. 3.

4. The Lady Jane Gray, Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, a Lady of incomparable
Peity, and, for her Years, of incomparable Learning; for being not past 17
Years of Age, she understood perfectly the Greek and Latin Tongues, and was so
ready in Points of Divinity, as if she knew them by Inspiration, rather than by
Instruction, Baker's Chron.

When her Master came to take his Leave of her, finding her busy in reading of
a Greek Poet; he asked her, How she could contain her self at such Studies,
when her Father, with other Persons of Quality and Ladies, were following their
Game and Pleasures in the Park?: Sir, (said she) they do not know what true
Pleasure means: I find more Satisfaction and Delight in one Page of this Book,
than they in all their Sports. During her Imprisonment, the writ upon the Walls
these Verses.

Non aliena Putes, homini quae obtingere possunt;
Sors hodlerna mihi, cras erit illa tibi.
In English thus: Think nothing strange, chance happens unto all;
My Lot's to Day, to morrow thine may fall.


And again: Deo juvante, nil nocet livor malus,
Et non juvante, nil juvat Labor grav^:
Post tenebras spero lucem.


In English thus: If God protect, no Malice can offend;
Without his Help there is nothing can descend.


This Distich was made upon her: Miraris Janam Graio sermon locutam?
Quo primum nata est tempore Graia fuit. Dr. Fell.


5. Concerning Queen Elizabeth, we have spoke already in the Chapter of
Rath-rip: Wits: I shall add no more here, save only, that when Mr. Doddington
of Trinity-College, and Greek Professor at Cambridge, had entertained her with
a Greek Oration, and offered (in Latin afterward) to speak it in Latin, if she
pleased; she made answer, Ego intelligo, non op^^ esr. (...).

6. Mrs. Walker of Geneva was a very extraordinary Person; her Father is of
Shaff-house; she lost her Sight when she was but a Year old, by being too near
a Stove that was very hot. There rests in the upper part of the Eye so much
Sight, that she distinguishes Day from Night; and when any Person stands
between her and the Light, she will distinguish by the Head and its Dress a Man
from a Woman; but when she turns down her Eyes, she sees nothing. She has a
vast Memory; besides the French, that is her natural Language, she speaks both
High Dutch, Italian, and Latin. She has all the Psalms by Heart, in French,
and many of them in Dutch and Italian. She understands the Old Philosophy well,
and is now studying the New. She has studied the Body of Divinity well, and
has the Text of the Scriptures very ready; on all which matters I had long
Conversation with her: She not only Sings well, but she plays rarely on the
Organ; and I was told, she played on the Violin, but her Violin was out of
order. But that which is most of all, is, she writes legibly. In order to her
Learning to write, her Father, who is a worthy Man, and has such tenderness
for her, that he furnishes her with Masters of all sorts; Ordered Letters to
be Carved in Wood, and she, by feeling the Letters, formed such an Idea of
them, that she writes with a Crayon so distinctly, that her Writing can be well
Read, of which I have several Essays I saw her write; she does it more nimbly
than can be imagined: She has a Machine that holds the Paper, and keeps her
always in Line. But that which is above all the rest, she is a Person of
extraordinary Devotion, great Resignation to the Will of God, and a profound
Humility. Dr. Burnet's Letters, p. 121.

7. The Lady, Donna Olivia Sabuco, being abundantly furnished with more of the
Masculine Wit and Understanding, courageously employed both her Brains and Mind
in the Investigation of the Natural things; and advancing in her Studies, she
set her Wits upon things of great use; and to the end, Spain, and the whole
World might receive some benefit thereby, she wonderfully gave beginning to a
new and most ingenious way of Curing. And Writing a Letter to Philip II. she
thus displays her Wit: It is as plain as the Light of the Sun, That the Ancient
Physic was in an Error, according as it is Read and Practiced in its
principal Fundamentals, for that the Ancient Philosophers and Physicians
neither understood nor reached the true Nature upon which Physic is founded,
and from whence it draws its Original; of which, not only the understanding
Christian Physicians may be Judges, but also those that have any prospect into
other Faculties, being Persons of Wit and Judgment. And a little after; He that
cannot comprehend or understand it, let him leave it to others that are to
come, or let him believe Experience, and not the Ancient Physic. Therefore my
Petition is just, that these my Followers may be approved for one year, since
they have tried the Rules of Galen and Hippoorates for these 2000 Years, and
have found the effect so inconsiderable, and the ends so uncertain, as it is to
be seen every day, and was lately observed in the past Epidemic Catarrhs,
Spotted Fevers, Smallpox, and Pestilences, etc. in the Cure of which, that
sort of Physic is so ineffectual, etc. Leonardo di Capoa's Vncertainy of the
Art of Physic, p. 97.

8. A Woman of Kenly in Shropshire, known generally by the Name of Nurse
Corfield, was so famed about twenty years ago for her Skill in Surgery and
Physic, that it gave occasion for a great Confluence of Persons and Patients
to the Town where she lived: Many People, not only of the meaner sort, but of
the Gentry likewise, for thirty or forty miles distance made their application
to her; insomuch, that the Inns were filled with Guests, and the Town turned
into a Hospital; and her Fame exceeded that of any other Physicians in those
parts that I know of; yet there were many eminently skillful and learned in
that Profession. I know not whether she may not be yet living in those parts.

9. I say nothing of those famous Prophetesses, Mary the Sister of Moses,
Deborah, Anna, Elizabeth, the four Daughters of Philip, St. Bridget,
Hildegardis, Cassandra, the Sybils, etc. Nor of those famous She-Philosophers,
Theano the Wife of Pythagoras, and his Daughter Dama, skillful in the
Exposition of her Fathers dark Sentences; Aspasia and Diotima, the Scholars of
Socrates; Mantinca, and Philesia-Axiochia, both Scholars of Plato: Nor of
Gemina and Amphiclea, extolled by Plotinus; Themistis by Lactantius. The Church
of Rome rejoices in her Catherine, which Maid alone did far excel all the
Learning of Wife Men in that Age. Zenobia the Queen, and Scholar of Longinus
the Philosopher, for her abundant and excellent skill in Literature obtained
the Name of Ephinissa, whose Holy Works Nicomachus has turned into the Greek
Tongue. In Oratory and Poetry, Armesia, surnamed Androgenia, was famed; so were
Sappho, Hortensio, Lucria, Valeria, Capiola, Corinna, Cornificia Romana, and
Erimna Telia, which were accounted Epigrammatists. And in Salust, Sempronia,
and Calphurnia, among the Lawyers, etc. Nor do I stay to insist upon that late
learned Countess of our own Nation, who has left a Specimen of her Learning
and Ingenuity behind her, in a whole Volume of Poems and Comedies: Nor of that
other famous Countess, (of Warwick) whose Ingenious. Meditations upon sundry
subjects, composed in Solitude, for the the help of her own Devotion, have been
since Printed: Nor the Lady Morton's Devotions, published in a Volume by
themselves: Nor Mrs. Josceline's Mother's Blessing: Nor Mrs. Vrsula Quarles,
who has in short, but handsomely penned her Husband's Life. Nor would it be
proper to say much of one Dorothy Lillingstone, who has left behind her a
short account of her own wicked Life and Penitential Death, (being Executed,
April 7, 1679. at Kennington for Murdering her Bastard Child) and published at
earnest Request.

CHAP. XXXVI. Wonderful Distempers.
THat wild computation of the Poet, Mill modi mortis, etc. does not reach the
number of Diseases, though it seems to be a great Hyperbole. Common Diseases are
many, and some of them strange enough; but there are others which admit at
their first appearance of no Diagnosis; the Symptoms are so new; or strange; or
complicated, that they put all the Art of Physic to a stand, and the
Physicians to ashonishment, and the Patients to surprising fears and
apprehensions of Danger. If Men had once got the knowledge of all Distempers,
they would be in hopes of baffling in time all the menaces of Mortality.

1. Anno. 1577. July the 5th and 6th, an Assizes was held at Oxford, where was
Condemned one Rowland Jenkins, Bookbinder of Oxford, for Seditious Words; who
being there Arraigned, many came to bear his Cause tried, and as soon as
Judgment proceeded against him there arose among the People such a Damp or
Mist, that so filled their Heads, that the greatest part of them seemed to be
smothered. The Jurors died; and presently the Lord Baron Sir Roger Bell, Mr.
Wrinemen. Sir William Babington a Justice of the County; Mr. Sergeant, Barbam
Justice of the Assize, Mr. Dolley High-Shcriff, Mr. Heart Undersheriff, with
diverse others, sickned there. Three of the Persons died at Oxford, and in
several other places about 200, many of them. Bleeding to death. Batman's Doom,
p. 405.

2. Schenckius tells us of several Persons, who through sudden fear have turned
perfectly Gray. does Vives, Hildanus, and many other Physicians.

3. One Jacob Heitzman contracted a Hoariness of his Beard from his Mothers
Womb, she being affrighted by occasion of a Neighbors House being on Fire.
Schenck Obs. Med. l. 1. p. 3.

4. We have known two Brothers bald by Nature, the one a Toll-gatherer, the
other a Husbandman, dwelling in Vngnrscheim. Johan. Stadlerus de Obs.

5. We have already spoken of a Distemper that began in Poland, and afterward
spread it, self in Germany and other parts, wherein the Hairs of the Head were
turned into a kind of Snakes and living Vermin.

6. Haly Rhod^han saw one that was Born with a Beard and Hair. Com. ad Tex.
177. Tech. Galeni, Wolfius observed an Infant, with as much Hair on his Breast
as one of 30 years of Age. Wolf. Lect. Memorab. Tom. 2. p. 540. And another
Bristled like a Swine.

7. Many Women have been seen with great Beards: Albertus Duke of Bavaria kept
one in his House; and I my self, when a young man, saw one at Oxford, that was
carried about for a show.

8. Tincelius tells us of an Infant afflicted with a Hydrocephalon, or a
Watrish Tumor of the Head, insomuch, that when 14 days old, the circumsluous
Flesh had quite covered his Eyes. Fincel. l. de Miraculis.

9. Albucacis tells of another whose Head was grown so big, that the Boy,
neither standing nor sitting, could bear it upon his Shoulders, so that in few
days he died. Albuc. l. 2. c. 1. Chirurg.

10. Vesalius tells of a Girl, of two years of Age at Ausburg, our of whose
Head was taken almost nine pounds of Water. Vesal. l. 1. c. 5. de hum. corp.
fabrica.

11. Many have been Born with Horns upon their Head, which I pass over as not
very pertinent in this place.

12. Johan. Baptista Modoctiensix used to be seized with a Pain of his Head
every morning at Sunrising, which continued increasing till midday, and then
abated by degrees. Carl. l. 8. c. 44. de Varietat. Gesner and Wolfius report a
Story of another of the like Nature: With some the like Pain has increased so,
that by Noon the Persons have been Mad.

13. A certain Hungarian Merchant, who had been troubled many years with a
heavy Pain in the forepart of his Head; and at length, with a strong blowing of
his Nose, drew out a Stone as big as a Bean. and so hard, that no Knife could
cut it, Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 1. p. 49.

14. In the Hungarian Fever, called Theriodes, it has been observed often that
Worms have crept out of the Brains of those Persons who have died. Corad. c.
10. Febr. Miscellan Hungar. Thercod.

15. A certain rich Nobleman, aged 22, who died of an Epidemical Distemper,
Anno 1571. in the Town of Albourg St. Sepulcher, in the Marches of Ancona;
being opened by the Physicians, whereof the famous Nicholas St. Michael was
one, and Schenckius himself another, there was found in his Brain, a red Worm,
as long as ones Finger, with a sharp mouth, a long black and hairy Neck,
rolling it self diverse ways, touching the very Basis of his Head, Schenck. Obs.
Med. l. 1. p. 50.

16. One of Galen's School-fellows was taken at his Study with a Catochus or
Catalepsis, lying like a Log of Wood, stiff and unflexible, looking upon those
that came near him with open Eyes, not so much as winking, being neither able
to speak or move any part, yet hearing and remembering some things that were
spoken. Galen, Comment. 2. in 1. pro Rhet. Hipp. c. 56.

17. Fernclius tells us of one who was suddenly struck with this Distemper at
his Studies, so stiff, that keeping his Seat, and holding his Pen in his Hand,
with his Eyes cast down upon his Book, he seemed still intent upon his Study,
till being called and pulled he was found to want all Sense and Motion. Fernel.
l. 5. c. 2. Patholog.

18. Jacotius speaks of another that he saw, an old man, very thin and
juiceless, sitting at Table with open Eyes, and erect Body, and his Hand
reaching to the Dish, as if you had seen a dead man feeding, but so stiff that
I could scarce move his Neck, says he. Jacotius Comment. ad Aplor. 7. l. 2.
Coaz. Hipp.

19. I saw, says my Author, a certain Epileptical Man, who first of all was
whitled about several times as it were in a Circle, and then fell into his
Fits. O^thaeus l. Obs. preper.

20. A certain man, aged 30. from his Childhood was wont, when he had gone 2 or
3 paces, to turn himself about as it were in a Circle, and he could not forbear
doing so continually from the time that he heard the Bell ring first in the
morning, till he heard the Bell ring the second time at night, in that time
wholly al^^aining from all Meat and Drink: At last, he was seized with
Epileptical Fits, in a most violent manner; from which Vertiginous Motion, and
the other direct Fit of the Falling Sickness, he was after some time delivered.
Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 1. p. 103. ex Moccio.

21. A Schoolmaster's son of Drogheda, not very far from Dublin, as often as
Epileptical Fits assailed him, was so hurried with a direct motion, that he
went strait forward till he met with some insuperable Obstacle that stopped him;
otherwise, neither Fire, nor Water, nor the steepest Precipice would hinder his
course. Arnoldi Boot, c. 6.

22. A certain Nun of St. Vincents of Mantua, by Name Monica Grignana, for
several years was afflicted with these Convulsive Motions; She was forced to
lie in Bed, sitting day and night with her Head, Neck, and Arms tossed about
forward and backward, and to move them continually as she was Eating and
Drinking; and if any stander by endeavored to hold them still, she fell into a
Swoon. Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 1. p. 120.

23. Platerus speaks of some, particularly an Abbor, who without any hurt of
his Mind, was forced involuntarily to Laugh and toss himself about even to the
utter spending of his strength. Plater. de Observe. propr. Which puts me in mind
of a Story related by Henry Stephens in his World of Wonders, of a Man, who
being at church, and seeing a Woman fall down off her Seat while she was
sleeping before him, fell into so great a Fit of Laughter, that he continued 3
days and 3 nights without giving over.

24. The Dance of St. Vitas is very wonderful, and hardly credible, which was a
certain species of Madness raging a long time especially in Germany, wherewith
Persons of all Conditions, but mostly the Commonalty, were seized: Shoomakers,
Tailors, and Country-fellows, throwing aside their Shoes, their Garments, and
their Ploughs, being seized with a horrid fury, and meeting together in certain
places, without any lying down, would carry on their Dances so long till their
very Breach failed them, unless they were restrained by force; for oftentimes
they proceeded to such a degree of fury, if there were not care taken, that
they offered violence to themselves: Sometimes they would Dance upon high
Precipices of Rocks till they threw themselves down and brake their Necks; and
sometimes upon the Banks of the Rhine, and other Rivers into which they would
precipitate and drown themselves: They would run hooting about, and bawling and
dancing, with geminated Clamours, truculent Aspect, and foaming Mouths, that
their Friends were fain to lay high Forms and Seats in their way on purpose for
them to leap over. Women with Child did not escape this fury, but ran about up
and down in the Dance without any inconvenience to their Burden. The
Magistrates were fain to appoint Musicians and Drumers, and the stoutest
Fellows they could get, to lead and assist them in their Dances, out of the
public Treasury, till their furious Fits expired. They betook themselves by
Prayer to St. Vitus, or John Baptist, in hopes of recovering their Health. See
more of this in Schenck Obs. Med. l. 1. p. 144. also in Camerar. Syllog.
Memorah. Cent. 11. p. 84. Bodin. l. 5. de Repub. cap. 1. etc.

25. Schenckius tells of a Nobleman's Son, who playing with a couple of
Cherry-Stones, to show some Tricks, put one of them into his Ear to make a show
^ow speedily he could convey it from the one Ear to the other, but put it so
far in, that it could not be got out again, no not by the help of Physicians;
till at last, by the help of Nature, the Stone began to germinate with the
warmth and moisture of the Ear, and being cleft in two parts, it was by a small
pair of Pinchers got out. Schenck. Ibid. p. 178.

26. Donatus tells the like Story of one Bonardus, who had got a Karobe Seed in
his Ear, and at last, by the help of an Aposthume which it caused in the place,
the Seed sprouted forth, and so was drawn out. Donat. Flist. Mirab. l. 2. c. 12.

27. A certain Nobleman of Venice, aged 46. whose smelling and spitting was
hindered, being dead, had his Brain Diffected, and therein was found a Stone
near the Basis; his Bowels being opened, his Liver was found hard and stony,
and the Blood contained in it as black as Ink. Ibid.

28. Physicians tell us of some Prodigious Haemorrhagies, wherein sometimes 18,
sometimes 20. and sometimes 40 pounds of Blood has flowed forth.

29. Hollerius tells of a Girl, who on the 9th of April, Anno 1553, at St.
James's-Gate, voided a large white Worm, thick, and longer than a Span, at her
Nostrils, without any cough or Vomiting going before. And Trincavel tells of a
Noble Venetian, who in a Fever voided at his Nose, a Worm almost four Fingers
long. Ibid.

30. Scaliger tells us of a Man whose Tongue was so big, that he durst nor
declare in particular how large it was for fear he should be suspected of a
Lie. Scal. Exercitat. 199. c. 2. Many other of portentous Tumors in this part
we have from other Physicians.

31. Lusitanus relates, how one Jacob Offlood had great Hairs growing on his
Tongue; and he guessed that he had them in his Heart too. Stones are often
found to breed under the Tongue, and so are Worms too, and sometimes Warts.

32. I saw a man, whose Gums, by daily vomiting of an acid Humor, grew so big
that they covered all his Teeth. Cardan. l. 12. de Subtle.

33. A Periodical Flux of Blood out of the Gums have been sometimes observed by
Physicians, particularly in the late famous Archbistop Usher, who had such a
Flux twice or thrice a year, which in his younger years was so great, that it
put him sometimes in danger of Life, but afterward more sparing and by drops,
yet without any intermission day or night, for one Natural Day, sometimes two
or more together, Arnold. Bo^^. c. 7.

34. Some have been Born with Teeth; some have had 26 in number, others 28,
others 32; in some says Columbus, there is a double Row, yet in my Son Ph^hus
there are 3 Rows. Columb. Anatom. Some have had only one Bone instead of Teeth,
others have had Teeth breed in the Pallat of their Mouths, as both Alexander de
Benedictus, Eustachius, etc. do testify.

35. Columbus found Bones in the Lungs of one Francis Capellus, l. 15. Anat.
Some by Coughing have Spit up Gravel. Gabriel Falopius found in the Lungs of a
young man that he Dissected at Padua, Anno 1565. 4 Stones, each of them as big
as a large Bean, etc. Physicians mention Flies, Worms, and other little
Animals, as generated in the Lungs, the rough Artery, and the Region of the
Vital Instruments.

36. Nicolaus de Podio had an Asthma every Friday. Nicol. Sermon. 4. Tract. 2. c.
25.

37. One Daniel Bonricius, on the 8th of January 1559. spit Blood mixed with
Phlegm; the next day a Vein being opened, he continued to Spit Bloody, his
difficulty of Breathing increased, so that he continued Waking some Nights
together; Blood perpetually issued forth out of his Nostrils, (yet without any
Cough) in great plenty: In a Twelvemonth, besides Blood, he Spit out a great
deal of Phlegm, black, and not deep, and yet without any mixture of Blood: The
same day a light Cough seized him, and a greater difficulty of Breathing, and
his Spittle was more bloody: Not long after he grew very cold, sweat, breathed
hard, and his Voice was intercepted: Upon taking of the Antidote of Diamose, he
grew warm again, slopt, and breathed more easily, and promised recovery; the
next night, his watching, difficulty of breathing, phlegmatic, black, and
bloody Spittle, returned in great plenty, and so continued till he died.
Cardanus.

38. A young Gentleman of Arles, Caesar sa Sata, being wounded in his Back and
Sides by a clownish Servant of the Family, after two days died; his Body being
opened upon the command of his Parents, and the Magistrate, there was so great
plenty of Phlegm found in his Breast, as amounted to 20 Sextarii, I know not
whether he means the Greek of the Roman Measure, Quarts of Pints. Valeriola l.
4. Obs. 7. Nicolaus tells us, That he saw a Woman distempered with an Empyema,
that Spit 8 pounds every day, and continued so for 6 days together. Jacobus
Comm. 1. ad Aph. 5. Sect. 2. l. 6. Coact. Hipp.

39. Campejus saw at Lunevil, a little Town of Lotharingia, two young men
begotten by the same Father; so extenuated and dried with a Consumption, that
the very Skin being chapt, represented the Bones naked, and exposed them to
sight; the Skin was married to the Bones with so close a conjunction, that
their Bodies seemed all Boney, and tied together only with Nerves; truly says
he, you would have taken them for the very Images of Death: The Younger of them
walked well enough, for he seemed not much unlike an Ape; yet in walking, the
Bones cracket together, very like the dry shells of Nuts. Their Father
continually attended the Furnace. Symph. Campej. l. 4. c. 13. c Narat. Histor.
Galeni.

40. Worms have been found sometimes breed in the Heart, which has caused
Palpitation, and the Lunatic Passion, and consquently Death.

41. Arculanus relates, that he saw a sharp Bone that stuck in the Throat of
one, at two months end come out through the Skin. Forest. l. 15. etc.

42. A certain Student in the College of Preleum, who had swallowed down a
branch of Grass, voided it afterward whole through the intercostal space.
Parcus. l. 24. c. 19.

43. A certain Shepherd being forced to swallow a Knife with a Horn handle,
half a Foot long, after a fortnights space, and much pain upon an Aposthume
breaking out of his Groins, voided it there. Idem. Dr. Brown tells us, That
either this Knife, or another, is to be seen in the Emperor of Germany's
Library; I say this or another, for there is the like Story of a Boy in
Prussia, that swallowed his Knife, and had it taken out again by a Surgeon
Several Persons have swallowed Pins, most of which they have voided again by
Urine. One Mrs. Sk^ymsher of Aqualat in Shropshire, near Newport, as it was
related to my Lord Paget, in my hearing, after she had swallowed down a Pin,
took it out of her Arm many years.

44. Sudor Anglicus, or the Sweating-sickness, was a Pestilent kind of Fever,
which either killed or delivered the Patient in a day or two, mostly peculiar
to England, but by its Contagion communicating it self sometimes to Holland; it
ended commonly in Sweating, and there was hopes of Recovery by no other
Medicines but Sudorificks. This arose first of all, Anno 1486. in the Summer
time, and in one day, with an excessive Flux of Sweat, would carry away many
thousands: They that were seized with it would be Sowed presently up in the
Sheets and Blankets, and earnestly entreat their Friends not to leave them till
their 24 hours were out; which Friends perhaps being seized presently after,
and thrust into the same Bed to them where being mightly covered with heaps of
Clothes, they cried out wretchedly, earnestly imploring the Favor of God and
Man. Gemma. Cosmo. l. 1. c. 8.

45. Lues Pannoniae, or the Hungarian Fever, (Theriodes) vulgarly the worm of
the Brain, began in the Expedition of the Emperor Maximilian II. against
Soliman the Turkish Emperor, Anno 1566. in Hungary, and carried away a vast
number of People, insomuch that you might see dead Bodies lie in the Streets of
Vienna, whither the Army hastened daily. First they were taken with a light
rigor and coldness; within less than an hour with extreme heat and pain of the
Head and Breast, and unsatiable Thirst, so that you might see them out of their
Tents, at Pitchers and Bowls of cold Water, drinking till they had Breathed
their last. The 2d, or at most the 3d day, they grew Delirious; sometimes there
was attending a Disentary or Flux of the Liver, sometimes the Colic and pain
of their sides; Matter thrown out by Stool, or out of the Head into either Ear
causing Deafness, gave hopes of Recovery. They all had spots like Flea-bitings
upon their Body, especially their Breast and Back, Arms and Shoulders. Jordanus
de Pestis Phaenomini. c. 19. Tract. 1.

46. Febris Stigmatica, otherwise called Lenticula, or Punticula, appeared
first, Anno 1505. and 1528. in Italy, especially Cyprus, and the Neighboring
Islands, it was contagious upon contact; at first it was easy and pleasant
enough, but afterward was attended with uneasiness and weariness of Body,
heaviness of the Head, or dullness of the Senses, Delirium, redness of Eyes,
Talkativeness, red Spots about the seventh day in the Arms, Back, and Breast,
little or no Thirst, etc. few Women were taken with this Fever, very sew old
Men, almost no Jews, etc. Tracaster. l. 2, 3. c. 6, 7. de Contag. Morb.

47. Morbus Gallicus, was brought first by the Spaniards out of the Indies, and
showed it self first in the Camp of Charles V. at Naples; it spared none of
what degree so ever, Kings, Lords, or Ladies, infected the Head, Eyes, Nose,
Pallat of the Mouch, Skin, Flesh, Bones, Ligaments, and inward parts of the
Body; produced a lumpish heaviness in the Members, wandering Pains, faint
Complexions, Sadness, Tumors, Pustules, Ulcers, Buboes, etc. Barrow's method
of Physic, l. 6. c. 1, 2, 3.

48. Brunnae Lues, of Lues Nova Moraviae, not very mortal, yet of an unusual
form, and strange Symptoms, and very Contagious; it began about Anno 1577. upon
occasion of going into the Baths near Brunna: The hurt did not appear until a
formight or a month after. Afterward, these Symptoms followed, sluggishness,
and torture of Body, a dejected Mind, a sad Countenance, pale Face, a brown
Circle about the Eyes, a frowning Forehead, an extraordinary heat in such
places where they had used Cupping glasses in the day, it produced Ulcers, and
much Corruption, sometimes a kind of Scab all over the Body like the Smallpox,
Callouses in the Head, which broke and run, pricking Pains all over the Body,
no rest, perpetual crying out, roaring, tears, avoiding all Conversation and
sight of Men, etc. Jordanus de Lue Nova Moraviae.

CHAP. XXXVII. Strange Birds.
I Do not intend to present my Reader here with a Complete Aviary, or to tell
him only what he knows already; though perhaps the Book may fall into the hands
of some, who know more than I can tell them; but only to speak of some of those
Inhabitants of the Airy Region, these Winged People of the Sky, that common
Eyes are least acquainted with, and which we do not see every day, whereof
there is so great a variety, and wherein there is such a pleasant sight of the
Creator's Infinite Wisdom and Workmanship, as is enough to allure our Eyes to a
further Prospect and Disquisition of what there is above these.

1. The Eagle is justly esteemed King of Birds: The right Foot is reported
greater than the left; the Brain is so hot, that mingled with Hemlock Juice,
and drank in Powder, it will make one Mad. It drinks not, because the Blood of
what it Preys upon, suffices it: But in old Age, when the Beak is crooked with
dryness, it preserves it self by drinking. Aelian. They have been seen a Cubit
in largeness, and some young ones, whose Wings stretched out would reach 7
Else* the Claws were bigger than a great Man's Fingers, and the Thighs greater
than a Lions. When the young ones are hatched, she holds them in her Talons
against the Sun; and having proved them to be Legitimate, she takes them on her
Wings and carries them; the strongest of them, when she has them aloft, she
lets them fall, and then she flies and meets them, and takes them up again.
When they are old enough, she drives them out of her Nest and Quarter. The
Female is so salacious, that being trod 30 times in a day, if the Male come to
her again she will run to him. She is so quick-sighted, that flying over the
Sea, out of man's view, she will discern the smallest Fish; and smells
Carcasses 500 miles distant. When she is become extreme hot. she plunges into
the Water, then she flies to her Nest, grows fevorish, casts her Feathers, is
fed by her young ones, and renews her self, but sooner if she can find Serpents
to feed on. Jonston. Hist. Not. p. 168.

2. The Hawk is of diverse Magnitudes according to its Sex and Country, the
Females are the greater, it casts its Feathers four times; it is so venerious,
that the Female will return 30 times a day. She flies from Carrion. In the Air
she will turn on her Back, and stretch out her Tail, Back, and Wings, and lies
upon them. She seems to lament the Death of a Man, and will cast Earth on his
Eyes: The Thigh Bone of it pat toward Gold; does draw it to it with Delight;
Pigeous so soon as they hear its noise, fly away; Hens Eggs; if they sit, will
be spoiled; Small Birds are so frighted at the sight of her, that you may take
them off the Hedge with your hands. Ibid.

3. The Manucodiatae, or Birds of Paradise, are said by Aldrovandus, to be of
five Kinds; Their Bodies not being much bigger than a Swallow, and their Heads
like to them, They are said to live always in the Air, and to rest firm without
any but a Tonick Motion, for they want Feet and never come to the Ground, but
when they are Dead. This is a Fable; for they could hardly sleep there, when
their Senses are bound up; for all their exercise is in a Tonick Motion. It is
likely, that there is a hole in their Back in the Muscles, where the Female
that has a hollow Belly lays her Eggs. Aldrovandus, who saw these
Manucodiatae, never found any such thing. The Mahumetans are persuaded, that
they came from Pardise, as tokens of the delights of that place. Johnston's
Hist. of Not. Class. 6. p. 184. Our later Writers say, that they have found
these Birds on the Ground dead, and their Legs eaten off with some Vermin,
which is supposed to give occasion to the aforesaid fabulous Tradition.

4. The Ostrich has a small Head like a Goose, not covered with Feathers, with
cloven Feet, he is too big to fly, yet sometimes he runs swiftly, the Wind
entering under his Wings, and extending them like sails; he will outrun a Man
on Horseback, he will swallow pieces of Iron; he makes a Nest of Sand that is
low and hollow, and fenceth it against the Rain: She lays above 80 Eggs, yet
the Young ones are not hatched all at one time; the Eggs are as big as a Young
Child's Head, weighing about 15 pounds, and are extreme hard; the Young are bred
of them, by heat of the Sun; she is wonderful simple; when she hides her Neck
in a Bush, she thinks she is all hid. Ibid. Class. 6. cap. 32.191.

5. The Heron, if they dung upon a Hawke, they burn and corrupt its Feathers;
they swallow Shellfish, shells and all; but when they think their heat has
opened them, they cast them up again, and eat the Fish. They lie in wait to
catch Fish cunningly, for they stand so against the Sunbeams, that their
shadow may not be seen to drive them away; some say, they have such a force,
that if they put but a foot into the Water, they will draw the Fish to them as
with a bait. Ibid. p. 169.

6. The King's Fisher, is reported to build their Nests of the hardest
Fish-bones, and to breed about the middle of Winter. Wherefore, when it is a
calm Winter, they call it Halcyon days; the Nest is made like a Pine Apple, it
is so Artificially made, that it cannot be easily cut with a Sword. That the
Water may not enter into it, she makes her hole of a spungy matter, that will
swell, and the swelling shuts up the entrance; when they go in, they press
against it, and so press out the Water and find passage. Johnston's Class. 6.
p. 171.

7. The Cranes are great Travelers, when they fly they keep a Triangular
sharp-angled Figure, that they may the easilier pierce through the Air; when
they light on the Earth to feed, the Captain of them holds up his Head, to keep
watch for the rest, and they feed securely; before they take rest; they appoint
another Sentinel, who may stand and ward with his Neck stretched forth, whilst
the rest are asleep, with their Heads under their Wings, and standing upon one
Leg; the Captain goes about the Camp, and if there be any danger he claries.
Lest they should sleep too soundly, they stand upon one foot, and hold a Stone
in the other, above Ground, that if at any time being weary, they should be
oppressed with sleep, the Stone falling, might awaken them. Johnston's Hist.
Not. Class. 6. cap. 18. p. 180.

8. Swallow's, where they live in Winter, is diversely described; some say, that
in hollow Trees many lying close together; they preserve themselves by mutual
heat. But Olaus Magnus Episcop. Vpsal. says, that in the Northern Parts, where
Men die of Cold in Winter, the Swallows live in the Water, yet in these parts
Swallows are often drawn up by Fishermen by accident, like a congealed Mass,
and then have united themselves together, bill to bill, foot to foot, wing to
wing; after the beginning of Autumn, to go amongst the Reeds, etc. When that
Mass is drawn forth and put into a Hot-house, the Swallows are thawed by heat
coming to them, and so begin to fly; but they last but a very short time,
because they are not made free, but Captives, by being taken too soon.
Johnston's Hist. Not. Class. 6. c. 20. p. 182.

9. The Ospreys, or Sea Eagles, are said to have one foot like an Engle, and
hooked; the other, plain like a Goose, to swim withal; that it has also a
costly Fat in his Tail, and that he flies in the Air, and hangs there as it
were, and lets drop some of this Fat into the Water, whereby the Fish are
astonished, that they turn upon their back, and so he catches them. Ibid. p.
183.

10. The Ibis, is a Bird so loving to Egypt, that it will live no where else;
so soon as it is hatched, if it be weighed, it weighs two drams. Plutarch. de
avib. l. 4. c. 9. The Heart is greater then is proportionable to the body. The
Gut is 96 Cubits long, and that in the Wain of the Moon of pressed together,
till the Light of it increases again, says Gaudentius Merula. The Lakes of
Arabia send forth Multitudes of winged Serpents; these Birds by a kind of
foresight, are stirred up, and fly forth in Troops, and meet these pestilent
Multitudes in the Air, before they waste their Coasts. Marcel. Ibid.

11. The Chough, peculiar to Cornwall, haunts the Seas, but feeds not upon Fish;
his bill is sharp, long, and red, his Legs red, and his Feathers black. It is a
very unlucky Bird, (and mischievous like a Pie,) for he will hide Money, and
other little things, and will carry Sticks of Fire about, and will set Barns,
Stacks, etc. on Fire; he is frequent about the Alps; Quere, if he be not in the
Clifts of Isle of Wight.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Strange Beasts.
FOR the sake of those People that never Traveled either with their Legs or
Intellectuals beyond the narrow Horizon of their own Country, I have here
Collected a short Catalogue and Description of such strange Beasts, as are bred
only in Foreign Parts, or, but rarely in our own; still with the same Design to
Illustrate the Power and Wisdom, both of the Divine Creation and Providence.
Yet I dare not say, that I have all here, that were in Noah's Ark; nor have I
searched all the Deserts of Arabia, and wide Wildernesles of the World; sor so
I might have lost my self.

1. The Lions bones have no Marrow in them, they have Teeth like Saws, their
Neck is made of one stiff bone. without any Vertebrae; they have 5 Claws on
their Fore-feet, and but 4 on their Hinder feet; the Balls of their Eyes are
black, Arist. They sleep but little, and when they do Sleep, their Eyes are
half open; Aristotle says, they eat and drink but once in two days; he is mild
to them that yield; he will scarce hurt those that lie down; and when he is not
Hungry, he will seize on Men, rather then Women, but not upon Children, unless
he be extreme Hungry; they are frighted with Coach Wheels running round, and
with the Combs and crowing of Cocks, but chiefly by Fire. Johnston. Hist. Not.
Clas. 7. cap. 22. p. 223.

2. The Elephant is the greatest of all Land Creatures; it is certain, that in
Old time, they carried Castles of armed Men into the Field. Aldrovandus tells
of one of their Teeth, sold for 36 Ducars, it was 14 spans long, and 4 spans
thick; so heavy, that he could not take it up from the Ground, and in his Heart
he has a Bone wonderful big, that he saw in one that was killed. Johnston
Hist. Not. Clas. 7. p. 219.

Some of the Indian Elephants are reported by Aelian, to be 9 Cubits high, 9
long, and 5 broad or thick.

3. The Crocodiles lay one Egg as big as a Goose Egg, yet from this small
beginning, they grow to a vast bigness; sometimes they are more then 18 Cubits
long; Aristotle says, their Tongue sticks all fast. When Nilus runs back to its
Channel, the Crocodiles will lie hid in the Mud, watching to satisfy their
Hunger; and they strike those that come, and Strangle them with their Tails.
The Trochilus is his Guard, and the Tentyritae are his Enemies; he awakes him
when the Ichneumon is like to do him hurt, and entering into his wide Jaws, he
pulls out Flesh from amongst his rows of Teeth, with his beak; when he flies
away, he warns to close up his upper Chap; but these swim in the River, and
getting upon their Backs as if they rid, they thrust a Bough into their Mouths,
and compel them to Vomit up the Bodies they have Newly devo^red. Johnston's
Hist. Not. Clas. 7. p. 217.

4. The Ichneumon, is a Creature in Egypt, with a long Tail like to a Serpent's
Oppian; without the Chin he has an Excreesence beset with Hair; when it is
hot, it opens that, his Mouth being shut; they will catch Mice as Cats: When
he observes the Crocodile Sleeping, he rolls himself in Clay, and goes into his
Mouth, and so into his Belly, and eats his Liver, and then leaps forth again.
Johnston's Hist. Not. p. 223.

5. The Chamaeleon, he changes his color oft-times, both in his Eyes, his
Tail, and his whole Body; and he changes like that thing he next touches,
except Red and White; when dead, he is pale. It is certain, that sometimes he
lives by the Air, for he will suffer Hunger a whole years some say, that he
turns to the Sun, and draws in the Sunbeams, and follows them with open Mouth.
Zandius says, he will hunt Flies; who says, he dissected the Tongue of one
that was as long as one Hands breadth, hollow and empty; in the top, was a
Hole, with Snivel in it, with which he caught his Prey. Johnston's Hist. Not.
Clas. 7. cap. 13. p. 216.

6. The Panther smells so sweet, that it will allure all the Wild Beasts; but
the frowning Countenance it has, frights them; wherefore he hides his Head,
and so they come and are caught. In the Right Shoulder, they have a Mark, like
the Moon; and as that increases, this increases and decreaseth, Albert.
Demetrius Physicus writes, that one of them lay in the way waiting for a Man,
and suddenly appeared to him; he was frighted, and began to run away, but the
Panther came and tumbled before him, and was grieved at it; for she had
littered, and her Whelps were fallen into a Pit; she gently laying her Claws,
and drawing him by the Garments; and he had his Life for a reward, for taking
out her Whelps; and she having got her young ones again, guarded him out of the
Desert, and she was jocund and merry, that it might easily appear, how grateful
she was, and not to wrong him for his good deeds, which is a rare thing in a
Man. Johnston's Hist. Not. Clas. 7. p. 230.

7. The Rhinoceros, is a Beast as big as an Elephant, he has one Horn in his
Nose; it is moderatly bent, and so sharp, that it will pierce Stones and Iron;
his Skin is very thick, with Scaly Crusts, in Color and Figure, like a
Tortoise-shell; it is so fast, that a Dart can hardly enter it. He is the
Elephants Enemy, when he Fights with him, he whets his Horn on a Stone; then
puts his Horn under the Elephant's Belly, where it is softest, he rends him.
Johnston's Hist. Not. Clas. 7. cap. 32. p. 232.

8. The Camel, Puddle Water is sweet to him, nor will he drink river Water,
till he have troubled it with his Foot; they serve the Indians to Travel with,
and will go hundred Miles a day, for eight days together, with very little
Meat; they never couple with their Dams; they are very docil; when they are
longer in their Journey than ordinary between Ethiopia and Barbary; they do not
whip them forward, but they sing to them, whereby they will run so fast, that
Men can hardly follow them. At Alcair, they dance at the sound of a Taber,
being Taught by a strange Art; for when they are young, they are brought into a
Stove, the Pavement being very hot; one plays on a Taber at the Door, they
because of the heat lifts up their Feet; they continue their Exercise, and use
them to it a whole Year so, that coming in public, remembering the hot
Pavement, when one plays on the Taber, they will lift up their Feet, and dance.
The swiftest kind are called by the Affricans, Ragnail, Johnston. Hist. Not.
Class. 7. cap. 6. p. 209.

9. The Beaver is a most strong Creature to bite, his hinder-feet are like a
Gooses, and his fore-feet like an Apes; his fat Tail is covered with a scaly
Skin, and he uses it for a Rudder, when he pursues Fish; he comes forth of his
Holes in the Night, and biting off boughs of Trees about the Rivers, he makes
his Houses with an upper loft, and when the Water rises, he lies there,
Johnston. p. 211.

10. The Bear, when he is Hunted, will send forth a Breath, that will corrupt
the Flesh of of the Hunters; and if they come nearer, they will cast a Phlegm
out of their Mouths, that kills or blind Dogs and Men. Aristot. de Mirab. she
brings forth her Young, somewhat bigger then a Rat, that is both anked and
unformed in its parts, a rude Mass. When he is Fat, he creeps into his Den on
his back, and so takes away his Footsteps, that the Hunters may not perceive
them. In this Den, he will grow lean in 40 days; and he will keep himself
alive, lying still and sucking his right Foot, 14 days. Johnston. p. 237. In
Brasil, is the Ant Bear as big as a g reat Dog the Tail twice as long as the
Body, and so full of Hair, that under it he shelters himself from Rain, Heat,
Cold, and Wind, his Tongue 3 quarters of a Yard long, which he thrusts into Ant
hills, upon which they run, and when full, he licks them in. Pur. Pilgr. Vol.
4. v. 1301.

11. Whether the Unicorn be? Authors are of diverse Opinions, some affirm it,
and some deny it. Ludovicus Vartomanus says, that he saw two of them sent to
the Sultan at Mecha, out of Ethiopia, they were shut up in Lattises, and were
not fierce; the Horns of this Creature are showed in many places; at the
Monastery of St. Dennis; there is one also at St. Mark's Church in Venice, and
another at Rome. Cardan describes it, That it is a rare Creature, as big as an
Horse, a Head like a Stag, that has one Horn growing on it, 3 Cubits long; it
stands in the middle of the Forehead, it is straight, and is broad at the
bottom; it has a short Neck, a thin Mane, with Feet like a Goat. A Portuguese
affirms, that he saw them in the Abyssine Empire, as large as a handsome Horse,
of a dark brown Color, with the Mane and Tail black, with a fair beautiful
Horn in the Forehead, 5 palms long, the Color inclining to white; they live in
close Woods and Thickets, sometimes venture into the Champion, not often seen,
being timorous, are not many, and those concealed in the Woods. A Portuguese
Captain, with 20 Soldiers in Company, designing to breastfast, while their
Horses grazed; a Unicorn described as before, sprang among the Horses; the
Spectators had sufficient time to see and observe him. See the Relation Printed
by the Order of the Royal Society. Anno 1669. by Sir Peter Wyche.

12. The Baboon is a Creature with a Head like a Dog, But in shape like a Man,
he will Fish cunningly; for he will dive all day, and bring forth Fish
abundantly; he takes wonderful delight to wear a Garment; he hurts no Man; he
understands the Indians, he will gently feed Sheep for their Milks sake. Pliny.
l. 7. c. 7. Strabo. l. 15. Two things are most wonderful in him, that in the
two Equinoctials, 12 times a Day, he will make Water once every Hour, and does
the same at Night; hence the Egyptians had the Picture of a Baboon Pissing upon
their Dials. The second is, that when the Moon has been sometimes in
Conjunction with the Sun, and loses her Light, the Male will not look not
feed, but holds down his Face to the Earth; nor will the Female move her Eyes
any way, casting withal, her Sperm forth; therefore are they held Sacred, and
fed unto this day, that by them the set time of the Moon's Conjunction with the
Sun may be known by them. Johnston's Not. Hist. Clas. 7. c. 13.

13. The marmaset, is a larger kind of Monkey, the Tail 5 Cubits long, his Hair
hanging down from his Forehead; by their Legs, Face, Genitals, they look like
Country Men, they are elsewhere all over Hairy; they love Children and Women,
and desire to embrace them, says Cardan. When they eat up the Ears of Corn,
one of them lies perdue in the Field, and makes an out cry when he spies a
Countryman; the rest fly. They so hate a Crocodile, that they cannot endure
to see his Skin at a g reat distance; In the Borders of Cariai, there are some
will leap from bough to bough, as if they flew. Ibid.

14. The Cocus is a 4 footed wild Beast in Slythia and Sarmatia, for greatness
between a Stag and a Ram, white and very swift; drinking with their Nostrils,
and bearing it for some days; so that they will feed well enough in Pastures,
where no Water is. Strabo. l. 7. About About Easter you may see 2000 together;
upon eating a Venerious Herb in March, they lie for a day as half dead.
Johnston. Ibid. out of Gesner.

15. The Buff, is bigger then an Ox, with a bunch on his Back, with a very
large Forehead, curled with Hair, that smells like Musk; the Flesh fattest in
Summer, but tasting of Garlic, that it feeds on; so strong, it will take up a
Horse and his Rider: The Blood, redder then Purple; so hot, that it will soften
the Iron of the Hunters Spear, and in the greatest Cold, it will Corrupt in two
hours. In the Scotch Woods, they will not touch the Shrubs that Men have
touched for many days; being taken by Art, they will die for Grief. Camd. in
Scotia.

16. The Haut, or Cercopithecus, is a Creature in America, mighty Ill-favored,
as big as a Monkey, his Belly touching the Ground, his Head and Face like a
Child, and when taken, he Sighs like a Child. Three Claws hang to his
hinder-feet, like the great prickly Bones of a Carp, and by these he creeps up
upon Trees; when tame, he will love a Man, and climb upon his Shoulders. Thevet
lift one in the open Air, which yet was never wet. Johnston. Not. Hist. chap.
7. c. 3.

17. The Elk, is a 4 Footed Beast, commonly found in Scandinavia, in Summer, of
an Ash color almost, in Winter, enclining to black; his Horns fit for
Footstools, each of them 12 pound weight, and two Foot long; his upper Lip
hangs out so long, that he cannot eat, but going backwards. He will run as much
Ground in one day, as a Horse in three; a strong blow with his Foot, will kill
the Hunter. Ibid. chapter 1.

18. Bonasus is a kind of Bugle, which dungs extreme hot, when the Hunter
follows him. Philip King of Macedon, killed one with a Dart at the foot of
Mount Orbclus: The Horns whereof were 16 handful, consecrated afterward to
Hercules. Ibid. chapter 5.

19. The Catoblepas is like a Bull, very terrible, with blood-shot Eyes,
looking downward; from the Venomous Herbs that it feeds on lifting up its Mane,
with open Lips it roars terribly, sending such a Stream out of the Throat, that
the Air will be infected, and make others dumb that draw it in, causing Mortal
Convulsions, Ibid. chapter 12.

20. The Sheep of Mexico, are Beasts of the greatest Profit and least Charge
that are; for from them they draw Meat and Clothing; they use them also to
carry all their burdens, having need neither of Shoes nor Saddles, nor yet of
any Oats, so that they serve their Masters for naught, feeding only on Grass
which they find in the Fields. There are two kinds of them, the one bearing
Wool, the other are bare, which are the better for burden; they are bigger
then great Sheep, and less then Calves, they have long Necks like a Camel; they
are of diverse Colors, some white, some black, and others gray, or spotted;
their Flesh is good Meat, but that of their Lambs is better; of their Wool, the
Indians make Cloth, some courser, others finer, like half Silk; upon these the
Spaniards carry their bars of Silver, one of them carrying about 150 pound
weight. In the Stomach of these Beasts, is found the Bezar's Stone; sometimes
one alone, sometimes two, three, or four; they are different in form,
greatness, and color, some like Filberds others like Walnuts, some as big as
Pidgeon's Eggs, others as big as Hen's Eggs; some white, some dark, green, some
black, and some as if they had been gilded; they are all made of diverse Films
and Skins one upon another. Purch. Pilgr. Vol. 3. p. 969.

In Socotira, are Sheep, whose Tails weigh 28 pound apiece. Ibid.

21. The Armadillo, is of the bigness of a Pig, and of a white Color, a long
Snout, and the Body covered with Shells like Plates, they are so hard, that no
Arrow will pierce them, except in the Flanks, where they are softer; they lie
in the Ground. Ibid.

22. The Porcupine has bristles, or Quills, white and black, of a span and a
half long, which they can cast; and they are of this quality, that where one of
these bristles enters into the Flesh, if it be not pulled out presently, it
will work it self quite through, they are of good Flesh and raste. Ibid.

23. The Civet Cat exceeds the Castor for bigness, her Head is little, her Eyes
clear; has a long Muzzle, sharp and offensive Teeth; her Hair is
party-colored, harsh, and bristly, yellow above, and whiter underneath; the
Pocket wherein the Civet is bred, is near the Genitory, which is taken forth
with a Spoon or a Stick, says Purchase. It has Mustachioes, and a long bushy
Tail. There is great plenty of them in Ethiopia, where the Jews keep them in
wooden Cages, feeding them with raw Mutton and Beef, cut in small pieces. Civet
is the Sweat of this Beast, which they make go back with a Stick, which they
thrust in betwixt the Bars of the Cage, and catch hold of his Tail; they take
hold also of his two hind Legs, pulling him half out of the Cage by the Door,
which falls down upon his back, and keeps him fast there; then another opens a
certain Cod of Flesh, which is shaped like a split Gizzard, and scrapes all the
sweat off it within. The Males have it between their Stones and Yard; the
Females have it betwixt their Fundament and Privities; it is emptied of the
Sweat twice a Weck, each Beast yielding a Dram at a time. It is first of a
whitish Gray, which afterward turns to a very brown Color. Dr. Stubbs says,
they will live a Month without drinking, and if they drink once a Month, they
will then yield the more Civet. Sir Thomas Pope Blunt. Not. Hist. p. 9.

24. The Musk Cat; Monsieur Thevenot tells us, That in the great Mogul's
Country, there is a Beast, like a Fox in the Snout, which is no bigger then a
Hare; the Hair of a Stags Color, Teeth like a dog, it yields most excellent
Musk; for, at the Belly it has a Bladder full of corrupt Blood, which they
take from it, which is the Musk, but after this Operation is made, the Beast is
not long lived: None of them have above one bladder, no bigger then a Hen's
Egg, which will yield about an Ounce of Musk. Ibid. p. 1.

25. The Cows of Mexcio, have Bunches on their Backs, about the bigness of our
Bulls, having little Horns, more Hair on the foreparts then behind, which is
like Wool; on the Backbone having Manes like Horses, and long Hair from their
Knees downwards, with much on their Throats. They are Meat and Drink, Shoes,
Houses, Fire, Vessels, and their Masters whole substance Purch. Pilgr. Vol. 2.
p. 1003.

26. The Possown of Virginia, has a Bag under her Belly, from whence she
lets forth her Young ones, and takes them in again at her pleasure. Idem.
Vol. 4. p. 1772.

27. The Camelopardus, is the highest of Beasts, so that a Man on Horseback may
ride upright under his Belly, his Neck is long, so that he usually feeds upon
the Leaves of Trees, his Color is white and speckled; his hinder Legs are
shorter then his former, so that he cannot graze, but with difficulty; he is
also called a Jaraff. Idem. p. 1469.

28. I shall conclude this Chapter with a Description, which Dr. Brown gives of
the Elector's Hunting House at Dresden. The Hunting-house is in the Old Town,
and therein are 15 Bears very well provided for, and looked unto; they have
Fountains and Ponds, to wash in, and near to the Pond, ragged Posts or Trees,
set for the Bears to climb up, and Scaffolds made at the Top, to Sun and dry
themselves; where they will also sleep, and come and go as the Keeper calls
them; in the House for wild Beasts, I took Notice (says he) of a Marian, which
is a four footed Beast, that hangs upon Trees by the Tail; also a wild or
Mountain Cat, of a large size, 5 Young Bears, 5 Old black Bears, a white Bear,
very large, the Feet, Head, and Neck whereof, are long then those of the black;
two Lions, 10 Luckses, (perhaps he means Lynxes,) very fine Beasts; in Bigness,
Color, and Shape, between a Tiger and a wild Cat; the Tips of their Ears and
Tail are black, their Eyes lively, their Skin Lyon-colour and spotted,
especially about their Eyes. Dr. Edw. Brown's Trav. in his Description of
Vienna.

Whereas I have spoke before of Unicorns, I desire my Reader to take Notice,
that Dr. Edward Brown, speaking of 3 Unicorn's Horns, which were showed him at
Vtrecht, little differing in length, the longest being 5 Foot and a half, out
of one whereof, being made hollow, and tipped with Silver, he drank, gives us his
Judgment thus: These (says he,) were of the Sea Unicorn, or the Horn or long
wreathed Tooth of some Sea Animal, taken in the Notthern Sea; of which I have
seen many, both in public Repositories, and in private Hands; two such as
these, the one 10 foot long, were presented not long ago to the King of Denmark
being taken near Nova Zembla; and I have seen some full 15 foot long, some
wreathed very thick, some not so much, others almost plain; some largest and
thickest at the End, near the Head, others are largest at some distance from
the Head; some very sharp at the end or point, others blunt. My Honored
Father, Sir Tho. Brown, had a very fair piece of one, which was formerly among
the Duke of Curland's Rarities. I have seen a Walking Staff, a Scepter, a
Scabbard for a Sword, Boxes, and other Curiosities made out of this Horn, etc.
But of these Unicorns, the King of Denmark and his Father had so many, that he
was able to spare a great number of them, to build a Magnificent Throne out of
Unicorn's Horns. Dr. Browns Trav. p. 101. etc.

CHAP. XXXIX. Strange Fish.
I remember, when I was a little Boy, and went first a Angling, I brought home
two or three small Dace and Breams, with no little Joy, and a secret promise of
Applause to my self, for my Success in the Game; but my Mother with some
Indignation, refused to give her consent fro the Dressing of them, I have not
served my Reader so here; No, the Watery Element is so stored with such
abundance of these Animals, and the Sea takes up so great a part of this lower
World, that I have passed by all the common Species, and present my Reader with
the Huge Leviathan, the Loving Dolphin, the great Manaty, and others, strange
and admirable for some Property or other, that I promise my self, my Reader
will not serve me now, as my Mother did then.

1. The Whale is the greatest and chief of all Fishes. That Whale taken in the
Scheld, 10 Miles from Antwerp. Anno 1677, was of a blackish blue color, he had
a Snout on his Head, wherewith he belched up Water, with great force; he was 58
foot long, 16 foot high, his Tail was 14 foot broad; from his Eye to the tip of
his Nose, 16 foot; his lower Chap 6 foot, of each side, armed with 25 Teeth,
and there were as many holes in the Upper Chap, where Teeth had been, the
longest of his Teeth 6 Thumbs long. A Whale taken at Sceveling, near the Hague,
was 60 foot long. Johnston. Class. 9. cap. 3. p. 290. In the 6th year of Queen
Elizabeth, in the Month of December, at Grimsby in Lincolnshire, was driven on
shore, a Monstrous Fish, in length 19 Yards, his Tail 15 foot broad, and 6
yards between the Eyes; 12 Men stood upright in his Mouth, to get out the Oil.
In the 17th Year, a vast Whale was cast upon Thanet Isle in Kent, 20 Else long,
and 13 foot broad, from the Belly to the Backbone, and 11 foot between the
Eyes; one of his Eyes being taken out of his Head, was more then 2 Cart with 6
Horses could draw; the Oil being boiled out of his Head was Parmacittee. Bakers
Chron.

The ordinary Dimension of the Whale is 36 Cubits in length, and 8 in
thickness; yet Nearchus in Arianus, is said to have measured one in the Indian
Seas, 50 Cubits long, and proportionably broad. Pliny exceeds all bounds of
Credibility, when he tells of some 960 foot, or 4 Acres long Heylin's Cosmogr.
p. 876.

2. The Dolphins are so swift, that they swim faster then a Shp under Sail,
before the Wind, says Bellonius; when they play on the calm Sea, they foreshew
which way the Wind will blow, and when they cast up Water, the Sea being
troubled, they foreshew a Calm. Thomas thinks, that Exhalations rising from the
bottom of the Sea, when a Storm is at hand in Winter, is the cause of it; and
he thinks that the Dolphin feels heat thereby, and so breaks forth the oftener;
but Rondeletius thinks, they are affected in the Water with the motion of the
Air, as those that are Sick, are wont to be, when the South Wind begins to
blow. Johnston. p. 294.

The last Year of King Edward VI. was taken at Quinborough, three Dolphins, and
at Blackwall, 6 more, the last of which was bigger then a Horse. Baker.

3. The Manaty is a great Fish, taken in the Rivers of Hispaniola; his Head is
like an Ox-head, or bigger; his Eyes, in respect of his body, are small; he
has two thick Feet, like Wings, in the place of Gills, with which he swims, he
has a thick Skin and no Scales. He is so great, that there needs a Yoke of
Oxen to carry him; sometimes he is 14 or 15 foot long, and 8 hands thick; he
has two stones, or rather bones in his Head, so great as little hand-balls; he
wants Ears, but in their place he has small holes, by which he hears. His Skin
is like the Skin of a shrevell'd Ox, a Finger thick, Ash color, and thin of
Hairs, the Tail is all Nervous, which being boiled or fried, it resolves into
fat. Johnston. p. 296.

4. The Swordfish has a beck on both Chaps, but the lower of them is short and
triangular; the upper is more bony and harder, and far longer, sometimes two
Cubits long. In the Indian Sea, they grow so great, that they will pierce the
sides of the strongest Ship, a hand and a half in thickness sometimes. Gesner
writes, that a faithful Friend of his, saw a Man, when he sailed to Syria, thar
swam by the Ships side, and he was cut in the middle, by the beck of this Fish.
Johnston. p. 304.

5. The Torpedo, has his name because he benums the Hands, and he does this so
effectually, that before he is taken, he will do it by the Net, or the Rod.
Johnston. p. 303.

6. The ^unies, are chiefly caught about Constantinople, for when they are past
Chalcedon, a certain white Rock appears to them, and so terrifies them, that
immediately they put over to the farthest Bank, and being taken by the swift
Current of the Waters, turns their course to Constantinople, so that they are
tkane in their Snares in great numbers; they are bred in the Lakes of Maeotis.

9. The Remora, is said to stay Ships. Petrus Melaras of Bononia reports, That
the Ship of Francis, Cardinal of Troas, when he went by Sea out of France, was
held frst in the swiftness of its course. Many have sought the cause, but no
Man has certainly found it. Says Johnston. Hist. Not. Class. 9. c. 7. p. 331.

8. Tritons, or Fishes having the Face, Lineaments, and shape of Man's body;
one was seen in the days of Tiberius, another in the time of Augustus, a third,
under Nero; Aelian, Theodor. Gaza, Trapezuntius, Alex. ab Alex. Scaliger and
diverse others affirm the Truth of this; yet these Tritons or Nereides, cannot
be called, nor are they Men, though they have the outward shape; for it is not
the matter, nor outward Lineaments, but the form that gives Essence and
Denomination. Ross. Arcana Microcosin. l. 2. p. 18.

In King John's Reign, such a Fish was taken near Orford in Suffolk, in all
parts like a Man, and for 6 Months was kept in the Castle, whence after he
escaped, and went again to the Sea. Others do add, that he was kept with raw
Flesh and Fish, and because he could not speak, was thrown into the Sea again.
Bakers Chron.

He uttered not any Speech, though to try him he was hung by the Heels, and
grievously Tormented; he would get him to his Couch as Sunset, and rise again
at Sunrising; one day they brought him to the Haven, and let him go into the
Sea, but to prevent his escape, they set 3 rows of very strong Nets before him,
to catch him again at pleasure; but he diving to the bottom, crept under their
Nets, and showed himself again to them, and so often diving, he still came up,
and as it were mocked them; at length, he came back to them of his own accord,
and remained with them two Months after. But afterward, being not carefully
looked to, he went to the Sea, and was never after seen, or heard of. Fabians
Chron.

Anno Christi, 1404. Some Women of Edom in the Low-Counties, as they were going
in their Barks to their Cattle in Purmer-meer, they often saw at the Ebbing of
the Water, a Sea-Woman playing up and down, where at the first they were
afraid, but after a while, encouraging one another, they made with their Boats
toward her, and the Water at that time being not deep enough for her to dive
in, they took her by force, and drew her into the Boat, and so carried her to
Edam, where in time she grew familiar, and fed of ordinary Meats; and being
sent from thence to Harlem, she lived about 15 Years, but never spoke, seeking
often to get away to the Waters. Belg. Common Wealth. p. 102,

Captain Richard Whithurn, in his Description of Newfoundland, writes: That
Anno Christi, 1610. early in the Morning, as he was standing by the Water side,
in the Harbor of St. John's, he espied a strong Creature swimming very swiftly
toward him, like a Woman, looking cheerfully upon him, her Face, Eyes, Nose,
Mouth, Chin, Ears, Neck, and Forehead, were like a Woman; it was very
beautiful, and in those parts well proportioned, having Hair hanging down round
about the Head; he seeing it come within a Pikes length of him, stepped back,
whereupon it dived under the Water, swimming to another place, whereby he
beheld the Shoulders, and back down to the middle, which was as square, white,
and smooth, as the back of a Man; from the middle to the hinder part, it
pointed in proportion like a broad hooked Arrow: afterward it came to Boat,
wherein some of his Men were, attempting to come in to them, till one of them
struck it a full blow on the Head; others of them saw it afterward also,
Clark's Geogr. p. 208. Purchase says, many Meer-maids and Women are seen about
Brasile, who sometimes catch, embrace, kiss, and crush the Indians to death.
Vol. 4. p. 1315.

Purchase adds, that many Women-Fishes are found near Soffala, which from the
Belly to the Neck, are very like Women; from the Belly downward, they are like
Dolphins.

I my self, when a Young Man at Oxford, saw a couple of such Fishes as these,
taken, as was reported by them who brought them, singing upon a Rock in the
Irish Seas.

9. The River-Horse, Hippotamus, the Morse, found in Soffala, is as big as two
of our Horses, living in the Water, but feeding on Grass by Land, with thick
and short hinder Legs, five Claws on each fore-foot, and four on the hinder;
the Mouth wide, and full of Teeth, 4 of which are above two spans long apiece,
the two lower stand upright, the two upper turned like Bears Tushes; they have
Teats, thick Hides, are of an Ash Color, with white Strakes on their Faces, or
Stars in their Foreheads. Purch. Pilgr. Vol. 2. p. 1544.

10. The Dog-Fish, found in the River of Goa, big as a Cur-dog, has a Snout
like a Hog, small Eyes, two holes for Ears, 4 feet like an Elephant; flat Tail,
Body, Head, Tail, and Legs, covered with broad Scales, as hard as Iron,
snorting like a Hog, and rolling himself round like an Urchin. Ibid. p. 1774.

11. Toad-Fishes, are about a span long, Painted, with fair Eyes, snorting and
swelling much out of the Water; the Poisonous Skin being flayed off, the
Indians eat them. Ibid. p. 1314.

12. Cuttle-Fish, has a Hood always full of black Water, like Ink, which when
she is pursued by other Fishes that would devour her, she casts forth, and so
darkens the Water, that she thereby escapes. Ibid.

13. The Flying-Fish, has Fins instead of Wings, and a delicate Skin,
interlaced with fine bones; they are like Pitchards, only a little rounder and
bigger; they fly best with a side Wind, but no longer then their Wings are
wet, seldom above a quarter of a Mile. The Dolphins and Bonitoes, do
continually hunt after them by Water, and the Alcatrace, a Fowl, much like a
Heron, hovers in the Air, to seize upon them.

14. The Eagle-Fish, found in the Indian Sea, has Eyes 5 quarters asunder,
from the end of one Fin to the end of the other, are above 4 yards; its Mouth
and Teeth resemble a Porcullise; has a small Tail, and its rather wondered at
then eaten.

15. The Carvel, comes of the Foam of the Sea; is a kind of a Sea-Spider, of a
round form, floating upon the surface of the Ocean, throwing abroad her string
like so many lines, to Angle for small Fishes: When she sees her Web too weak,
she can blow a deadly infectious Breath, or put forth such a Sting as if she
had borrowed it from a Scorpion. Herb. Trav.

16. A. Shark taken by Mr. Herbert's Men in his East India Voyage, was 9 foot
and a half long; they found in her Paunch 55 young ones, each of them a foot in
length, all which go out and in at their pleasures; she was armed with a double
row of Venomous Teeth; and is guided in her Prey by a little Musculus, or
Pilot-Fish, that she sends to and fro do bring Intelligence; the Shark for its
kindness suffering it to Suck at pleasure. Herb. Trav. p. 26.

17. A certain Fish, or Sea Monster, (in le Maire's Voyage) with a Horn struck
against the Ship with such violence that it shook it; whereupon the Master
looking overboard, saw the Sea all Bloody, but knew not what should be the
cause, till coming into Port Desire, where they cleansed and trimed their Ship,
they found 7 foot under water, a Horn sticking in the Ship, for bigness and
fashion, like an Elephants Tooth, yet not hollow, but all of solid hard Bone,
which had pierced through three double Planks, and was entered into a Rib of
the Ship; it stuck above half a foot deep into the Ship, and by great force was
broken off, which caused the Monster to bleed so much as discolored the Water.
Purch. Pilgr, vol. 1. p. 90.

18. Dr. Edward Brown, in his Description of Vienna, speaking of the Danube,
says, it affords extraordinary Carps, Trouts, Tenches, Pikes, etc. There is
that substantial large Fish called Scheiden, or Silurus Gesneri, larger than
Pike, Salmon, or any of our River Fishes, but the great Fishes called Hausons,
or Husons, in Jonston, for largeness exceeds all others, some being 20 foot
long: Some think this to be the Fish which Aelian names Antacetus, and speaks
largely of the Fishing for them in Ister. I was (says he) at the Fishing
places, for Hausons in Schiit Island, between Presburg and Comora, for they
come not usually higher, especially in Shoals, and it is much that they come so
high, for they are perceived to come up the Stream out of the Euxine Sea. They
Eat them both fresh and salted: they taste most like Sturgeon. It is a
Cartilaginous Fish, consisting of Gristles, and they have a hollow nervous
chord the down the Back, which being dried, serves for a Whip. When they Fish
for them, they blow a Horn or Trumpet and know where they go by the moving of
the Water. Dr. Browns Trav. p. 154.

19. Chatagne de Mer, or Sea Chest-Nuts, found in Canada of New France, are the
most delicious Fish that possibly can be. Nova Francia, p. 265.

CHAP. XL. Strange Serpents.
THere is no kind of living Creature, that we have a greater Antipathy against,
then this of Serpents; and the Reason will easily appear to the Reader upon
perusal of this Chapter; so that they seem to me very fit Emblems of Satan's
Malice and Cunning, and fit Engines for that Evil Spirit to make use of in the
Delusion and Destruction of Human Nature; insomuch, that a due consideration of
the Resemblance will serve pretty well to solve the difficulty of the History
of our Fall.

1. The Asp: Their Poison is so great that they are not used in Medecines: That
of Chalidonia is the most Poisonous, Death straightway following. The Cure of
their Poison, is by Incision, Cauteries, Cuppings, and Cocks Rumps applied,
etc. It is like to a Land-Snake, but broader on the Back; their Teeth are long
and full of holes, which are covered with a Skin that slides up when they Bite,
letting out their Poison. Salmons Dispensatory, p. 247.

2. The Ammodite, its Poison is not inferior to that of the Asp, some dying
within 3 hours after the Wound received, none living above 7 days: The Biting
of the Female is most Venomous. It is a kind of Viper of a Cubit long, having
black spots on the Skin. small lines on the Back, and hard Wart like a Horn on
the upper Chap, and very fierce. Ibid.

3. Amphisbaena, It is a venomous Serpent, making a Wound so small, that it can
scarce be discerned, causing Inflammation, and a lingering Death. Its Body is of
an equal thickness; the Eyes commonly shut; the Skin rough, hard, spotted, and
of an Earthly color: They go both ways. Ibid.

4. The Boa, It is a Serpent which goes upon its Belly, and grows to be above
an hundred foot long: It kills not Cattle till their Milk is dried up, and then
it Eats them, destroying Herbs. Its Poison causes Tumors, Swellings, and
Iastly Death. Ibid. 248.

5, Caecilia; The Slow-Worm is a Creature which has a very strong Poison. If
their Wound swell, prick, and apply a Cataplasm of Fullers Earth and Vinegar.
It is called the Blind-Worm, but it hurts not unless provoked. Ibid.

6. Cenchrus, the Millet, It is a Serpent about two Cubits long, of a dark
color, spotted like the Millet-Seed; They go strait, and are avoided by an
oblique Motion. It is a dangerous and strong Beast; when it seizes its Prey, it
sucks the Blood, whilst it beats the Body with its Tail. Ibid.

7. Cerastes, the Horned Serpent; It Is a yard long, of a sandy color, with two
Horns and Teeth like a Viper, its Poison is deadly. It make the patient made,
Eyes dim, Nerves immovable, causes a pricking like Needles. Ibid.

8. Chelidrus, Druina, Hicinus, Querculus, Cheresidial, the Druin: its among
the first Ranks of Serpents for Poison; It Is about a yard long, full of Scales,
under which breed a sort of Flies which destroy it: The Back is blackish, Head
broad and flat: Their Captain has a white Crown or Comb on his Head. Its very
smell stupifies, and almost strangles. Ibid.

9. Coluber, the Adder, is a hotter Serpent than a Snake, of a dark blacker
color, of about a Cubit long: Their Biting causes Swelling, Paleness, and
Swounding. The Cure is Venice-Treacle or Mithredate, with Wine or Juice of
Rice, etc. Ibid.

10. Dipsas, Ammoatis, Situla, Melanurus, Causon: It is a burning fiery
Serpent, insomuch, that they that are bit, thirst most intolerably, and drink
so much till they burst: It is less than a Viper, (but kills sooner) about a
Cubit long; the Head and Tail are very little, small, and black; the other
parts whitish, with black and yellow sports. Ibid. p. 249.

11. Draco, the Dragon: It hurts more by its Biting and Tail, than by its
Poison.

12. The Haemorrhe, (Affodius, Sabrine) is about a Foot long, of a sandy
color, spotted all over with black, flaming Eyes, small Head, with the
appearance of Horns, having Scales rough and sharp, making a noise as he goes.
Its biting causes a continual bleeding sweat, violent torture, Pain in the
Stomach, difficulty of Breathing, Convulsions, etc. The Cure is by
Scarification, etc. Ibid.

13. Lacerta, the Lizard, is of a changeable color, and an Enemy to the Spider
and Toad. The Eggs kill speedily, except a sudden remedy be exhibited, made of
Falcons Dung and Wine. If they Bite, they leave their Teeth behind them, which
cause continual aching till taken out. The Green Lizard living in Meadows are
not Venomous. Ibid.

14. Lacerta Aquatica, the Neute, is Venomous, and hardly dies by blows, but
Salt kills them presently: Their Eggs are about the bigness of Pease: If
provoked, they shut the Mouth, and stand upon their hinder Legs, till their
Body be all white or pale, by which is shown their ill Nature. Ibid.

15. Pelias, by Biting causes Putrification, but such as is easily Cured by
drinking Poisan with Oil, and anointing with Balm of Perue. Ibid.

16. Prester, That which Junius and Tremelius think to be the fiery Serpent in
the Wilderness, is a hot and fiery Beast, and goes panting with open Mouth, of
a very malignant Poison. The Cure is by the Juice of Pursley and Castorcum,
Drunk with Opoponax and Juice of Rue in Canary. Ibid.

17. Plyas, the most Poisonous Asp, kills by Spitting, Touch, or Smell,
wounding almost invisibly: They Prick not much bigger that the stinging of a
Be, without swelling; it causes heaviness of the Eyes, pain of the Body, with
some kind of Pleasure, Stupidity, Deafness, Convulsion, Vomiting, and Death.
It Is about a yard long, ash color, flaming, and greenish.

18. Regulus, Sibulus, Basiliscus, the Cockatrice, is the King of al Serpents,
infecting the Air round about, so that no Creature can live near it: It is said
that he kills both by touching and sight, casting forth a burning Fume, whereby
the Beams of the Eyes they corrupt the Visive Spirit. They go half upright, and
have a Comb like a Cock, feared by all other Serpents if seen or heard; but
they themselves fear the Weasel. Ibid.

19. Sagitta Jacularis, Serpens volens, the Dart so called, because he will
leap or shoot himself at least 10 yards; he is about 3 or 4 foot long: Its
Poison is present Death; scarce Curable. Ibid.

20 The Salamander is a four footed Creature, a kind of a Lizard, black and
full of yellow specks, with a great Head: It is a bold Creature, delights in
moist places, and clear Springs. They are reported to live in Fire, but that is
a Story; for they no otherwise live there, but by quenching it. by a cold moist
humor which issues from them; when that is exhausted, if the Fire continues,
they are subject to destruction: They have as many Venoms as colors. If they
once Bite they never let go. The Cure is by Decoction of Frogs, drink Milk,
etc. Ibid.

21 Seps, Sepidon, Selsi^, has a broad Head, slender Tail, of many colors,
about a yard long: He causes the part to Rot which he bites. For the Cure, wash
with Vinegar and Oximel. Ibid.

22. The Serpent, (...), is a kind of Snake, a crafty Creature, lying all the
Winter under the Earth, or Roots of Birch or Hasel; casting its Skin every
Spring and Autumn: They are best in the Spring when they have cast their Skins,
and recruited their Flesh with Food. The Head, Gall, and Tail, and to be cast
away: The Heart, Liver, Flesh and Bones, are a precious Treasure in Physic;
concerning which, see more in Salmon's Dispensatory, l. 2. c. 5. p. 252.

23. The Snake, Anguis, Chersydrus, (the Water Snake) their Poison is not
inferior to that of other Serpents; when they Bite, there ensues great Pain,
Inflammation, blackness in the Wound, the Vertigo and Death within four days.
The Water Snake has a fiery Poison, which disperses it self over the whole
Body, which when it comes to the Heart, the Creature immediately falls down
dead. Therefore it is best, if a part be bitten, presently to cut it off,
otherwise to apply Organy, beaten with Oil of Tartar and Oil Olive or
Oak-Ashes, mixed with Barly-Meal, Pitch, Water and Honey, boiled to Poultis. 1.
The Liver of a Snake breaks the Stone in the Bladder. 2. The Flesh eaten, cures
the Leprosy and Pox; applied, it helps Wounds, 3. The Skin boiled in Wine, and
that Wine Dropped into the Ears, eases the Pains of them. Ibid. p. 247.

24. The Viper, (...), is a Creature that brings forth alive, exceeding other
Serpents in Venom, sleeping all the Winter under the Earth in Rocks. The young
Females are the best, being taken in the Spring. Vipers have stronger Virtues
than Serpents, and they have also the same preparation. In the Viper there is
nothing Venomous but the Head and Gall. Concerning its excellent Virtues in
Physic, See Salmon's Dispensatory, p. 253.

Having given this Account of the Particular Species of Serpents out of Mr.
Salmon, we will conclude with some general Remarks out of Jo. Jonston's History
of the wonderful things of Nature.

In the Province of Caraia, under the King of Tartary, some Serpents are 10
yards long, and 10 hands broad; some want fore feet, but have Claws in the room
of them; their Eyes are as great as two small Loaves; for which he cites Paul
Venetus.

Americus Vespasius, saw some in the Indies which Men did Eat, as big as Kids,
a yard and an half long, with long feet, strong claws, of diverse colors, nosed
like Serpents, having from the Ears to the Tail, a certain Bristle going quire
through the Back. Ludovic. Romans

Sais Calicut breeds the like, as great as Boars, with fore-feet, no Venom, yet
biting dangerously.

Anno 1543. there appeared four footed Beasts in the Borders of Germany, near
to Styria, like Lizards, with Wings, whose Biting was incurable.

Anno 1550. about St. Margarets-Day, in Hungary, near Zisca, about the River
Theysse, they were found in the Bodies of many; They killed about three
thousand men: Some came out of Men's mouths, but they went in again: It is
almost incredible what is reported of those places; that multitudes of them
were found in piles or handfuls of Wheat, and when the Countrymen thought to
burn them, there came a great many more forth, and charged them with Man's
Voice, to forbear, saying, That they were not bred naturally, but sent by God
to punish Men for their Sins. Johnston's Not. Hist. Class. 7. c. 33.

This puts me in mind of a Story related by Matt. Paris, which is this: Anno
1234. Walter Gray, Archbishop of York, having 5 years Corn under hand, would
not thresh it out for the Relief of the Poor in three year Famine, hoping still
that the price would increase, being told by his Officers it was greatly to be
feared, least the Corn were consumed by Mice, he willed them to deliver it to
Husbandmen who dwelt in his Manor, upon Condition they should pay him as much
new for it after Harvest. They attempting to take down a great Mow of Corn,
which he had at Rippon, saw the heads of many Snakes, Toads, and other Venomous
Creatures, peering out at the end of the Sheaves. The Bishop hereupon forces
certain poor Men to go up with Ladders; they were scarcely up, when they saw a
great Smoke rising out of the Corn, and felt withal a loathsome Stink, which
compelled them with all haste possible to hasten down again: Moreover, they
heard an unknown Voice, saying unto them, Let the Corn alone for the
Archbishop, and all that he has belongs to the Devil. In fine, (says the
Story) they were fain to build a Wall about the Corn, and then set it on Fire,
fearing least such a huge number of Venomous Creatures should impoison or annoy
the whole Country. Charles Fitz-Jeffery's Curse of Corn-holders, p. 24.

Schiltbertus a Hollander, tells a Story of a Combat between Sea and Land
Serpents, thus: In the Kingdom of Genyck, there is a City called Sampson, where
Water-Snakes and Land Serpents innumerable did surround it for a Mile about:
These came forth of the Woods which are many in the Countries adjoining, and
these forth of the Sea. Whilst these met, for 9 days no man for fear durst stir
forth; yet they hurt neither Man nor any other living Creature. On the 10th
day, these two kinds of Serpents began to fight early in the morning, and
continued till Sunset, and then the Water-Serpents yielded to the
Land-Serpents; the next day 8000 of them were found dead. It is most certain,
that there are Serpents in the Sea; Aristotle says, they will overthrow
Galleys, and kill Men. Olaus Magnus writes, That about Norway, when the Sea is
Calm, Serpents will show themselves that are an hundred or two hundred foot
long, and sometimes will catch Men from their Ships. Johnst. Not. Hist. c. 9.
c. 18.

Jacob Hollerius writes, that by the frequent smelling of the Herb Basil, an
Italian had a Scorpion that bred in his Brain. Hol. de Morb. intern. l. 1. c. 1.

Camerarius, tells a Young Nobleman in Germany, who, being in a Mortal Disease,
was desired to leave his Effigies Painted or Engraven to Posterity, because of
his Beauty, refused; but gave them leave after a few days, to open his Tomb,
and as they found his Body then, to have it pourtray'd' but when they opened
it, they found his Carcass half consumed with Worms, and many Serpents about
his Diaphragma, and backbone. His Monument it yet to be seen in Gentilitio
Sacelio, says Camerarius, who himself was an Eyewitness. It a Natura
quasi-digito antorem Calamitatum nostrarum and Corruptionum monstrat, scilicet
Serpentem.

CHAP. XLI. Strange Insects.
IF, says Lessius, Pythagoras finding out a Demonstration in Mathematics, did
so immoderately rejoice, that for the time he did not perfectly enjoy himself;
then how much Joy would so clear Knowledge of so many and great Mysteries
bring, which are in themselves discoverable, in making of the least Fly! such
as may entertain a most sweet and serious Speculation of them for the space of
many Years. And I remember, Gazeus, in his Pia Hilaria, spends a whole Poem in
admiring and describing the Singing of a Grasshopper near one of their Saints
Cells, concluding the whole with this short Epiphonema, O quam magnus est in
parvis Deus! (viz.) Oh! how great is God in little Things!

1. Apis, the Be, is of a protuberant Oval Figure, black, and drilled full of
innumerable Holes like a Grater or Thimble, only the Holes are of a square
Figure like an Honeycomb, and stuffed full of small Hairs: If you divide the
Be near the Neck, the Heart, which is a white pulsing Vesicle, may be seen
without a Glass to beat most lively. The Sting in all Bees are hollow and
tubulous, (like a Shoemaker's Punch,) so that when they prick the Flesh, they
do also, through that Channel, transfuse the Poison into it: For if you take a
Be, Wasp, or Humble-Bee especially, and gently squeeze her Tail, so that you
may see the Sting, you shall perceive a drop of Diaphanous Liquor at the very
end of it, which if you wipe off, you shall distinctly see it renewed again,
that Humor passing down the Cavity into the end thereof. The Sting of a Be
seems to be a Weapon of Offense, and is as great an Instance, that Nature did
really intend Revenge as any; and that, 1. Because there seems to be no other
use of it; 2. By reason of its admirable Shape, which seems to be designed for
that very end; 3. From the Virulency of the Liquor it ejects, and the sad
Effects that follow it. Through the Microscope it appears to consist of two
Parts, a Sheath, and a Sword or Dart: The Sheath without a Chape or Top, almost
like the Holster of Pistol, hollow, of several Joints, armed near the Top with
several Crooks, like Cats Claws: The Sting or Sword appears quite through at
the smaller End, sharp pointed, armed likewise with Claws as the Sheath: These
Crooks or Claws can be closed up, or laid flat to the sides of the Sword when
drawn into the Scabard, and serves for drawing in, and holding the Sting in the
Flesh. They seem to sting thus: 1. They enter the Crooks, and lay hold on the
Skin on either side, which keeps the Sheath from sliding back, and then
throughout the top of the Sting by an alternate and successive retracting, and
emitting it out of the Sheath; and thereby also, perhaps, does force out the
poisonous Liquor, and make it hang at the end of the Sheath in a Drop. The
Crooks are supposed to the cause why these angry Creatures, being in haste,
leave then Sting behind. Hook's Microg. p. 163, 164.

In windy Weather Bees often hold a little Stone in their hinder Feet for
Ballast. Mouf. de Insect. c. 1.

The Honey-Bag is the Stomach, which they always fill to satisfy and to spare,
vomiting up the greater part to be kept against Winter. They have a King, who
is so much honored, that he never goes forth but they all attend him; when he
cannot fly, they carry him, says Aristotle.

They are so Chaste, that they will sting those that smell of Copulation, and
love to stall themselves in Virgins Sepulchers, says Plutarch.

Augustinus Gallus says, That at Verona they crept into the Sepulcher of two
Sisters that were Virgins, they made abundance of Combs in the dead Bodies of
them both. The Matter two Years after their Burial was made manifest by the
fall of Thunder, without any hurt to the Carcases of the Bees and Combs. There
were some found also in the Tomb of Hippocrates.

2. Araneus, the Spider, is a poisonous Insect, which hurts by Stinging, being
of diverse sorts, as the Asterius, Caeruleus, Lyeos, Myrmerion, Phalangium, and
Tarantula. 1. They that are hurt by the Asterius, presently rage, are heavy and
sleepy and have a Relaxation of the Nerves. 2. The Ceruleus causes a Pain at
the Heart, deep Sleep and Vomiting. 3. The Myrmerion causes a Swelling in the
Wound by Pain, and want of Breath. 4. The Phalangium affects the whole Body by
Heat, Cold, Horror, Tumor, Inflammation, Trembling, and a Diabetes. 5. The
Tarantulus causes Singing, Trembling, Fear, Phrenzy and Madness. The Cure is
done by bathing with Decoction of Stinking Trefoil and Oil, fomenting the Parts
with a Sponge dipped in Vinegar, etc. Against the Tarantula, some use Music.
Salmon's Dispen. p. 257.

Spiders have six or eight Eyes, eight Feet, are Insects of Prey, hairy, of
thirty sorts in England; in projecting a Thread cross a Room in plano
Horizontalis, raise themselves on their Legs, and turning themselves up on
their hinder Parts, shoot out a Thread at a great distance.

3. Asellus, Millipedes, Multipedes, Tilus, Sows or Hog-Lice; they breed in
most Places under Stones, etc. any being touched gather themselves up round.
They are of thin Volatile Parts, digesting, cleansing, opening, and a great
Resolver of all Tartarious Matter; of great Use in Physic for the Stone, all
Obstructions especially of the Urine, Jaundice, etc. Ibid.

4. Auricularia, Forficula, Mordella, Vellicula, Fallo, the Earwig; in Powder
with Hare's Urine cures Deafness Ibid.

5. Blatta, Tinea, the Moth, hurts Books, Bee-hives, and Woolen Clothes; and
may be gathered together by Moth Mullen. Ibid.

6. Bombyx, the Silkworm, differs not from the Caterpillar, save that the
Caterpillar is a little hairy, and the Silkworm is stronger than the Web of the
Caterpillar, and of another Color; but as to the Figure and Bulk, there is
little difference between them. Whereto may be added, that their Production is
much at one, as being, as it were, hatched of certain Eggs living on Leaves,
enclosing themselves in certain Webs, out of which they make their way; after
which they become a kind of Butterflies by a strange Metamorphosis, which
forces them from one Extremity to another, i. e. from the Nature of Reptiles,
to that of Volatiles: Which Transformation is such, as might be placed among
the Miracles of Nature, considering the great difference there is between those
two Forms. Which makes a Question, Whether the Silkworm becoming a Butterfly,
did not change its Species? As certainly it would, were it not that every Thing
produces its like; and the Silkworm deriving its Birth from the Seed of the
Butterfly, it is an Argument that both are of the same species. The Seeds of
these Worms are like Pins Heads, but black and flat; put between two warm
Pillows, or in the Sun in April, Worms are produced, black, but small, which
pass through certain little Holes made in a Paper wherewith they are covered,
and fasten themselves on the Mulberry Leaves, which are also placed on the same
Paper full of little Holes, upon which Leaves the best Seeds being hatched,
within five or six Days go creeping after the first Worm that gets out of her
Shell; these laid upon little Boards in a temperate Place, a spacious and
lightsome Room, are entertained with fresh Leaves twice a Day; White Mulberry
makes finer Silk than the black; in want of them, Rose-Bush Leaves and Lettice
are used. In 40 Days it becomes gray, and changes Color four times, not eating
for some Days before its Change. The Worm is subject to certain Diseases; the
Cure is, removal into another Room, Perfume, Vinegar, Wine, the smell of dried
Bacon, etc. They are to be kept clean from Flies and Pismires on Boards rubbed
with Wormwood Leaves, or sprinkled with Wine. All Moisture, harsh Sounds, as of
Bells, Muskets, etc. and strong Breaths, destroy them. When the Time of their
Spinning draws nigh, which is about 6 Weeks after their being first alive, at
which time they are about the bigness of a Man's Little Finger, more
transparent than they use to be, and the Little Snout so lengthened, as that it
represents the form of Nose; the Animal by extraordinary Motion expresses the
Inconvenience it endures by reason of its Burden: Then it is cleansed oftener,
and there is much less given it to eat, and afterward dried Branches of Birch,
Heath, Broom, or Vines, are set on the Boards. Then they fasten their first
Threads, which are course, and afterward finer, in one continued Thread,
accompanied with the Gum which makes it stick one to another, shutting her self
at last up in the Clue, there stays 15 Days, till the Skin is broken: Then
the Silkworm breaks through its Web, and comes out in the form of a
white-horned Butterfly: Then the Male coupling with the Female, which is
bigger, the Latter sheds her Seed upon a clean Paper spread under her. The Seed
is either kept in a Box for the next Year, or sold by the Ounce. The Webs,
about 15 Days after they are completed, are cast into warm Water, and there
stirred with a Handful of Birch, till they have fastened on 7 or 8 Ends of
Silk; which done, they wind it up into Skains, and that is the Raw Silk. Philos.
Confer. of the Virtuosi of France, Vol. 2. p. 402, 403, etc.

Moufet affirms, that in the Transmutation of the Worm into a Fly, the Tail of
the Fly is made of the Head of the Worm; but that is not likely. One of the Oval
Cases drawn out into all the Silken Wire it was made up of, appeared to be by
Measure above 300 Yards, and yet weighed but two Grains and a half. Rob. Boil
of Effluv. p. 11.

7. Buprestis, Eulprestis, the Burn Cow; it is of the Nature of the
Cantharides, causing Heat and Exulceration. They cause Lust, being drunk; and
are good against Leprosy, Ringworm and Canker, Salmon's Dispens. p. 258.

8. Cantharides, the Spanish Fly, is produced from a Worm like Eruca; they are
Hot and Dry in the fourth Degree, being Caustic: Whereby they Corrode, and
draw Blisters; are Diuretic, and kill Worms. They are bred from a Worm in a
spungy Substance, especially of the Sweet-brier, Fig Tree, but most fruitfully
in the Ash. Their Venom is most tart. Johnston's Not. Hist. a. 8. c. 5. p. 248,
etc. Salmon's Dispens. p. 258.

Their Antidote is Milk or Oil, and Clysters with fat Broth.

8. Cicada, the Grasshopper; is a Creature having no Mouth, only a Pipe in the
Breast, by which it sucks in Dew, of which it lives, and of which it seems to
be bred; for in those little Dobs of Frothy Dew, which appear upon Bushes and
Leaves in the beginning of Summer, (which are commonly called Cuckow-Spit,) you
shall find them always in Fieri, or Generation. The Ancients used to eat them.

10. Cicindela, Noctiluca, Nitedula, Noctuvigila, the Glowworm, has Wings,
and shines in the Dark; their Light is under their Wings; and they likewise are
said to be generated of Dew It has a Belly with Roundles, divided with many
Segments, in the end whereof are two Spots very light, like to Fire, shining
most when her Belly is pressed. Adrianus Junius, when in Bononia, drew the
Liquor of them upon Paper, that shined like Stars; what is writ therewith in
the Day, may be read in the Night. The way to do it is, by cutting their Tails
from their Bodies, and taking care that nothing mingle with the shining Parts;
and then grinding it on a Porphyry-Stone, bury it for it for 15 Days in a Glass
Vessel under Dung, the Parts of the Worm hanging in the Vessel, and not
touching the Sides: Then take the Glass and put it in a hot Oven, or hot Water,
receive the distilled Water underneath, and keep it in a fine Chrystal-Glass,
hanging it in your Room or Chamber, and it will so enlighten the Air, that you
may see by it. Johnston's Not. Hist. cl. 8 c. 5. our of Bapt. Porta.

11. Cochinila, the Lady-Bird, is the delicate little Bird with red hard Wings,
and black Spots, which Children play with, and is an excellent Cordial, a
wonderful Alexipharmic and Antifebrifick, curing the most malignant Fevers,
Smallpox, etc. The Powder of its Body is a deep Purple, and omits its Tincture
into Water, Wine, and Spirit of Wine, not inferior to Saffron, etc. Dose, a
Grain, v, ad xv, vel xx. Salm. Dispens. p. 259.

12. Cochlea, Limax, the Snail: They have Eyes in the Top of their Horns, and
pull them in when any thing comes near them, and put their Horns into their
Heads, and their Heads into their Bodies.

13. Cimex, the Chink, Wall-Louse, Wood-Louse, or Bugg; haunts Beds, is flat,
red and stinking, and sucks Man's Blood greedily; but is used in Physic.

14. Crabro, the Hornet, is said to breed out of the harder Parts of
Horseflesh, as Wasps out of the softer: The very Decoction of them dropped on
the Skin makes it swell. The Cure for the Sting is Venice-Treacle inwardly, and
Cow Dung with Fasting-Spittle outwardly. Salmon, Ibid.

15. Culex, the Gnat, arises of Putrefaction, is useless in Physic, and is
driven away by the Fume of Wormwood, Fleabane, or Sulphur.

16. Eruca, Brucus, Tinea Agrestis, the Catterpillar or Canker-Worm: They are
destroyed by the Fume of Brimstone.

17. Gryllus, Acheta, the Cricket: It is a Winged Insect like a Locust or
Grasshopper, lives in Chimneys and warm Places, and sings almost continually.

18. ^^mica, Murmos, the Pismire or Ant. It is a small, but wise Creature,
gathering its Food in Summer in the Full Moons, and resting in the New Moons:
They are like a Commonwealth, and gather Corn, which they dry, and bite at both
Ends, that they may not grow; they wear away Stones by their Assiduity, and
make beaten Road-ways; they help one another in drawing their Burdens, dam out
Water, and bury their Dead. The Greater lead the way, and the Lesser drag the
Corn; and when dirty, they cleanse themselves before they enter into their
Habitations. They teach their Young to labor, but expel the Idle; and when
they carry their Grain, it is said to be a sign of foul Weather. They cast up
the Earth over the Mouths of the Caves, (that the Water may not enter in,)
wherein they have three Cells; in the first, they live; in the second; they
breed and bury; and in the third, they keep their Corn. They generate in
Winter, bring forth Eggs, which in Spring are Ants; when old, they grow Winged,
and then suddenly after die. Salmon's Disp. l. 2. p. 260.

19. Hirudo, Sanguisuga, the Horse-Leach; The Great are best, with a Line on
their Back. They are used to draw Blood with; but they ought fisrt to be
cleansed of purged with clean Water, and then applied to the Part, it being
first rubbed with Sal Nitre, Blood, Milk, Clay or Honey, then apply them: To
remove them, cast upon their Mouth, Salt, Ashes, Aloes, Vinegar. etc. and they
will fall off. In the River of Mauretania they are said to be seven Cubits long.

20. Julus, Centumpeda, the Gally-Worm. They are a short kind of Scolopendra's,
exceeding in number of Feet all other Insects.

21. Locusta. It was formerly used as a Food in the Eastern Countries, and John
Baptist fed upon them. It is an Insect which has a Head like a Horse, six Legs,
and Wings, being of diverse Colors, Anno 852, they wasted France 20 Miles in
one Day, going in Troops, the Leaders with a few more went before to take up
Quarters; the next Day at the same Hour they all arrived. In the Sixth Year of
the Emperor Argyropolus, they drove the Inhabitants of certain Provinces of
the East to such Necessity, that they sold their Children, and passed into
Thrace; next Year they returned again, and having spoiled the Provinces three
Years, perished at Pergamos. In some Places the Magistrate appoints them to be
killed thrice a Year, and he that refuses is punished. Johnston's Not. Hist.
p. 254.

22. Musca, the Fry.

23. Papilio, Compilo, Avicula Isiodori, the Butterfly: They generate in May,
June, and July, and lay Eggs.

24. Pediculus, the Louse; breeds first in the Skin of the Head, and abounds in
Hectic Fevers, not so in Putrid Fevers: It leaves those that are dead.
Eating of Figs is said to produce them; but it is certain, it breeds Warts on
the Skin. Johnston.

25. Pulex, the Flea; they are generated by Dust, as also of putrified Sweat:
The only Remedy to destroy them, is the Pulp or Decoction of Coloquintida.
Salmon. Some say, Silk-Yarn put into the Bed will gather them together into it.

26. Ricinus, Redivivus, the Tike; is a filthy Creature, or kind of Louse, that
troubles Oxen, Goats, Sheep, Dogs, etc.

27. Scarabeus, the Beetle; the smell of Roses is said to kill them.

28. Scincus, the Sea-Skink.

29. Scolopendra; they differ from a Galley-Worm, as a Lobster from a Crevise:
They are Poisonous, and their Poison causes Putrefaction.

30. Scorpio; it is almost like a Craysish, having little Eyes, Oval form,
eight Feet, and two Arms. Of great use in Physic, especially for the Stone and
Gout.

31. Stella Mariana, or the Sea-Pad, is of great use in Physic.

32. Tabanus, Asilus, Musca Caballonia, the Ox-Fly.

33. Teredo, the Wood-Worm, breeds and feeds in many Trees, except the Oak, and
some others. The Frygians are said to eat of them. thence called Xylophagi.
Elian writes, that the King of the Indies used for a second Course a Worm
breeding in Plants, which was broiled at the Fire. Johnst. Not. Hist. p. 263.

34. Vespa, the Wasp, breeds most, when Wolves kill Horses or Oxen: Sometimes
they are found in a Stags Head. One brought one of these formed Wasp-Houses
wonderfully made to Pierius Valerianus at Belunum, from some Wood in a Desert;
which he describes thus: There are seven Rounds one above another, at two
Fingers distance, distinguished by little Pillars between, that every one might
have space enough to go and come to his House; the Diameter of the Rounds unto
the fifth, was about 12 Digits; the others narrowed by degrees. The first Round
or Chamber was hanged to a Bough of an old Tree, guarded with a Crust against
Wind and Weather; beneath were six angled Cells close together, so that the
other Chambers were all overcast with the same Crust, etc. All these Creatures
flew out of the upper Stations, those in the lowest Rooms seemed like to
Embrio's, etc. part their Belly from their Breast, and they will live long, and
will sometimes prick one that touches their Sting an Hour after. A Swarm of
Wasps among the Romans was accounted an ill Omen. Johnst. Not. Hist. p. 267.

35. We will conclude this Chapter with a general Discourse of Worms,
especially such as are bred in living Creatures; for they are found in Cattle,
and in Men, as well as Plants, or in the Earth. Anno 1549, there were many Men
about the River Thaysa, in whose Bodies were found Creatures called Lutrae, and
Lizards. Wierus saw a Countryman that voided a Worm 8 Foot long, with Mouth
and Head like a Duck. Wier. de Praestig. Demon. l. 3. c. 15.

A Maid at Lovain (says Cornelius Gemma) voided many prodigious Creatures,
amongst the rest, a living Creature a Foot and half long, thicker than a Man's
Thumb, like an Eagle, but the Tail hairy.

Forestus out of Hostim ( Obs. Med. p. 1. obs. 2.) shows, that at beneventum in
Italy there was a great Mortality, which much troubled the Physicians, not
knowing the Cause thereof, till they opened one of the dead Bodies, in whose
Brain they found a red Worm yet alive; this they tried to kill by diverse
Medicaments, but nothing was effectual: At last they boiled some slices of
Rhadish in Malaga Wine, and with this it was killed. He shows also, that one
being cured of the french Malady, was still tormented with the Headache, till
his Skull by Advice was opened; under which, upon the Dura Matter, was found a
black Worm, which being taken out and killed, he was cured.

Brassavola records, (in 16 Aphorism. l. 3. Hippocr.) that an old Man of 82
Years, by a Potion made of Scordium and Sea-Moss, voided 500 Worms.

Alexander Benedict speaks of a young Maid, who lay speechless 8 Days with her
Eyes open, and upon the voiding of 42 Worms, recovered her Health. Alexand.
Bened. lib. de Verit. Re^um.

Cardan records, that Erasmus saw an Italian, who spoke perfect Dutch, which he
never learned, so that he was thought to be possessed; but being rid of his
Worms, recovered, not knowing that he ever spoke Dutch.

Ambrose Parry ( l. 19. c. 3) shows, that a Woman voided out of an Impostume in
her Belly a multitude of Worms, about the bigness of ones Finger, with sharp
Heads, which had pierced her Intestines.

A Woman in Delph in three several Days voided three great Worms out of her
Navel, and not ^^ng after was delivered of two Boys, 7 Days one after another.
But of this, Mention is made already.

Thed. D^nus speaks of a Switzer Woman, who voided a piece of a Worm 5 Else
long, without Head and Tail, having Scales like a Snake; after this she voided
another, bred in her Bowels, above 20 Else long. This poor Woman was tortured
so long as she was fasting; but when she eat, she had some ease. Rosse arcan.
Microcosm. p. 103.

I could set down, says the same Author, many other Stories of Worms voided
out of Men's Bodies, some like Lizards, some like Frogs, some Hairy, and full of
Feet, some voided by the Eyes, Ears, Vomiting, Stool, some by Urine; but this
may suffice to let us know, of what Materials this Body of ours, which we so
much pamper, is composed; and how little Cause we have to be sollicitous for
the Back and Belly; and withal, let us stand in awe of God, who, when he
pleases, can for our Sins plague us with vermin in our Bodies whilst we are
yet alive. Ibid.

CHAP. XLII. Strange Vegetables, Trees, Plants, etc.
ADam, when he was innocent, was placed in a Garden, and after he had sinned,
was turned out into the wide and wild World; most of his wiser Posterity, after
they have sinned away a great part of their Life, and rambled about through the
Bustle and Cares of the World, desire to make a Garden the place of their
Retreat, as suitable for Retirement, Meditation and Devotion. For such Purposes
this Chapter will be serviceable, wherein I take not upon me to mention every
Vegetable, and, as Solomon, to give the Natural History of all Plants, from the
Tall Cedars of Lebanus, to the Hysop upon the Wall; nor read particular
Lectures upon any of them, as our Savior, when he sends us to consider the
Lillies of the Field, to learn the Duty of Contentment; but I expose to public
View, a Collection of some of the choicest vegetables in the Garden of God,
enough to furnish a Man of Methusalem 's Age with Subject enough to
Philosophize and Meditate devoutly upon; for me may tread and read all the way
to our Graves.

1. The Boramet, which grows in Scythia, is said to have the perfect
resemblance of a Lamb, with the Head, Eyes, Ears, Teeth, and the rest of the
Parts of the Body proportionable: This Plant is reported to crop and feed upon
all the Grass that grows round about it; and when there is no more left, it
dies with Famine. You may have the Story of it, says my Author, in
Sigismundus, Cardan, Scaliger, Vigenerius, Rovillius, Duret, and one of the
most Excellent of the French Poets: Tells que les Boramets, etc.

Englished by Silvester thus: Such as those Boramets in Scythia bred,
Of slender Seeds, and with green Fodder fed:
Although their Bodies, Noses, Mouths and Eyes,
Of new-yean'd Lambs have full the Form and Guise.
Gaff. Cur. p. 2. c. 5.

2. There is now at this instant showed in my House a couple of Mandrakes,
found in a Field called the Shoulder of Mutton Field, between Croydon and
London, in Mr. Anderson's Grounds in August 1695, of a Form very much
resembling the Humane Shape, with distinction of Sexes, the Female with Hair
much longer than the Man, the Man with Beard, Mustachoes, and all other Parts
answerable. It is now living, and shoots forth Leaves: At first it was found in
a Wheat-Field, out of which Wheat was carried but three Days before, and then
no appearance of any such Plant; yet at the first discovery the Leaves were
near upon as broad as a Woman's Apron; of a pale Green, and narrow pointed,
with Apples like Oranges. Yet this is almost altogether Imposture; for as
Johnston tells us, there are Counterfeits made of Reeds and Briony Roots.
Matthew. l. 4. Discor. c. 7. shows the Way and Imposture used to make one. They
carve in these the Images of both Men and Women, sticking the Grains of Barley
and Millet in the places where they will have Hair come forth; then making a
Hole in the ground, they cover it with thin Sand, so long till these Grains
shoot forth, which will be in 20 Days at least: then they take them up again,
and cut the Roots where the Grains grow to them with a very sharp Knife, and
they fit them so, that they represent the Hairs of the Head, the Beard, and
other Parts that are Hairy. John. Not. Hist. a. 5. c. 29. p. 148.

3. The Palm Tree accounted the most excellent, both for Use and Ornament,
takes no Repose, but every Month in the Year presents new Fruit: A beautiful
Cluster of thirty, forty, sometimes more Cocoes or Nuts monthly appearing; and
tho not above seven, twelve at the most, come to be ripe, and attain the last
Perfection; yet it is questionless, that the Palm Tree by her Fruitfulness was
by God peculiarly created for the Advantage of Mankind. Some think rev. 22.2.
is an Allusion to it; this being a Tree of Life on Earth, as that is in Heaven.
It grows mostly in Asia, particularly India, and best nearest the Sea side. Of
this Tree, there are many kinds.

I. The Coco-Tree, which bears Coco Nuts, whereof some are wild, some
excellent, called Barcaes, very sweet, refreshing and wholesome. II. The Casuri,
which bears Dates, tho in India it yields none, but a certain Liquor which they
distill and make a Wine of. III. The Trefulim, which bears a Fruit called
Arequ^ira, of whose Leaves are made Vmbrellaes, large enough to shelter two Men
from Sun or Rain, without which they cannot travel. IV. A fourth Species (which
is Nameless) produces the Fruit called De Raposa, (i. e.) Foxes Fruit, a kind
of Wild Date, of no good Taste, and never coming to Maturity. V. The Berline,
which bears no Fruit, only used for adorning Churches, and of a fit size for
that use. VI. The Macomeira, whose Fruit is in Clusters of Thirty or more,
every one as big as an ordinary Apple; when ripe, of a Date-colour, and very
grateful; the Rhind, as hard Tow, oftener sucked, than eaten; if swallowed, of
very hard Digestion: The Stone green and hard, yet Sovereign against many
Diseases.
These are the Real Estates in India, as Vineyards and Oliveyards in Europe:
They are planted by sowing the Cocoes or Nuts in a Bed, afterward transplanted
and ranked at a fit distance, afford a beautiful Prospect to the Eye: They bear
Fruit at five Years, sometimes not till seven; in some part of Ceilon at two
Years. Some of the Nuts falling off, Nature supplies the lost ones, by
immediately putting forth another Cluster; and this it does from Month to
Month, so that some are Ripe, when others are in the Blossom. The Coco Fruit is
very extraordinary, making a good Drink called Lanha while the Nut is green;
arrived to a greater Consistence, they eat it with Spoons, and call it Cosanha;
come to the last Perfection, it is eaten, and is savoury and well tasted, but
some part of it hot and unwholesome. The thin Rind that covers the Kernel is
Medicinal; a kind of Meat called Cuscus is made of the Nut grated: The Gratings
steeped in Water, and squeezed, make a delicious Broth. Much more might be said
of the Fruit of this Tree, for they make an Oil of the dried Kernel, etc.

The utmost Rind called Cairo, well macerated and drawn into Threads, afford
all sorts of fine Thread, and Ropes big enough for the greatest Ships, which
will not rot in Salt Water. The second Rind, when green, is eaten like
Chardons; when ripe, it is called Charetta, and made up for diverse Uses;
charked, it admirably tempers Iron. In short, the Palm Tree alone is sufficient
to build, rig, and freight a Ship with Bread, Wine, Water, Oil, Vinegar, Sugar,
etc. I have sailed in Vessels, (says my Author,) where the Bottom, and the
whole Cargo, has been from the Munificence of the Palm Tree. Relation of the
River Nile, etc. Translated into English by Sir Peter Wyche, p. 70, 71, etc.

4. The Cabbage-Tree growing in the Caribbe-Islands, is, as Dr. Stubbs assures
us, a sort of Palm Tree: All that Part that is eaten as the Cabbage, is what
sprouted out the Year, and so is tender. If eaten raw, it is as good as new
Almonds; and if boiled, it excels the best Cabbage. When that Top is cut off,
the Tree dies. The Doctor says, There was one of those Trees at Barbados
above 300 Foot high. This Tree will never rot, and when it is dried, grows so
hard, that you cannot drive a Nail into it. Sir Thomas Pope Blount's Not. Hist.
p. 357.

5. The Stinking-Tree, growing in the East Indies, naturally smells like the
strongest Humane Excrements, especially as upon the emptying of a House of
Office. Sir Philberto Vernatti sent an Arm of this Tree of the Royal Society at
Gresham-College; where, tho it has now been preserved many Years, yet seems to
give as full and quick a Scent as ever: Yet in burning, it yields no Smell.
it is ponderous, hard, and of the Color of English Oak; and, as that, has
large Air-Vessels, yet but few. Ibid. p. 356.

6. The Cocao-Tree; the Bodies of the largest are in Bigness, tho not in
Tallness, equal to our English Plum-Trees: They are in every part smooth, and
much resemble our Heart-Cherry-Tree; there is little difference in their
Leaves, these being pointed, but smoother on the Edges, and of a darker Green,
more like the Leaves of an Orange-Tree. It bears Fruit every Year twice;
delights in the Shade: The Fruit called the Cacao-Nut shaped like a Cucumber,
about four or five Inches long, and two broad; chiefly used in making
Chocolate. Those Trees grow in America: A Bearing-Tree yielding from two to
eight Pound of Nuts a Year, and each Cod twenty or thirty Nuts. The Cods grow
only out of the Body, or great Limbs; and at the same time there are Blossoms,
Young, and Ripe Fruit. These Kernels being well pounded in a Mortar with Sugar
and Spices, are commonly made up in Cakes or Rolls, and so brought Spain, and
other Parts. Dr. Stubbs is of Opinion, that it is the best Diet for
Hypochondriacal and Chronical Distempers, Scurvey, Gout, Stone, Women lying in,
and Children new born, etc. Sir Tho. Pope Blout 's Not. Hist. p. 91, etc.

7. Thee, or Tea, is a Shrub growing in most Parts of China and Japan; it is
about the bigness of our Garden Rose, and Currant-Trees: The Roots are Fibrous,
and spread, near the Surface of the Earth; the Flowers are like those of Rosa
Sylvestris; the Seeds are round and black, which being sowed, come to
perfection in three Years time, but that Crop is little valued: the great and
only Virtue of this Plant consisting in the Leaves; of which, there are five
sorts; the largest at Bottom being sold at a Penny-halfpenny the Pound; the
smallest at the Top, for Fifty or a Hundred, Crowns the Pound. It Is supposed,
of Virtue to rectify the Ferment of the Blood, and to strengthen and confirm
the Tone of the Parts, in assisting Nature in her Operations. Warm Water is
looked upon as the best Vehicle for it. Ibid. p. 100.

8. Coffee, or Cauphe, grows in Arabia Faelix, like our Cherry-Trees, but
scarce so big: It bears a Berry about the bigness of a small Bean, used much in
Turkey, in the City of Cairo, Barbary, etc. Monsieur Thevenot says, If it be
drank very hot it clears the Head of Vapors, moderately hot it binds, and cold
it is laxative. The Lord Bacon says, it comforts the Brain and Heart, and helps
Digestions. Dr. Willis confirms the same, but says, it disposes to the Palsy.
The Persians think it allays the Natural Heat, and hinders Procreation. Ibid.
etc. p. 110.

9. Lignum Aloes, is most in Malacca, in the Islands Sumatra, Camboia, Siam,
and the Adjoining Countries; the Trees are like Oliver Trees, but larger; the
drier the Wood is, the better it smells; the innermost part of the Wood is the
best; the finest is called Columba, and the other, Palo d'Aquilla. The Wood
that is very heavy, with black and brown Veins, and yields much Oil, (which
is found by the Fire,) is the best, and the greater and thicker, the better it
is. Of this Wood they make many costly things, and it has so curious a smell,
that it is greatly esteemed; the Calamba if good, is sold by weight against
Silver and Gold; the Palo D'aquilla is next accounted of. There is another kind
called Aquilla Brava, the Indians use to burn therewith, the bodies of their
Bramen's, and Men of account; this Wood beaten to Powder, and taken in Broth or
Wine, fortifies the Stomach, stays Vomiting, and Cures the Plurisie, and
Bloody Flux, etc. Ibid. p. 70.

10. The Lentisk-Tree, bears the Mastick, which is a Gummy Rosin, of a whitish
yellow, well scented, and in Grains, the best comes from Chio: three Leagues
from that Island, upon a Mountain to the South, there grows a peculiar sort of
Trees; the Leaves are like Myrtle, their Branches so long, that they creep on
the Ground, but, which is wonderful, that when they are down, they rise again
of themselves. From the beginning of May, to the end of June, the Inhabitants
take great care to keep the Earth under the Tree, very clean; for during those
two Months, there Issues out a certain Gum from the Joints of the Branches,
which drops upon the Ground; this is that we call Mastick, and the Turks,
Sakes, according to the Islands Name. Here grows great store of this Mastick,
which in the Seraglio of Constantinople, the Women continually chew it, to
cleanse and keep their Teeth white. At Chio they prick those Trees in August
and September, and the Mastick, which is their Gum, sweating out of the Holes
they have made in the Bark, runs down the Tree, and falls upon the Ground,
where it congeals into flat pieces, which sometime after they gather, then dry
them in the Sun, then sift them to separate the Dust from them. Ibid. p. 65.
etc.

11. The Cinnamon-Tree grows in the Island Ceylan. It is much like the Willow,
and has three Barks; they never take off but the first and second, which is
accounted the best, but should the Knife enter the third, the Tree would die,
which Art they learn from their Youth. The King of Ceylan being an Enemy to the
Hollanders, sends his Forces with Intention to surprise them, when they gather
their Cinnamon, so that they are forced to bring 7 or 800 Men together, to
defend as many more that are at work. There grows upon this Tree, a Fruit like
an Olive, of which the Portugals made a Past, like white Wax, of which they
made Tapers, which as soon as lighted, did Perfume their Churches. Monsieur
Thevenot says, the Tree is like an Oliver-Tree; that it bears a white Flower,
of an excellent scent, and the Fruit of it is round; they take of the Bark in
Summertime, and when they cut it, the smell is so strong, that the Soldiers
fall almost Sick upon it; the best dried is Reddish. Sir Tho. Pope Blunt. p. 37.
etc.

12. The Nutmeg-Tree grows in the Molucca Islands, Zeilan and the Isle of Bunda
in the East Indies; the Tree is somewhat like a Peach; the Fruit consists of
4 parts, the first is a thick covering like a Walnut. The second Coat is Mace.
The third a harder Shell under the Mace. The Fourth a Kernel, included in the
Shell, which is the Nutmeg. Tavernier says, that the Nutmeg being ripe, several
Birds come from Isles toward the South, and devour it whole, but are forced to
throw it up again, before it be digested; that the Nutmegs then besmeared with
a Viscous Matter, falling to the Ground, takes Root; and produces a Tree, which
would never thrive, were it Planted. These Birds of Paradise come in flights to
gorge themselves with this pleasing Spice, but are so intoxicated therewith,
that they fall dead drunk on the Ground, where the Emmets in a short time eat
off their Legs; Thevenot says, these Birds are shaped like Cuckoes. Ibid. p.
44. And Tavernier of the Commod. of the Domin. of the G. Mogul. Thevenot's
Trav. into the Indies. p. 109.

13. The Pepper-Plant, is of three sorts; that which bears the black Pepper
grows up like a Vine Naturally; is sometimes sown at the bottom of some Three
to support it; the Leaves few, somewhat like an Ivy. That which bears white
Pepper, is much like the other, but only in the Color of the Fruit. That which
bears Long-Pepper, differs from the two former, and grows in another Country.
Gerrard's Herbal.

Tavernier speaks of two sorts of Pepper, small and great; the larger from
Malavare, the other from Bantam, etc. Baldeus says, it grows best in shady
places, having on each Branch commonly 6 Clusters, each a foot long, in color
like unripe Grapes; gathered green in October and November, and then dried in
the Sun.

The Red Pepper, is said by Ligon, to be of two sorts, one like a Child's
Coral, 2 Inches long, and shining, the other of the same color, but shaped
like a large Cloak-button, both so violently strong, that at garbling of them,
they never cease Coughing. Spaniards use it in all the Meat that they would
have pickant; for a greater Haut-goust, is not in the World, It grows on a
little Shrub like a Goosberry-bush. Ligon's Hist. of Barbados. p. 79.

Guiny Pepper is said by Piso to grow in Brasile, there called Quiya, of 9 or
10 sorts; a great Stomachick, and good Sauce. Grew's Mus. Regal. Societ. p. 231.

Jamaica or sweet scented Pepper, grows much like the East India Pepper. Sir
Tho. Pope Blunt's Not. Hist. p. 53.

14. The Clove-Tree grows in the Molucca's, much like our Bay Tree; the Clove
grows 10 and and 20 together, among the Leaves; the blossoms first White, then
Green, and at last Red and Ripe; the Leaf, Bark, and Wood, as strong as the
Clove; when the blossoms are Green, they are the pleasantest smell in the
World. The Cloves are gathering from September to March, by beating the Tree,
as we do Walnuts; the Fruit falling grows, and after 7 years, bears fruit for
100 years together; but barrens all the Ground about it, suffering neither
Grass nor Weed to grow near it. At cleansing of the Cloves, they will drink up
in two Days a whole Vessel of Water placed near them. Purch. Pilgr. Vol. 2. p.
1783.

15. Ginger is the Root of a Plant much like a Reed, growing in many parts of
India, taken up in December and January; the outward skin scraped off, to kill
the Spirit, and then covered with Pot-Earth to stop the Holes, and keep it
fresh; it is much eaten in India, green for Sallads, as also sod in Vinegar;
the blossom of a Scarlet color. Sir Tho. Pope Blunt's Not. Hist. p. 57.

16. Indigo, grows in the Great Mogull's Country, sown every Year like our
Hemp, Cut three several times, the first best, which makes a Violet blue; the
Herb bring cut and thrown into Limepits half full of Water, and there Jumbled
together, till it become like a thick Mud, and there left to settle for some
days; the Water is all drained out, several Baskets filled with the Slime,
several Men in a plain Field, fall to work, making p little pieces of Indigo,
flat at the bottom, sharp like an Egg, at the top, The Flower the Plant bears,
is like that of Thistles; whilst they sift the Powder, they are fain to keep a
Linen Cloth before their Faces, and stop their Nostrils, leaving only two
little holes for their Eyes, and drink Milk every half hour; and yet after long
employment about this work, their Spittle is apt to be bluish. Tavernier
says, that one Morning he laid an Egg among the Sifters, and breaking it in
the Evening, it was all blue within. Ibid. p. 80.

17. The Sugar-Cane is a kind of Reed, both pleasant and profitable, having
long Stalks, about 6 or 7 foot high, jointed or knotted much like the Great
Cane; the Leaves come out of every Joint on each side of the Stalk, long,
narrow, and sharp-pointed, much like unto some Flags, but not so broad, but of
a more bluish green color, much like a Willow-green. These Canes are not
hollow, but the Stalk is stuffed with a Porous substance, moist and sweet in
taste. From the Root spring young Suckers, which are cut away, and serve to
Plant elsewhere for Increase. The Sugarcanes grow in both the Indies, the
Canary-Islands, Portugal, Spain, Sicily; Creet, and Cyprus. The Maderaes Sugar
is the best, the Canaries next, Malta next; then Barbados, Virginia, St.
Thomas, etc. Dr. Willis lays the cause of the Increase of the Scurvy, on the
too much use of Sugar; and in Portugal it is observed of those who work much in
the Sugar-houses, that they are very subject to the Scurvey, and their chief
Distemper is a Consumption. Ibid. p. 136.

18. The Soap-Tree grows in Jamaica, the Berries whereof, (as big as Musket
Bullets,) wash better then any Castle-Soap, but they rot the Linen in time;
the Negroes use them. Dr. Stubbs. Ibid. p. 357.

19. The Poison-Tree grows in Barbados, its Leaves are as large and beautiful
as the Laurel, and so like, as not to be known asunder. If any of its Sap fly
into the Eyes of the Workmen, they become blind; they wear Cypres over their
Eyes: Yet of this Timber they make the Pots they cure their Sugar in; for being
sawed, and the Boards dried in the Sun, the Poison vapors out. Ibid. p. 358.

20. The Poisonous-Cane grows there also, so like the Sugar-Cane, as hardly to
be discerned the one from the other. Whosoever chews this Plant, and sucks in
any of the Juice, will have his Tongue, Mouth and Throat so swelled, as to take
away his Speech for two Days, and no Remedy but Patience. Ibid. p. 357.

21. Arbor Tristis grows in Malacca, bears Flowers after Sunset, and sheds
them so soon as the Sun rises, and this every Night in the Year. R. Morden's
Geogr. p. 413.

22. The Sensitive Plant, called by some the Bashful Plant, contracts it self
if any one puts his Hand to it; and upon pulling back of the Hand, it recovers
it self again. Much of this Nature is that Tree in the Island Simbubon, whose
Leaves being like the Mulberry, and having somewhat like two little Feet on
both sides, when they fall upon the Ground, do move and creep. One of them kept
eight Days in a Dish, lived and moved so often as one touched it. Jul Scalig.
Exerc. 112.

23. The Trawberry-Tree Flowers in July; the Buds hang so together, that they
are joined in Clusters at the utmost end, each of them like a long
Myrtle-Berry, and as great, without Leaves; hollow as an Egg, with the Mouth
open. Thuphrast. de Plant. l. 3. c. 16.

24. The Todda-Tree growing in the Province of Sutan in India, is supposed to
be that Tree which yields that excellent Rarity called Linum Asbestinum, or
Incombustible Cloth. Mr. Nich. Wait, Merchant of London, having procured a
piece of it, gives this Account thereof in a Letter to Dr. Plot.

He says, He received it from one Conco, a Natural Chinese, resident in the
City of Batavia, in the North-East Parts of India; who, by means of Keayarear
Sukradana, (likewise a Chinese, and formerly chief Customer to the old Sultan
of Bantam) did, after several Years Diligence, procure from a great Mandarin in
Lanquin (a Province of China) near a quarter of a Yard of the said Cloth; and
declared, that he was credibly informed, that the Princes of Tartary, and
others adjoining to them, did use it in burning their Dead; and that it was
said and believed by them, to be made of the Under Part of the Root of this
Tree growing in the Province of Sutan; and that of the Upper Part of the said
Root, near the Surface of the Ground, was made a finer sort, which is three or
four times burning, the said Mr. Wait says, he has seen diminished almost
half. They report also, That out of the said Tree distills a Liquor, which not
consuming, is used with a Week made of the same Material with the Cloth, to
burn in their Temples to Posterity, Mr. Wait showed an Handkerchief of this
Cloth to the Royal Society, nine Inches long between the Fringe or Tassels.
There are two Proofs of its resisting Fire at London; one privately on Aug. 20.
1684. with Oil, and then it lost 2 Drams 5 Grains: The second, public before
the Royal Society on Nov. 12. in a clear Charcoal Fire, and then it lost 1 Dram
6 Grains. Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 172. This Linen is mentioned by Pliny,
Caelius Rhodiginus, and Paulus Venetus, who says, the Emperor sent a piece of
it to Pope Alexander out of Tartary, etc. Mr. Ray was showed a Purse of it by
the Prince Palatine at Heidelberg. Signior Bocconi sent a long Rope of it to
the French King, which is kept by Monsieur Marchand in the King's Gardens at
Paris. And now we have seen a piece of it pass the Fiery Trial both at London
and Oxford. Dr. R. Plot' s Philos. Transact. Numb. 172.

25. The Balsom-Tree, growing formerly in Judea, now mostly in Grand Cairo, and
other Parts of Egypt, bearing Leaves like Rue, always green; yielding a Gum pon
Incision, or boiling of the Chips with Water, which they collect in little
Horns, etc. See more in the Chapter of Gums.

26. Betel-Trees so called from a River of the Name near Cambaia, are Plants
that are wrapped with others, and want propping, having neither Flower nor Juice,
The Indians sprinkle it with Water made of Lime from Shells of Fishes, and then
eat in when they are at leisure, (I mean, the Leaves,) which make their Lips
red, and Teeth black; too much disturbs the Mind. Mathil. l. 4. Scalig. Exere.
1.46. Sect. 2.

27. Cedar-Trees, growing formerly in libanus abundantly, are wonderful for
Height and Thickness; the Body so great, that three Men cannot fathom it: They
are said to kill Moths and Worms, and to preserve Dead Bodies from Corruption.
Johnst. Not. Hist. p. 135.

28. The Indian Fig Tree, or Arbor de Ran, so called, because it spreads forth
vast Boughs, which bending to the Earth again, in a Year's space take Root, and
grow up with new Branches ro^^^^ about their Parents like to Arbors; so that
seven Shepherds may Summer under it, being (...) and fenced about the the Tree,
and from far it seems an Arched Circumference. (...) ^^^per Boughs put forth
very high, and in abundance, that many of them make a Round of 60 Paces, and
they will cast a Shade 2 Furlongs. Johnst. Ibid.

29. The Brasil-Trees, so called from the Country where they grow, used in
dying Cloth, are of that incredible greatness, that whole Families live on an
Arm of one of them. Dr. Heyl. Cosm. p. 1079.

30. The Dragon-Tree, so called, because its Fruit much resembles a Dragon,
yielding a Juice called Dragons Blood. Ross's Arcan. Micro. p. 143.

31. The Olive Tree flowers in July, the Fruit is ripe in November; first
dried, and then pressed with a Millstone, pouring scalding Water on to get out
the Oil.

32. Turpentine-Trees are Male and Female, the latter only bearing Fruit, first
Green, then Red, afterward Black.

33. The Frankincense-Tree in Arabia, engrossed by a certain number of
Families, who keep it by Succession.

Guaiacum, China, the Pomegranate, Mulberry, the Lote-Tree, and some others, we
pass over, as not so strange and unknown to the present Age. Tulip-Trees are to
be seen in England.

34. The Cotton Plant is a Shrub like a Rose-Bush, planted of a Seed: It blows
first into a yellow Blossom, which falling off, there remains a Cod about the
bigness of a Man's Thumb, in which the substance is moist and yellow, but as it
ripens it swells bigger, till it breaks the Cod, and in short time becomes as
white as Snow, and then they gather it. Purch. Pilgr. vol. 2. p. 1470.

35. Gum-lac, comes from Trees like Plum-Trees, out of which Trees comes a
certain Gum, which Pismires suck up, and then they make the Lac round about the
Branches of the Tree, as Bees make Wax; and when it is full, the Owners come,
and breaking off the Branches, lay them to dry, and being dry, the Branches
shrink out, and the Lac remains: It comes from Pegu. Id. p. 1783.

36. The Herb Addad is bitter, and the Root of it so Venomous, that one drop of
the juice will kill a Man within the space of one hour. Ibid, p. 850.

37. Sponges grow on the sides of Rocks, 15 Fathom under water, about the
bottom of the Streights of Gibraltar. Ibid.

38. The Resurrection-Tree grows in Manica, which for the greatest part of the
year is without a Leaf or Greeness, but if one cut off a Bough; and put it into
the Water, in the space of 10 hours it springs and flourishes with Green
Leaves, but draw it out of the Water, and as soon as it is dry it remains as it
was before. Ibid. p. 1537.

39. A Tree as big as an Oak of a middle size, the Bark white like Horn-beam, 6
or 7 yards high, with ragged Boughs, Leaf like the Bay-Leaf. It beans neither
Fruit nor Flower; it stands on the side of an Hill; in the day time it is
withered, and drops all night, (a Cloud hanging thereon) so that it yields
Water sufficient for one of the Gatary Islands, wherein are 8000 Souls, and
above 100000 Cammels, Mules, and Goats, etc. The Water falls into a Pond made
of Brick, paid with Stone; from whence it is conveyed into several Ponds,
through the whole Island; for they have no other Water there except Rain Water.
The Pond hold 20000 Tun of Water, and is filled in one night. Many of our
English that have been there attest the Truth thereof. Idem. p. 1369.

40. About Saffron-Walden in Essex, grows great store of Saffron, first brought
into England in the Reign of Edward III. This in the month of July every third
year; being plucked up, and after 20 days, having the Root split, and set again
in the Earth, about the end of September it puts forth a whitish blue
Flower, out of the midst whereof comes ^ Chives, which are gathered in the
morning before Sunrising, and being plucked out of the Flower, are dried by a
sort Fire; and so great is the increase that comes thereof, that out of every
Acre of Ground are made 80 or 100 pound weight of Saffron whilst it is most,
which being dried, yield about 20 pound weight. Cambd. Brit. p. 453.

41. The Assa-Fatida Tree is like our Brier in height, the Leaves resemble
Fig Leaves, the Root is like (...) Radish-Root; though the smell be (...) pa^e,
yet the taste is so pleasing, that no Meat, no Sauce, no Vessel is pleasing to
the Gusarat's Pallats where it grows, except it relish of it. Herbert's Travels.

42. The Benjamin Gum issues from a high Tree, smell, and furnished with
fruitless Branches, the Leaves are not unlike to those of the Olive: Pegu and
Siam yield the best. Clarks of Tree, etc. p. 199.

43. The Plantan-Tree is of a reasonable height, the Body about the bigness of
a Man's Thigh, compacted of many Leaves, wrapped one upon another, adorned with
Leaves instead of Boughs from the very ground, which are for the most part
about two Else long, and an Ell broad, having a large Rib in the middle
thereof. The Fruit is a Bunch of 10 or 12 Plantans, each a Span long, and as
big almost as a Man's Wrist: The Rind being stripped off, the Fruit is
yellowish, and of a pleasant Taste. purch. Pilgr. p. 416.

44. The Palmeta-Tree yields a sweet and wholesome Wine by cutting, or boring
Holes in the Body of the Tree, into which a Cane is put that receives the Sap,
and conveys it into Gourds: It tastes like Whitewine, but it ill not last above
24 Hours. Purch. Pilgr. vol. 2. p. 1500. Vide more, Numb. 52.

45. The Tonal-Tree grows in New-Spain, in whose Leaves breed certain smell
Worms, at first no bigger than a Flea, at greatest about the bigness of our
Lady Cows which they resemble; which feeding on the Leaves, are gathered by the
Natives twice a year, stifled with Ashes, or Water, and dried to Powder in the
Shade. Some call this Tree Tuna, other the Prickle Pear, bearing a Leaf of a
slimy Nature, and a Fruit blood-red, and full of Seeds, which give (...) like
to Brasiletto Wood, that will perish in a few days by the Fire: But this Infect
gives (...) ^^^manent Tincture, and is Cochineel. Sir Tho. Pope Blunt, p. 75,
76, etc. Clark, of Trees (...). page 201.

46. A Berry grows in Bermudas and New England, from a Plant called Red-Weed,
which is as Red as the Prickle Pear, giving much the like Tincture; out of
which Berry come out first Worms, which afterward turn into Flies somewhat
bigger than the Cochineel-Fly, feeding on the same Berry; in which we read,
there has been found a color no whit inferior to that of the Cochineel-Fly,
and as to Medicinal Virtues, much exceeding it. Idem, Sir Tho. Pope Blunt.

47. Manguey grows in New-Spain: it has great and large Leaves, at the end
whereof is a strong and sharp point, which they use for Pins and Needles, and
out of the Leaf they draw a kind of Thread which they use much to Sew with. The
Body of the Tree is big, which, when it is tender, they cut, and out of the
hole proceeds a Liquor which they drink like Water, being fresh and sweet. This
Liquor, being sodden, becomes Wine, which being kept till sower, makes good
Vinegar: Boil it a little more than for Wine, and it makes a fine Syrup; and
Boil it till thick, and it makes Honey. Purch. Pisgr. v. 3. p. 957.

48. The Papiri, Sedgie-Reeds grow in the Marines of Egypt, whereof formerly
they made Paper, and from whence ours that is made of Rags assumed that Name.
They divide it into think flakes, whereinto it naturally parts; then laying
them on a Table, and moistening them with the Glutinous Water of Nilus, they
press them together, dry them in the Sun, and then they are fitted for use.
Idem. v. 2. p. 898.

49. Ananas arises from a Root like an Artichoke; when they are ripe they show
themselves, and are not above two foot high: Without, it is covered with a dry
Rind, hard, and scaly; within, it is wholesome and pleasant, and though a little
of it seems to satiate the Appetite, yet the Stomach likes it well, and its
easy of Digestion. Idem.

50. The Duroyen is in shape round; at first opening it has an unpleasant
smell: The Meat is whitish, and divided into a Dozen Cells, filled with Stones
as big as Chestnuts, white and cordial, It Is a Fruit, nutritive and dainty, and
may be called, an Epitome of all the best and rarest Fruits in the Orient.
Clark of Plants, etc. p. 201.

51. The Aree-Tree is almost as high as a Cedar, but more like the Palmetto: It
is of fuzzy hollow substance, adorned at every top with Plumes, wherein the
Fruit hangs in clusters; It is in shape and bigness like a Walnut; white, and
hard within; has neither taste nor smell: They never Eat it alone, but wrap it
in a Leaf of Bettle, and are frequently chawing of it: Some add to it a kind of
Lime made of Oyster-shells: It cures the Chollick, removes Melancholy, kills
Worms, provokes Lust, purges the Stomach, and prevents Hunger. It Is much used
in the East Indies. Ibid.

52. The Palmeto-Tree is long, straight, round, and soft, without Leaf, Bough,
or Branch, save at the top, and those are few, green, and sedgie; under which
Branches there appear certain codded Seed, etc. Ibid.

53. Dr. Edward Brown in his Description of Larissa in Thessaly, says, the
Country produces very large, fair, and delicious Figs, Water-Melons, the
largest and most pleasant I have tasted; as also fair and delicate
Pomegranates, Oranges, Lemons and Citrons, Vines which are low, and not
supported; but the Branches and Clusters great, and the Grapes as big as good
Damsons, and of a delicious taste. The Wine of the Country is rich, but has a
resinous taste or tang of the Boracho. They Plant Tobacco, and esteem it better
than what is brought from other Parts, as being more strong and pungent. The
Fields are spread with Sefamum and Cotton-Trees; but the Trees grow low, yet
make a fair show. The Country abounds in Almonds and Olives; (...) the Greeks
delight most in ripe Olives pickled, as we in the green. Dr. Brown's Trav. p.
41.

54. The Gourds in the Hedges, with their large yellow Flowers, and the many
sorts of green Thorns, and ever-green Oaks, make the ways pleasant. Idem.

55. The Hex Coccifera, and Chermes-berry, or the Excretion, serving for Dying,
and making the Confection of Alchermes growing plentifully in these Countries.

56. Garlic, they use in most of their Dishes, and their Onions are
extraordinary, as large as two or three fair ones with us, and of a far better
taste; being sharp, quick, and pleasantly pungent, and without any offensive
smell: Though I were no lover of Onions before, yet I found these exceeding
pleasant and comfortable to the Stomach. They are used at most Collations, and
eaten with Bread in great quantity. I asked a Chiaus, then with us, who had
Traveled through most of the Turkish Dominions, Whether he had any where met
with so good Chions as those of Thessaly? who answered me, That the Onions of
Egypt were better, which was the first time I sensibly understood the
Expression in the Scripture, and ceased to wonder why the Israelites lingered
after the Onions of that Country. Ibid. p. 42.

57. Coral grows like a Tree in the bottom of the Sea, green when under Water,
and bearing a white Berry, and when out, turns red. There is also a black and
yellow kind of Coral. Lindschot says, That at the Cape of Good Hope there are
Rocks on which Coral grows of all colors. In the Mediterranean, they gather
great quantity of it; and those of Massilia go yearly to Fish for it, and draw
it from the bottom of the Sea with Nets. The Places for this Fishery, are,
Arguiril near Sardinia, Bosa near the Island of St. Peter, and near the Bastion
of France, etc. The times for this Fishery, are from April to the end of July;
to which purpose there are employed 200 Vessels (more ot less) yearly. They
never Fish above 40 miles from the Land, where they think there are Rocks, for
fear of the Pirates. Tavern, Trav. in India.

In the East and West Indies they Fish with two big Beams of Wood, laid
cross-wise, with a good piece of Lead in the middle to make it sink, casting
about it course Hemp, carelessly twisted, and tying this Wood to two Ropes,
whereof one hangs at the Stern, and the other at the forepart of the Boat. The
common Opinion, That Coral is soft under Water, is confuted by John Baptista de
Nichole, Overseer of the Gathering of Coral in the Kingdom of Tunis: Yet Mr.
Boil affirms, That whilst it grows, it is often found soft and succulent, and
propagates its Species. Georgius de Sepibus, Kircher, Wormius, and Tavernier,
are of the same Opinion. Ser Tho. Pope Blunt, Not. Hist. p. 23. it is otherwise
called the Stone-Tree.

CHAP. XLIII. Strange Minerals.
Now we are going to draw off the very Skin and Surface of the Earth, and
Anatomize the very Sediment of the Creation; and even there we shall find the
Footsteps of the Almighty, and Trace the print of his Divine Atributes. For
whither can we go from his presence? he not only sits upon the Circle of the
Earth, but if we ascend up to Heaven, he is there; if we go down into the lower
parts of the Earth, he is there also: Even the Materials that the Earth is made
of, are full of Wonder, and very useful for the wants of Men.

1. Lime is no more than Chalk burnt, (of which heareafter;) it is a king of
Earth drier than a Stone, which after it is burnt, is made more intense with
Water, and extinguished with Oil: It Is called Quicklime, because it contains
an occult Fire within it. Stier. Phys. pars specialls Tract. 4. c. 5.

2. Gypsum, is a kind of Plaster or Mortar, viz. a white Earth, clammy and
light, akin to Chalk, but not so hot, dug ot of the upper part of the Earth.

4. Creta, Chalk, is white Earth, chiefly dug in the Isle of Crete or Candy,
but there is much of it in other parts. It kills Worms in Children, and is good
against Heart-Burnings, and dries up Wounds.

4. Oaker, (Ochra), a light kind of Clay, of which being burnt in new Pots
bedawbed with Clay is made Ruddle. It is naturally yellow, discusses hard
Tumors, dried and binds.

5. Argilla, a kind of Potters Earth, fat and clammy, of which are made Earthen
Vessels. It is cold, drying, binding, and abstersive.

6. Terra Lemnia, otherwise called Sigillata, or sealed Earth, because Diana's
Priest, taking upon him for the Honor of his Country, offering for Expiation
Wheat and Barley, brought this into the City, soked with Water, and making it
like Clay, he dried it that it might be like soft Wax, and when it was become
so, he sealed it with the sacred Seal of Diana, Gal. l. 9. Simpl. Now it is
dug up yearly not without Superstition, on the 6th day of August only. They
that dig are Greeks, the Pit sends forth a sweet smell. It is dug after
Sunrising for 6 hours, it is laid up in one Lump, and it must see no light
till a year be expired. Then it is taken out and washed, being washed it is put
into a Bag; it is mingled with hands, it is made into round Cakes, and marked
with the Emperor's Seal. Then it is dried, and put into a Sealed Cabinet, and
sent away to the Emperor to Constantinople. It is good against deadly Poison.
It Is called otherwise, Terra Silesiaca, Sphragis, Terimachum, Terra Samia,
Melia, Trigensis, and Turkish Earth. The best is known, first, by the sticking
to the Tongue, secondly, by making Bubbles in the Water. It is drying, binding,
sudorifick, and ^^lexipharmick, resisting Plague, Poison, Putrefaction, and all
kind of Malignity and Venom. It is chiefly used against the Plague, Malignant
Fevers, Diarrhaea, Dysenteria, and Bitings of Venomous Beast. It powerfully
diffolves congealed Blood. Johnston, Not. Hist. cl. 4. c. 3. Salmon, l. 3. c.
14.

7. Terra-Armenia, or Role Armeniack, so called, because it comes from Armenia,
but it is also found in Germany; it is a pale red Earth, impregnated chiefly
from Vapors. It is very dry, astringent, and strengthening; good to stop
Fluxes, thicken Humors, resist Putrefaction, expel Poison; and therefore it is
excellent against the Diarrhaea, Dysenteria, Flux of the Terms, Catarrhs,
spitting of Blood, Bleeding at Nose, and Wounds, etc. Often used outwardly in
strengthening Cataplasms, and binding Powders; the best is that which is free
from Sand, clear and smooth; being tasted, sticks to the Tongue, melts in the
Mouth, like Butter, and when moiftened does bubble. Salmon. l. 3. c. 14.

There are other sorts of Earth of good use, as Fullers-Earth, Japonian-Earth,
good for drying up Catarrh's; Alanian Earth, used by Goldsmiths; Marle, a Fat
kind of Earth, used in Agriculture for the Enriching of Grounds, and in
Physic, for drying, binding, and healing; Selenusian and Chian Earth, used as
Cosmaticks.

8. Salt is either made, or else it grows; it is made of Salt Fountains, the
Water whereof boiled long, at length is turned to Salt. It breeds many ways; it
is dried in the Lake Tarentinum, by Summer Suns, and the whole Lake turns to
Salt; in some places it is moderated, not above Knee up. In Bactria, two Lakes
very large, one toward the Scythians, the other toward the Arii, boil with
Salt; also, the Tops of some Rivers, are condensed into Salt; the rest of the
Rivers running as it were under Ice, as at the Caspian Mouth, that are called
Rivers of Salt. Oxomenus in India, says, there are also natural Salt
Mountains, where it is cut out of Quarries and grows again; and the Custom of
it is more to their King's, then Gold and Pearls. Between Egypt and Arabia, it
is found under the Sands, and in the Deserts of Africa, so far as the Oracle of
Ammon, Johnston's Not. Hist. cl. 4. chapter 4.

Near Epries in Vpper-Hungary, there is a Salt-mine of great Note, from the
first place of descent unto the bottom, it is about 180 Fathoms deep. Into this
the Miners descend first by Ropes, and at last by Ladders into the lower parts.
The Veins of Salt are large, and there are pieces to be found of 10000 pound
weight; they commonly hew out the Salt into long square pieces of two foot in
length, and one in thickness, and for use, it is broken and Grinded between two
Grind Stones. The Mine is cold and moist, but the Salt being a Stone Salt, is
not easily dissolved, or at least, in any great quantity by dampness or
moisture; yet much of the Water of the Mine is impregnated with Salt, in such
sort, that being drawn out in large uckets, and afterward boiled up, it
affords a blackish Salt, which they give to their Cattle in that Country; the
color of it is not very white, but somewhat gray, yet being broken and Grinded
to Powder, it becomes as white as if it were refined, and this Salt consists of
pointed parts, or Fossets. Another sfort there is, which consists of Squares
and Tables; and a third of somewhat stirious or long shoots. The Salt of this
Mine is of diverse colors; that which is mixed with the Earth, receives some
color from it; and the most pure that resembles Crystal, does often receive
Tinctures of several colors; in the middle of a Crystal Salt, I have seen a
delicate blue, and in Vienna I have seen a large piece of fair transparent
yellow. There are some pieces so clear and hard, that they carve them into
diverse Figures, as if they were Crystal it self. Dr. Ed. Brown's Trav. p. 70,
71.

The greatest part of Africa has no ohter Salt, but such as is dug out of
Quarries and Mines, Barbary abounds with Salt; but the Land of the Negroes,
and especially the inner part of Ethiopia, is so destitute thereof, that a
pound of Salt is there sold for half a Ducat. And the People there use not to
set Salt upon their Tables; but holding a Crumb of Salt in their Hands, they
lick the same at every Morsel of Meat which they put in their Mouths. The
Principal Salt Mines are in Poland and Calabria; in the lesser Poland are some
pieces of Salt as big as huge Stones, so hard, that whole Towns are built with
them. Near Cracovia are the SAL-GEMME Mines, 200 Fathom deep. Out of these
Mines they dig 3 sorts of Salt. 1. Is common, course, and black. 2. Finer and
whiter; the 3d very white and clear, like Crystal. The Course Salt is cut out
in great pieces, 3. Else long, and one thick, which cost from 50 to 70 Florins.
Salt in one of the best Royal Revenues, there being 1000 Men constantly
employed in these Mines; the Provision of Salt there was valued at two
Millions. Sit Tho. Pope Blunt. Not. Hist. p. 220.

300000 Weights of Salt are computed to be made in England Yearly.

9. Sal Ammonia, so called from (...) Sand, wa^ anciently a Native at the Lybic
Sea; ours is Artificial, boiled from the Ashes of Minerals, Vege^^bles and
Animals; Salt of Soot-Common, Salt and Sal Gemme. The best comes from Venice
and Antwerp; it is of the greatest Virtue, but the scarcest of all the Salts
that Nature alone produces; it is sometimes found under the Sand of the
Seashore, congealed in little pieces. by its own heat, or the continual
burning of the Sun, baked so much, that it is the bitterest of any Salt.
Goldsmiths use it to cleanse and color Gold, and put it in to the Composition
of that Aqua Fortis that dissolves it. Alonso Barba of Metals, Transl. chapter 8.

Borellus in his Historia and Meteorologia Incendii Aetne, Anno 1669. takes
particular notice of the great abundance of Sal Ammoniac, that was found in all
the Holes and Vents of the Ground, and in the Clefts of Stones; and of this
Salt he affirms, that there had been sublimed so great Store, that many
Thoussands of Pounds might be gathered, adding, that a whole Year after the
Extinction of the Fire in the Mouth of Aetna, there were found remaining,
diverse vents about Catania, exhaling store, of smoke, which had the like Sal
Ammoniac, sticking in the sides and edges of the Stones. Sir Tho. Pope Blunt.
Not. Hist. p. 210. etc.

10. True Nitre, is now little known, which was anciently made of the Water of
the River Nilus, Albertus Magnus says, that in Goselaria was a Mountain, that
contained a very Rich Mine of Copper, and that the Water that issued out at the
bottom of it, being dried, became Nitre; we know little also of Aphronitrum,
which is as it were the Froth of Nitre. It is bitterer then Salt, but less
Salt. Ibid. The Egyptians strowed their Rhadishes with Nitre, as we with Salt.

11. Saltpeter is the means between them two, and consists of very dry ad
subtle parts; it grows on the Walls of Old Houses, and in Stables, Cow-houses,
and Pidgeon-houses, it will grow again in the same Earth it was taken out of,
if that Earth be thrown into Earth and not stirred, and taken care of; the use
of it is well known in making Gunpowder; Aqua Fortis, it is used also in
melting Mettle. Ibid.

It is disputed variously, whether the Nitre of the Ancients be of the same
Species with our Saltpeter. Ibid.

12. Alom is either Congealed or Liquid; the Congealed is of many Figures; that
which is called Scissum, is the Flower of Alom in Clods, and is pressed together
like Plank, or it flourishes severally like Gray-hairs; round Alom like
Bubbles, or is like a Sponge, by reason of the holes in it; the Liquid Alom
send out of it self such a Vapor, that smells like Fire, as Sons when rubbed
together, to cause Fire; when burnt, it swells into bubbles, and loses
something of its substance, Johnston's Not. Hist. Clas. 4 c. 5.

13. Amber has been reputed by some a Gum, by others, the Sperm or Dung of
Whales, hardened by the Sea; but Dr. Heylin affirms it to be the juice of a
Stone, growing like a Coral in Poland, in a Mountain of the North-Sea, clean
covered with Water, and rent thence in the Winter, and so cast into the
Neighboring Havens, hardening like Coral, when taken out of the Water; burning
like Pitch, attracting Straws and Iron, good for stopping the Blood, Agues,
etc. Tavernier says, that it is a certain Congelation, found only upon the
Coast of Prussia in the Baltic Sea, Farmed out by the Elector of Brandenbourg
for 20000 Crowns a Year, or more. Hevelius in a Letter to Mr. Oldenbourg, from
Dantzick July 5. 1670, says, he had received a piece of Amber so soft, that he
had Printed his Seal on it; yellowish, transparent, and burning as other Amber,
but of a stronger seent, yet had been cast up from the Baltic, the year
before. In China, their great Lords at their Feasts, throw a vast quantity of
Amber into persuming Pots, set upon the Table, burning it partly for the scent,
and partly because they adore the Fire; there are several sorts of Amber, pale,
black, spotted, etc. The Shops know only the white, which is best, and the
yellow. Sir Tho Pope Blunts Not. Hist. p. 13.

24. Jet, Gagates Obsidianus, is a black Bitumen, hardened in the Sea, which the
Floods use to cast upon the Shores of the Estyii with Amber. Earthen Vessels
that are glased with it, are not defaced. lin. l. 36. c. 19. When burnt, it
smells like Brimstone; it kindles with Water, but is extinguished with Oil; it
is found great and of a pale color, at the Town of Ganges in Licia. Strabo
says, creeping things fly from the scent of it; it is called Earthy Bitumen,
otherwise burning Stone, because it will flame; it is called Ampelitis, because
it kills little Worms called Enipaes; it is dug up in Scotland, and in the
Jurisdictions of Leids, they make Chaplets of it to say their Prayers upon. In
Collaum, a Province of Peru, there is a place all bare; not Tree, nor Plant
upon it, the Earth being Bituminous, out of which the Indians extract a Liquor,
good for many Diseases; the way this, they cut the Ground into Turss, lay it
upon Rods or great Reeds, putting Vessels under it to receive it; the Sun Melts
this Bitumen, and the dry Turfs are fit to make Fires.

15. Coal, or Sea-Cole, so called, because carried by Sea from several places,
as Wales and New Castle, to other Parts, for Fuel, is dug out of Pits or
Mines, where it is found in manner of a continued Black-Rock, or hard Bitumen,
well known in England, there being no less then 50000000 Chaldrons yearly
gotten in the Nation; the greatest remarkable concerning them is, that there is
a Species of it in Cheshire, and some other Parts, of a more Fat and Unctuous
substance, called Cannal-Coal, which gives a pleasant flaming Light in the
Burning, like a Lamp or C^ndle. But there are often found in these subterrauean
Vaults, such Stagnations of Vapors, that for want of a due Ventilation,
produce very strange and dangerous Damps; of which we shall speak more
hereafter; it is called Carbo petrae, Lithanthaeax, or New Castle Coal, the
chief Fuel in England and Germany; the Chemical Spirit or Oil, is no ways
inferior to that of Amber, healing Wounds, softning Tumors, etc.

16. Sulphur or Brimstone, is dug up in an Island by the Mountain Hecla, and
that without Fire. It is yellow that is dug out of the Plain of Brimstone,
which is called in Campania, Virgin-Brimstone, because Women Paint their Faces
with it. It is so Friendly to Fire, that pieces of it laid about the Wood will
draw the Fire to it; put into Fire, it will by the Scent discover the
Falling Sickness. Johnston's Not. Hist. Clas. 4. c. 13.

Mr. Salmon makes 5 kinds of Mineral Sulphures, Brimstone, Arsnick or Orpiment,
Amber-Grease, Amber, and Bitumen; Sulphur Vive, is a Resinous Fatness of the
Earth, full of a Vitriolick Acidity, being Gray or Greenish, inflamable with a
Blue and Suffocating Fume. An Artificial is made of Sulphur Vive, being Porous
and Yellow, or boiled out of Sulphurous Water; the Foeces of either of which is
the Sulphur Cabaline, or Horse-Brimstone; besides which, there are other
Artificial Brimstones, drawn out of Copper, Cinnaber, and Vitriol.) which as it
is rarer, so it is better. For in Chimneys where Vitriol is commonly boiled,
you may find Flower of Sulphur elevated; all Sulphur of Brimstone is hot and
dry, Aperitive, Cutting, Discussive, etc.

17. Arsnick is a Mineral coagulated Juice, or Fat made of Combustible Sulphur,
and corrosive Salts, being Natural or Artificial; the Natural is either yellow
or red; the yellow is called Orpiment; the red is called Risgalum, Real-gal,
and Sandaracha; the Artificial is white, and is made of the yellow, sublimed
with Salt, of each equal quantities; and this is that which is properly called
Arsnick, which being pure, hard, heavy and white, like Milk or Crystal, is
good. Unprepated it is one of the greatest Poisons, and a perfect: Enemy to the
Balsom of Life, causing Heat, Thirst, Torment, Corrosion, Vomitting,
Palpitation, Cold Sweats, Intolerable burning Pains, Convulsions, and Death.
Outwardly, it is used in Amulets and Cauteries, with good Success; it eats away
proud and dead Flesh, takes off Hair. Salmon. Disp. p. 400.

Spirit and Butter of Arsnick, the thin Spirit is a Dissolvent of Iron; and the
Butter is an excellent thing against Cancers Ulcerated, being mixed with an
equal quantity of Opium, (to take away the Sense of Pain, and applied with
proper Defensatives. Ibid.

18. Bitumen, is properly Oil of Fat of the Earth embodied; Mr. Salmon makes 7
Species of it, of which Sea-Coal and Jet are two of them, (of which we have
spoke already;) the others are these Napheth, Petrolaeum, Terroloeum, and
Sperma Ceti; that which is by way of Excellence called Bitumen, is otherwise
called Asphaltos, and it is either Natural or Factitious; the Natural is of the
Nature of Sulphur, black as Pitch, and hard; it discusses, contracts,
glutinates, and binds; being drunk, it dissolves clodded blood, it mollifies
and warms the Nerves, and glews them together if Cut; the Jewish, which shines
like Purple, is heavy and of a strong Scent, is the best; then the Babylonian;
the black is naught. Salmon Ibid.

19. Naphtha is Liquid, and burns violently, being the straining of the
Babylonian Bitumen, white in color, and of an exceeding strong Scent, but
there is some that is black also; it has all the Veroues of Asphaltos, and
much more powerful to the intention, as being the most pure part thereof. Ibid.

20. Petroloeum, or Rock-Oyl, is a Liquamen, or Fat, flowing from Rocks and
Stones; it is not and dry, digests, dissolves, is Cephalic, Arthritick,
Anodine, and of thin parts; it Comforts the Nerves and Brain, consolidates
Wounds, and heals them. That which is found in Italy, is white and red; it
swims on Springs in Sicily; the Babylonian is said to burn in its Fountain,
Ibid.

21. Trro^aemn, or Oil of the Earth, is two sold, either red or black; the red
comes from the East Indies, and is clear strong Scented like Petrolaeum, but
sweeter and more pleasant; it is hot and dry, consumes all cold matter in any
part of the body; it Cures Convulsions, Palsies, Epilipsies, etc. The black
comes from the West Indies, and Barbados, and is called Pisselaeum Indicum, or
Baroadoes Tarr. Ibid.

22. Sperma Ceti, Flos Salis, Flos Maris, is gathered from the Sea, upon which
it floats like froth; some taking it to be the Seed of a Whale, which is denied
by others, because it is found in places where Whales are never taken. Its
chiefest use is in Physic. Ibid.

23. Vitriol is a Gross Terrestrial, Universal Salt, acording to the Nature of
the Mine, from whence it is dug, and is called Calcanthum; it is three fold,
Saphytine, or Sky colored, coagulated like Sugar Candy, dry in touching, and
this comes either from Hungary or Cyprus. Greenish, which is more granulated
like common Salt, and unctuous, as the Swethland Gas^arian Vitriol; and lastly,
the white and dry, made like small Loaves. Vitriol is either Native or
Factitious; the Native is taken out of the Earth, either in its own form, or in
Water. The Factitious is made out of Copper, or Iron, severally or both, of
which the Roman is chief. That which has most Copper in it is the best, and
particularly the Hungarian. Paracelsus accounts it for a third part of Physic,
and says, that a whole Shop is contained therein.

24. Borax, is either Natural or Facticious. Natural cleanses Ulcers, hinders
proud Flesh, and makes the Body clean. The Factitious is either simple or
compound; the Simple is made of Boys Urine and Nitre, mixed and coagulated; the
Compound is thus made, Recipe, Salt of Tartar, Sal Armoniack, Nitre, A one
Ounce and a Dram; Mastick, Roch Alum, one Oune and a half, Powder all a part,
mix, dissolve all in Boys Urine, filter and coagulate by boiling to a Salt.

CHAP. XLIV. Metals, Gold, Silver, Copper, etc.
THis at first sight appears to be one of the most pleasant Subjects I have
treated of yet; but to my mind it is as barren as any, like the Ground that the
Gold grows under; excepting only the Value which Man himself has put upon
Gold, and some Physical uses it serves for, the Excellency is not great; but
however there are many other Metals very useful and commodious, and such as we
cannot well live without, and such as we are willing to rifle the Secrets of
Nature for; but which is remarkable, whereas our God is above, Man is such an
Earthly Creature, that he commonly seeks for him below; and consequently sinks
down in his Soul and Affections beneath his own Orb, when he ought to soar
upward and fly above the Skies.

1. Gold, is the most perfect of all inanimate Bodies, out of the Power of any
of the Elements, to corrupt or destroy, and the greatest Cordial in the World;
an excellent Medicine against Melancholy. It has the least variety of regular
Figure in the Ore, of any Metal. It Is a rare Specimen, mentioned by Georgius de
Septibus, which calls Aurum Ramescens.

The Ductility of Gold is admirable; one Grain, in Leaves, is extended to above
50 Inches square; and one Ounce employed in Gilding small Hair-Wire, will be
extended to almost an Hundred, Miles in length, as Mr. Boil has observed. The
uses of gold for Vessels, Coins, Armor, Garments, etc. are infinite. Some
Painters hang plated Gold over Vinegar, whereby is produced a pure blue.
Galienus the Emperor, Powdered his Hair with Gold dust. The Principal use of it
in Physic is, to Correct Mercurial Medicines. At Tockay in Hungary, where
there are Mines of Gold, the very Kernals of the Grapes appear Gilt over, as if
it were with Leaf-Gold. Robt. Boil, of the Insalubrity and Salubrity of the
Air. p. 44.

At Cremnitz, in Hungary, there is a Gold-Mine, in which they have worked these
950 years; the Mine is about 9 or 10 English Miles in length, and there is one
Cuniculus or Horizontal passage, which is 800 Fathoms long, called the Erbstal;
the depth of it above 170 Fathoms; into this Mine they are let down by a Cable
and Sling, or Seat of Leather; there are 6 of these Schachts or Perpendicular
Pitts, known by their proper Names. The Cable is fastened to a large Wheel, by
the taining of which, they make a descent. Of the Gold Ore, some is white,
black, red, yellow; that with black spots in white, is esteemed the best; there
have been pieces of Virgin Gold found here. Where they Pound the Gold Ore, they
lay a Foundation three yards deep of Wood, upon which they pace the Ore. over
which there are 24 Beams, armed at the bettom with Iron, which break and grind
the Ore, it being covered all the while with Water, These Beans are moved by 4
Wheels 1. Wheel to 6 Beams the Water which comes out from the Pounded Ore, is
let into little Pits or Chests, commonly 7 or 8 one after another, and
afterward into a large Pit of almost half an Acre of Ground, and then after
settling, let out. The Gold Ore Pounded, is called Slick. of which that is the
Richest, which is nearest to the Beams, where it is first Pounded. They work
thus day and night continually, making use of Fir-Wood for Candles. They wash
the Slick so long, as perhaps in 100 pound weight, there may be half an Ounce
or an Ounce of Gold or Silver, the greatest part ordinary Gold. To this Slick
they add Limestone and Slacken, and melt them together in the Melting Furnace;
the first Melting produces a Substance called Lech; this Lech they burn with
Charcole, to make it lighter and more porous, and then it is called Roast; to
the Roast they add Sand as they see occasion, and melt it again in the Furnace,
and then let it out into the Pan, and proceed as in the Melting of Silver.
Brown's Trav. in Hungaria, etc. p. 98. etc.

In some places they Fish for Grains of Gold in Rivers, which are carried down
thither from the Hills, by the great Rains; in other places they dig for it in
Mines; these Mines are either pendant in the Tops of Hills, or settled in the
bottom upon plain firm Ground. The places where Gold is found are generally
naked and bare, without any verdure; here they first wash the place very clean,
then dig about 8 or 10 foot in depth, and as much in length and breadth; then
in a certain Vessel they still wash the Earth, as it is dug up; if thus by
washing they find any Gold, they continue digging deeper, till they find out
the Rock, which they break and pierce through with their Instruments, Vaulting
it as they go on with Engines of Wood, that the Earth or Stones may not fall
upon them. In the Water, the Slaves stand up above the Knees, washing the
Earth, as it is brought unto them, in Sieves or Sierces, the Earth glides away,
and the Gold remaining behind in the Sieve, etc. Sometimes Gold in Grains is
found in Rivers. Treat. of Anc. and Mod. times. l. 8. c. 30.

2. Silver, the most perfect Mettle next to Gold, therefore Silver may be
turned into Gold, because the Color only being wanting, the Fire and
Artificial Concoctions can supply that, whereof there be many Experiments. It
endures the Fire with little waste, and is tough and malleable, and endures the
drawing out into very thin Leaves, and small Wyre; an Ounce of Silver may be
drawn out into Fourteen Hundreds yards of Wyre, and all that shall be made Gilt
Wyre, with only 6 Grains of Gold; so that although Silver can be extended to
admiration, yet gold is an Hundred times more ductile than it. Barba of
Metals, chapter 27.

The Silver Mines of Potezi, discovered Anno. 1545, the fifth of which payable
into the King of Spains Exchequer, amounted in 40 years to One hundred and
eleven Millions of Pezoes, every Pezo being valued at 6 s.6 d., and yet a third
part of the whole was discharged of that Payment. Peter Heylin.

The Ore, is as hard as a Stone, is cut out with Pick-axes, beaten in pieces
with an Iron Crow, and carried upon their Backs on Ladders made of Leather,
each Ladder has 3 fastnings about the thickness of a Cable, stretched out by
Sticks, so that one goes up on one side, while another comes down on the other,
each Ladder being 10 Fathom long; the Laborers carry the Ore in Bags, fastened
before on their Breasts, and falling back over their Shoulder, three and three
together, therefore, most whereof ties a Lighted Candle to his Thumb, and thus
they help themselves with both Hands; Thus the Peruvians scramble up and down,
continually 150 Fathom, The Silver runs for the most part between two Rocks, of
which one side is as hard as Flint, and the other much softer; it is of
different value; the best called Cacilla, or Tacana, resembles Amber in color;
the worser sort are blackith, and sometimes of an Ash Color. The pieces of Ore
are carried on the backs of the Sheep Pacos, to the Mill, where being ground to
Powder, they are put into Furnaces to Melt: Of which there were once above 6000
on the Top of Potozi, but since the Quicksilver was found to cleanse the same,
not a third part remains, Ogilby's America. p. 464, 465.

Silver is dug out of several places in Germany; so much was dug out of the
Mine at Sueberg as was worth 2000000 Rhevish Nobles, that at Abertham 150000.
Agricol. etc.

3. Quicksilver, Mercury, is either Natural, or Artificial: The Natural is a
Volatile Mineral Juice, greedily cleaving to, and devouring Metals, principally
Gold: The Artificial is drawn out of Metals, and is called The Mercury of
Bodies. the best is that which is taken from Mines near Gold or Silver; for
which Cause, the Spanish and Hungarian Quicksilver is counted the best, having
less of Antimony, Cadmia, Arsnick Lead, or other Poisonous Matter; by means of
which Things also it is adulterated. Salm. Disp. l. 3. p. 298.

If it be in the Body, it is drawn forth by drinking of Gold. Silver cannot be
gilded without it. If one be anointed for the French Pox, a Gold Ring rolled up
and down the Mouth will draw all the Quicksilver to it, which being taken out
like Silver, is recovered by putting of it into the Fire. Lemn. de Occult. l.
2.35.

When all other Things swim upon it, only Gold sinks into it. It so flies the
Fire, that if it cannot go downwrd, it will fly upward; and being shut in, it
breaks the Cover. Vnzer. l. de Marc. c. 1.

Put into a Ring, and put to the Fire, it makes it leap. Bread in the Oven,
Pease in the Pot, Eggs at the Fire, touched with a Drop of it, will dance so as
to provoke Laughte^, Water wherein Quicksilver has been infused, being
strained and drank, wonderfully drives forth Worms. Johnst. Not. Hist. clas. 4.
chapter 28.

4. Copper, Cuprum, Aes, Orichalcum, Venus, is one of the Base Metals, which
consists, according to the Opinion of Paracelsus, of a yellow Mercury, Purple
Sulphur, and a Red Salt. It is refined thus: Lay Flakes of Brass in an Earthen
Vessel, putting Salt or Sulphur between them, and so lay them Flake upon Flake;
burn them thoroughly, and wash the Ashes with warm Water till they be sweer.
Salnton's Disp. l. 3. c. 3.

Copper is found in several places of Cornwall, and Pure Brass is found both in
its own Mines, and amongst Silver Mines. The Lumps are dug forth of diverse
fashions, like Ice-Sickles, Globes, Rods. In Shops, where they separate Brass
from Silver, it is Yellow and Red, which they call Regular; Duskish Red they
call Cauldrons Metal, that is softer, and may be dilated, and not melted only;
this will melt, but not be drawn: With the Tincture of C^dmia it will look like
Gold, and is called Alchymy. It melts and runs in the Fire, but in a great
Crucible it will not endure the force of Fire. Johnst. Not. Hist. cl. 4. chapter 29.

5. Iron, or Mars, purified much in the same manner as Copper, is called Steel;
is dug-up in a Mountain of Cantabria, Sicily, Lusatia, etc. The Mine is the
greatest of all Metals; in some places it is said to grow again, and the Earth
and Stocks of Trees become Iron. First, it is like a thick Liquor, and by
degrees it grows hard; when it is boiled, it becomes moist like Water,
afterward is broke into Sponges. The more tender Iron Instruments are steeped
in Oil to quench them; Water makes them too hard and brittle. Plunged fiery hot
in Vinegar, it will endure no Hammering, but will sooner break than draw. In
Furnaces, where they make it into Bars, there rise such Vapors from it in the
Hammering, that certain Powder sticks to the Walls. Ibid.

6. Tin, Stannum, Plumbum Album, or Jupiter, is found and discovered in Cornwall
by certain Tin Stones, which are somewhat round and smooth, lyng on the Ground,
which they call Shoad. If the Load of the Tin lie right down, the Tinners
follow it sometimes 40 or 50 Fathoms; their Labor is so redious, that they
cannot work above four Hours in the Day. A good Workman will scarce be able to
hew above a Foot of hard Rock in a Week.

The Tin Stone being brought above ground out of the Work, is broken in pieces
with Hammers, and then stamped in a Mill into smaller Pieces, and then it is
ground into fine Sand. Then this Sand being laid in Water that runs over it,
has all the Earth washed from it, and then it is called Black Tin, which is
carried to the Blowing-House, where it is melted by Charcoal-Fire, blown by a
great pair of Bellows moved by a Water-Wheel, and then it is coined. There is
Hard Tin and Soft, but the Soft is most worth: A Foot of Black Tin is in
Measure two Gallons, and is in Weight according to its Goodness. A Foot of good
Moor Tin will weigh about 80 Pounds; a Foot of Mine Tin 52 Pounds; of the worst
50. Two Pounds of Black Tin melted will yield one Pound of White. Britan.
Baconica, Cornwall. p. 8.

7. Lead, Plumbum Nigrum, or Saturn. In the Peak of Darbyshire, Lead Stones lie
but just within the Ground, next to the upper Crust of the Earth. Ibid.

It is heavier than Silver, yet will swim upon it being melted. When Silver is
boiled out of it, Fire consumes it all.

8. Antimony, or Stibium, is a Mineral Body, consisting of, 1. A Mineral
Sulphur, partly Golden, partly Combustible. 2. An undigested Mercury of the
Nature of Lead, being more concocted than Quicksilver. 3. Of a Saline and
Earthly Substance. It is found in Germany, but the Hungarian and Transilvanian
is the best, having a Golden Ore in it of an obscure Red, (from the great
quantity of Sulphur,) with bright long Flakes. This has diverse Names; Basil
calls it Oriental; Paracelsus, the Red Lion; Some, a Wolf, because it devours
all Metals but Gold; some, Proteus, because it changes it self into all Colors
by Fire; others, the Philosophers Saturn, because like Lead. The crude Antimony
is drying and binding; Medicines are made of it of excellent Use.

9. To these might be added, the Native Excrements of Metals, as Chalcilis,
Cobalt, Marcasite, Misy and Sorry: The Artificial Excrements of Metals, as
Litharge, Plumbage, Ceruse and Minium of Lead, Diaphryges, Cadmy, Tuty,
Pompholix, and Spodium: Which I mention only, to present the Reader with a
General Scheme and Idea, not to satisfy the curious Inquisitor into Natural
History.

CHAP. XLV. Precious Stones.
I Take these, much more than Metals, to be the very Flowers of the Earth, the
Quintessences of Metals, the Virtue of Terrene Matter concocted and contracted
into Epitome: Tho I am not so fond as the Ancient Naturalists, who attributed
almost all the Properites of the Deity to them, as if they were effectual
Preservatives against Danger, Cordials against Griefs, Antidotes against
Poison, Amulets against Witcheraft and the Malice of Devils, etc.

1. Achates, Sardocates, Haemacates, the Agate, is of several kinds, as the
Black, Coral-like, Indian, and that of Crete; Veins and Spots do so run up and
down it, that represents several Forms, as of a Turtle, a Horn, a Tree, etc. In
the Agate of King Pyrrhus, there were the Nine Muses naturally with Apollo.
Johnst. Not. Hist. cl. 4. c. 23. It is so called from the River Achates in
Sicily, near which it was first found; it is the hardest of Semiperspicuous
Gems; and grows in India, Germany, and Bohemia; used for Sword-Hilts,
Knife-Hafts, Beads, Cups, etc. Grew's Muss. Reg. Soc. p. 287.

2. Adamas, the Diamond, is the most precious and hard of all Gems. There are
several kinds of it, the Indian, the Arabian, and Cenchros: It is never given
inwardly, but only worn as in Rings, etc. and so it is said to take away Fears
and Melancholy. The principal Diamond Mines are in the Indies, sometimes above
Sixty thousand Men, Women and Children, are at work in one of them.
Sometimetimes they are found in the Sand of the River. Some of them will take
up Straws like Amber; and Mr. Boil had one, which by Water (made little more
than lukewarm) he could bring to shine in the dark. Boil of Gems. p. 112.

It Is the property of all true Diamonds to unite the Foil (a mixture of
Mastick and burnt Ivory) closely and equally to it self, and thereby better
augment its Luster than any other Gem. The Great Duke of Tuscany's Diamond
weighing 139 Carats, clean and well shaped, cut in Facets every way, is valued
by Tavernier at 2608335 Livres. That of the Great Mogul weighing 279 Carats, is
valued at 11723278 Livres. Tavernier's Travels in India, Part 2. l. 2. c. 12.

3. The Amethyst, Gemma Veneris, is brought from India, Arabia, Armenia, and
Egypt, and is of an Attractive Nature; the best are those of a Purple Color,
shining and sparkling; those of India are of an exact Phaenician Purple.

4. The Beryl, is either Common or Golden, but the best are of a Seagreen
Color. They fortify Nature, and are useful in Physic.

5. The Calcedony, is both Male and Female; the Male best and brightest, having
as it were, shining Stars within it.

6. The Chrysolite, a Gem of a Golden Color, is either Oriental, or
Occidental; the Oriental is the best, which being laid together with Gold,
makes it look like Silver. It is of a Solar Nature, and is though to expel
fearful Dreams, and Melancholy. The Occiedenal is found in Bohemia.

7. The Chrysophrase is of Fiery Gold-like Color, and is reported to be of a
Pale Color by Day, but Glorious by Night.

8. The Crystal, is so called from (...), and (...), because supposed to be
only Water condensed with Cold, and is found in India, Scythia, Spain, Germany,
and Asia; the softest of all Gems, except the Turquois, most usually of a
Sexangular Figure. There is a massy piece of it now in possession of the Royal
Society, of a roundish Figure, near a Yard in compass, weighing more than 39
Pounds. It is of a binding Nature, good against Diarrhoea's.

9. The Cornelian come from Malabar, Narsinga, and Cochinchina; called in Latin
Sardius, Corneolus, Corperina; It is of various Colors, Red, Fleshy, Yellowish
Red. The Babylonish, and those found in Sardinia, are the best.

10. The Granate is a shining transparent Gem, of a Yellow Red, almost like
Fire, or Minium. They are brought out of Ethiopia, Spain, and Silesia.

11. The Hyacinth, or Jacinth, is transparent, of a Yellow Red, found near the
River Isera, and in the Indies. It is a great Cordial, and Alexipharmick.

12. The Jasper is Green, sometimes Sky-colored, White and Red, etc. brought
out of India, Persia, etc.

13. The Ligure is a kind of Jacinth, and has the same Physical Virtues.

14. Margarita, Vnio, Lapis Erythraeus, the Pearl, is found in Sea-Shelfish
near the Persian or Indian Ocean; and upon the Coast of Silesia, Scotland, etc.
They are cold and dry, strengthen the Heart, cleanse the Eyes, etc.

15. The Onyx-Stone has the Color of the Nail of a Man's Hand, better known
to the Ancients, that to us. Some take the Alabaster for it.

16. The Opal is of diverse Colors, representing the Carbuncle, the Amethyst,
and Emerald, all very strongly and curiously mixed, with incredible Light or
Shining. Horstius says, no Gem can be more Glorious, and has the Virtues of
all together.

17. The Ruby, or Carbuncle, is either White or Red, the ripest as Red as
Blood. The best come from Ceitan and Pegu, and are the hardest and coldest,
which you may perceive by your Mouth and Tongue; and shining in the Dark,
steeped in Vinegar they shine clearer. Lapidaries can easily counterfeit them.
They are found in Hungary in the midst of Flints. Tavernier's Travels in India.

18. The Sapphire is of a glorious, clear, transparent Blue, or Sky-colour,
which is called the Male: The Female is White, and Unripe. They are found in
the East Indies, and in Silesia and Bohemia; and are of good use in Physic.

19. The Sardonyx is of many Colors, white, Blackish, cloudy, some resembling
the Rainbow. It is brought out of the Indies and Arabia.

20. Smaragdus Prasinus, the Emerald, is a clear transparent Gem of a very
beautiful and glorious green, found in Scythia, Egypt, Cyprus, etc. They grow
in Stones, forming a Vein, in which they are by little and little refined and
thickened. Dr. Grew says, One in Gresham-Colledge being heated red-hot, shines
for a confiderable time.

21. The Topaz is a Stone found in Zeilan and Arabia, a kind of Ruby, shining
in the Night; exceeding, as Berchorius says, all Jewels in brightness; and as
Pliny says, all Jewels in bigness.

22. The Turcois is of a dark sky-colour, sometimes greenish or blueish, found
no where but in in Persia: It loses its color by Oil, Ointment, or Wine; and
is easily counterfeited with Glass.

23. The Loadstone, Magnes; from Magnesia in Greece, where, though to be first
found. Of an Iron color, tending to blue, the Male; if black, the Female. Of a
Metallic or Iron matter, found in Germany, Norway, Italy, etc. about Iron
Mines sometimes in Devonshire. it attracteth Iron according to its Poles, and
communicates to Iron the same attractive power, and a verticity to the
North Pole; for which Reason it is applied to Navigation, and used by Travelers
in the vast Deserts of Arabia. It will suspend sometimes 60, sometimes 80 times
its own weight. But the best Lodestone in time, loses very much of its
strength; which is recovered by application of more weight to it, and this
repeated at several Periods; for which Reason it is said to be fed with Iron.
It does not lose its attractive Virtue altogether by being cast into the Fire,
but in part. One give by Dr. Cotton to the Royal Society, weighting 60 pounds,
found in Devonshire, takes up no great weight indeed, yet moves a Needle 9 foot
distance. Sir Tho. Pope Blunt Not. Hist. p. 182.

CHAP. XLVI. Stone less Precious.
1. ALablaster, our Moderns call this the Onyx, but it is certain it is not the
Onyx of the Ancients. It is a kind of Marble, indigested and soft: it is so
soft as to be cut, it is called Gypsum. It is brought out of India and Egypt.

2. Amianth, or Plumous Alum. It differs not from Alum in form, but it wants
the taste of Alum, nor will it burn like Alum.

3. Arenosus Lapis, Tophus, the Sand-Stone. It is very dry, and sticks to the
Tongue like Bole-Armenick, and may be used instead thereof.

4. Armenius Lapis, is found in the Silver Mines in Armenia, but is now found
in Germany: It is full of spots, green, sky-colour'd, and blackish like the
Lapis Lazuli, with golden spots and Veins, differing from it but only in
ripeness, save Lapis Lazuli is found in Gold Mines, and this is Silver; that
which is sky-colored is best.

5. Aetites, the Eagle-Stone, is almost like the Bezoar-stone, having another
Stone that rattles within it: Oriental or Occidental; The Oriental is rough, of
diverse colors, commonly black, having within it anothter Stone called
Collimus, about the bigness of Damlon. The Occidental, which are two forts, are
found in Germany; one kind of them has Clay or Marle within it, being smooth,
and of an ash color; the other kind has Earth within it; both sorts are often
found as big as a Goose's Egg. It is called the Eagle-Stone, because found in
Eagles Nests, of which there are two kinds, viz. Male and Female, without which
they bring not forth.

6. Bezoar.

7. Calaminaris Lapis, Cathimia, Climea, Cadmia, Lapidosa Calaminare, is a
yellow Stone, not hard, which when burning, gives a yellow Fume; found in
Mettalick Mines: Of this, Copper-Smiths make Brass. It is the most perfect
Remedy for Sore, Running, and Rheumatick Eyes, that is yet known.

8. Calcarius, Limestone, is of gray color, almost like Marble, which burnt,
is Quicklime.

9. Chalcedonius, Chalcedony, shines, and has as it were bright Stars within
them.

10. Cos, Acone, Lapis Naxius, the Whet-stone.

11. Fe^otrope, it is a Solar-Stone, a kind of Jasper, being of a greenish
color, with red spots upon it; Some take this for the true Boodstone.

12. Haematites, Scedenigni, the Boodstone. It is found in Iron-Mines in
Germany, of a black, yellowish, or iron color: The best is like Cinnabar. It
cools, drys, astringes, mixed with Woman's Milk it helps Blear Eyes.

13. Hibernicus Lapis, Irish Salt, growing in Ireland and England, is often
used against Bruises, instead of Sperma Ceti.

14. Judaicus Lapis, Tecolinthus, Phenicites, Syrincus, Jews-Stone, comes from
Judea and Silesia, roundish almost like an Olive, tender and brittle, with
flakes the long way, at equal distances, as if done by a Turner. It is
sometimes as long as ones little Finger, and is a Specific against the Stone.

15. Lapis Lazuli, Cyanaeus, Coeruleus, Stellans, Azurus, the Azure-Stone, is
found in Gold, Silver, and in Copper-Mines, and is like a Saphir, or the
flowers of Blue-Bottles, with Golden Veins, somewhat harder than the Armenian
Stone; found in Germany, and in the Indies: It purges Melancholy, and is
excellent for Fevers, and the Gout.

16. Lincis Lapis, Belemites, Dactylus Idaeus, the Lynx-Stone, said to be
generated of a Lynx's Urine, like to an Arrow, or the Idaean Date, shines
almost like Amber, and is found in Germany, etc. an excellent Lithontriptic and
Vulnerary.

17. Lapis Humanus, or the Stone found in the Reins or Bladder of a Man, open
Obstructions, and expels the Stone, etc.

18. Marcasita, Lapis Moralis, the Millstone, in Powder with Rosin, drys up
Milk in Women's Breasts.

19. Marble, is either white, black, green, red, etc. Alablaster, Ophites, and
Porphyrites, are certain Species of it. It Is good for the stone, Cholick,
Pleurisy, etc.

20. Nephritic-Stone, is green, sometimes whitish green, yellowish, pale; found
in Spain and B^hemia: The Superficies always sweats with Fat, and is good
against the Stone, and pain of the Reins.

21. The Ophite, is a kind of very hard Marble, of a dark green, having spots
like a Serpent, eminently good against Headaches, and stinging of Serpents.

22. Ostiocolla, Ossifragus, Sabulosus, the Bone-Binder, is almost like a Bone,
white, or ash-colored, and sometimes like Coral, found in Germany, etc.
speedily Knitts Bones together.

23. Phrygice Lapis, the Phrygian Stone, mixed with Wax, it helps burning, and
is profitable against putried Ulcers, used as Cadmia.

24. Porph^ry-Stone. or Red-Marble, taken inwardly, breaks and expels the
Stone, etc

25. Pumex, Lapis Bibulus, the Pumice Stone. It is a white, light, dry,
spongey, porous Stone, full of holes, easily broken, and free from Sand, found
chiefly in Germany. It cools drys, cleanses Uclers, Incarnates, and Skins: The
Clax is used in Eye-Medicines, etc.

26. Pyrites, Lapis Luminis, Lapis Aera^ius, it is twofold, viz. a Golden or
Silver color: does heat, dry, discuss Humors, and soften Swellings: Is found
in Persia, Cypus, G^slaria.

27. Samnius Lapis, the Samian-Stone; the best is hard and white, is good to
polish Gold. Is cold and astringent; being Drunk, it helps them which cannot
digest their Food, but Vomit it up again.

28. Schistus, Iscistus Isidori, the Cleaving-Stone it is a king of Talc, of the
Nature of the Boodstone; it is brought to us out of Germany.

29. Silex, Lapis Tiliceus, and Vivus, the Flint, is harder than Marble, some
black, some cloudy, some white; and some with a thick, white, crusty outside,
which when broken, have been as transparent as Crystal. Flints are hot and dry,
discussive, digestive and resolutive: They open Obstuctions, and dissolve the
Stone and Tartarous Humors; outwardly they cleanse the Teeth.

30. Smyris, (a Stone which Glasiers use to cut Glass) is found in the Earth of
Samot; the Powder of it serves to polish Gems withal.

31. Spongites, the Sponge Stone, breaks the Stone in the Reins and Bladder,
and discusses Tumors of the King's Evil, mixed with Sal, Gem and Tartar, and
Drunk in a Man's Urine every morning Fasting.

32. Talcum, Phengites, Stella-Terrae, Talc is brought from Muscovy and Venice;
and is almost like the specular Stone, but thinner, scaly, greenish, resisting
Fire, and fixed: That which is greenish is best. Its used for a Fucus for the
Face.

33. Unicorn Stone, is of the color, smoothness, and form of an Horn, found in
Germany, etc. It has been often found so great and thick, as could never be
produced from an Animal: Sometimes hard, sometimes soft, always stoney,
brittle, close, without pores, sticking to the Tongue, and of a pleasant scent.
It is drying, binding, cardiac, and sudorifick.

CHAP. XLVII. Strange Stones, and of Admirable Figures, or Signatures.
As the Psalmist says of the Heavens, That they declare the Glory of God, and
the Firmament shows his handiwork; -- there is neither Speech nor Language
where their Voice is not heard; So I may say of the very Stones of the Earth,
that if all the other Preachers of Nature were suspended from their Office, and
commanded to be silent, the very Stones would speak and declare the Wisdom and
Power of their Creator: And it is not in my opinion credible, that the variety
which appears in these works of Nature is altogether accidental or f^rtuitous,
but the effect of a wise Providence, which leads on all things to their end;
and which makes nothing, but to some purpose.

I shall take notice of their Figures, called by some Gamahes, from (...)
Chamai^u, from (...) Chemaia, as Gaffarel thinks, signifying, as the waters of
God; because, says he, you shall see some Agats streaked in such a manner, as
that they perfectly represent the figure of Waters: The Word God being added
according to the Hebrew Idiotisim, which speaking of any thing excellent,
usually add the Holy Name after it, as the Paradise of God for an excellent
Garden; the Army of the Lord, for a great Army; the Cedars of God, for tall
Cedars, etc. Some of these Figures or Gamahes are Natural, others Accidental,
others Artificial: The two former ate either embossed, (rising up) or hollowed,
(engraved) or only painted.

Among the Painted ones, the Agats are well known. That of King Pyrrhus, where
the nine Muses richly apparelled were represented Dancing with Apollo in the
midst of them, playing upon a Harp, seems mighty strange, and served to puzzle
Cardan; and yet is swallowed glibly by Gaffarel. Card. de Subl. 1.7. Gaffarel,
unheard of Curios. part. 3. c. 5. That which M. de Brev^s reports, That he saw
in his Voyages into the Levant, of a Crucisix represented on a Marble-Stone;
and the other at St. George's in Venice, where the Figure of a Crucifix was
represented on Marble, with so much Life, as that you might distinguish in it,
the Nails, Wounds, and drops of Blood, and in a word, all the particulars, that
the most curious Painter could have expressed: As also another of a
Death's Head, so exactly drawn upon an Altar of Jasper, colored Marble, in the
same Church at Venice; seem to me to have been made by the Art of the Painter;
though Gaffarel believes them to be merely Natural; and therefore breaks out,
upon the mention of them, into those Words, How prodigiously full of Wonder the
Effects of Nature are, which shows herself admirable in all her Ways! Gaffar.
Ibid.

I dare hardly impose upon my Readers Faith, that which he relates afterward
of a kind of Stones found in Mauritania, which naturally represent all the
Words of the Ave-Maria, written at length: As for Example, In one you shall
have Ave-Maria, in another Gratia Plena, in others Dominus Tecum. That is more
Credible, which he reports of a company of little Flint-Stones, that had been
presented to the late King of France, that by the Letters naturally figured on
them, did make up his Name at large. Ibid.

In the Imperial Repository at Vienna, is a large Stone of Agate on the
outside, and a Bed of large Amethysts naturally in the middle of it, which is
an extraordinary and pleasant Rarity. Dr. Brown's Trav. p. 148.

Selenites, the Moon-Stone, represent the Image of the Moon in all its Phases.

Asteria, or Star-Stone, is formed like a Star, the Thunderstone, etc.

CHAP. XLVIII. Strange Hills.
THOUGH the Earth of late Ages be acknowledged to be a round Globular Figure, yet
the unevennesses of it, and the strutting forth of some large Mountains seem to
make against it; but indeed, the Objection amounts to no more, than the little
small knobs of an Egg, or the little silver Pins that a Watch-Case is studded
with, against the Oval Figure of the one, or the Roundness and Sphericalness of
the other. Mountains are useful in their places, formerly among Jews and
Gentiles, chosen for Devotion; now in their Natural Consideration, they serve
for the Boundaries and Bulwarks of Nations, the Generation of Metals and
Minerals, for deriving a fruitfulness upon the lower Grounds, breaking the
Winds, pleasantness and variety, etc.

Some have thought, that Mountains, and all other Irregularities in the Earth,
have risen from Earthquakes; others from the Universal Deluge; from the great
Agitation of Waters which broke the Ground into this rude and unequal Form:
Both these seem very incompetent and insufficient. It is most probable, that at
the General Deluge, as all those parts that flood above the Water made
Dry-Land, or the present Habitable Earth, so such parts of the Dry-Land as
stood higher than the rest, made Hills and Mountains; and this is the first and
general account of them, and of all the Inequalities of the Earth. Tho.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth. l. 1. c. 11.

The highest Mountain in the World is not found to be five direct miles in
height, taking their Altitude from the Plain they stand upon.

1. Olympus, whose height is so extolled by the Poets, that it is said to
exceed the Clouds; yet Plutarch tells us, That Xenagoras measured it, and found
it not to exceed a Mile and an half Perpendicular, and about 70 Paces. Much
about the same height, Pliny says, That Dicoarchus found the Mountain Pelion
to be.

2. Mount Athos is supposed of extraordinary height, because it cast it is
shadow into the Isle of Lemnos, which according to Pliny, was eighty seven
miles; yet Gassendus allows it but two miles in height; but Isaac Vossius
allows it but ten or eleven furlongs at most.

3. Caucasus, by Ricciolus, is said to be fifty one miles in height; Gassendus
conceives it not above three or four miles at most; but Vossius will not yield
it above two miles perpendicular, for which he gives this Reason: Polybius
affirms, that any Mountain in Greece may be ascended in a days time, and makes
the highest Mountain there not to exceed ten Furlongs; which V^ssius says, is
scarce possible, unless a Mountaineer, another will scarce be able to ascend
above six Furlongs perpendicular; but if we do allow eight Furlongs for a days
ascent, yet thereby it will appear that the highest Mountains in the World are
not above twenty four Furlongs in height, since they may be ascended in three
days time: And it is affirmed of the Top of Mount Caucasus, that it may be
ascended in less than the compass of three days, and therefore cannot be much
above two miles in height.

4. The Pike of Teneriffe, reputed the highest Mountain in the World, which the
Inhabitants called Pica de Terraria, may be ascended in three days time; For in
the months of July and August, (which are the only Months in which Men can
ascend it, because all other times of the year Snow lies upon it, although
neither in the Isle of Teneriffe, nor any other of the Canary Islands, there be
Snow ever seen) the Inhabitants then ascend to the top of it in three days
time, which top of it is not Pyramidal but plain, from whence they gather some
Sulphurous Stones, which are carried in great quantities into Spain. So that
according to the proportion of eight Furlongs to a days Journey, this Pike will
not exceed the height of a German Mile Perpendicular, as Varenius confesses,
who thinks no Mountain in the World to be higher; and the Alps, in a
Perpendicular Line, comes not near the height of a German Mile. Dr.
Stillingfleet's Orig. Sacr. lib. 3. cap. 4. p. 544. etc.

5. In the County of Hereford, Marclay-Hill, Anno 1571. roused it self up, and
for the space of three days together, moving and showing its self with roaring
noise in a fearful sort, and overturning all things that stood in its way,
advanced it self forward to the wondrous astonishment of the Beholders, Camb.
Brit. p. 620.

6. In Glamorgan-shire, in Cliff by the Seaside, there appears a very little
Chink, unto which, if you lay your Ear, you shall hear a noise as if it were
Smiths at Work; one while the blowing of Bellows, another while the striking of
the Sledge and Hammer; sometimes the sound of the Grind-Stone, and Iron-Tools
rubbing against it; the hissing Sparks of Steel-Gads, within holes as they are
beaten also, and the puffing noise of the Fire burning in the Furnace. This is
called Merlin's Cave. Camb. Brit. p. 643.

7. Crowborough-Hill, about eight miles from Timbridge-Wells, is so very high,
that in a clear day Ships may be seen under Sail: There is also an unlimited
prospect on this Hill, which renders it the more delightful.

CHAP. XLIX. Vulcanoes.
VVlcanoes are nothing but the Vent-holes or Funnels of Nature, to give vent to
the Superflnous choking Fumes, and smoaky Vapors of the Earth, which fly
upwards, and make way and free Passage for the Vehemence of the burning within
the Bowels of the Earth; and for the Attraction and free admission of the
Friendly Air, to cherish and ventilate those Suffocating Flames, least they
should continually shake the Foundations of the Ground, with Intolerable
Commotions and Earthquakes; for Earthquakes are the proper effects of
Subterrestrial Combustions; and so the Fire is both discharged of its
Superfluous Clog through these wide mouthed Orifices, and cherished also with
the reviving Air. Of these Ventholes or Chimneys, there are such a Multitude
and variety, than there is hardly any Region in the World without them.

1. Asia has them every where, in Persia, Armusia, Zeilan, Media, in the
Mogul's Country, and China; the Molucca and Philippine Islands, Japan, New
Guiny, in the Indian Ocean every where, the Shoats of North Tartary, and in all
the Ocean and Islands almost, etc.

2. Africa has two famous ones in Monamotopa; 4 in Angola, Congus, and Guiney;
one in Lybia, one in Abassia; besides innumerable Craters and Sulphurous Dens,
every where obvious; the Atlantic Sea so abounds with subterraneous Fires,
that Platoes Land called Atlantis, seems to have been swallowed up by them. The
Terzeras can scarce be inhabited for the Vehemence of Fires; and in them the
Pico, equal to Teneriffe, belches forth Flames to this very day, etc.

3. America may be called Vulcan's Kingdom; In the Andes alone, in the Kingdom
of Chile, are 15 Vulcanoes; in Peru as many, 6 of inaccessible height, besides
innumerable Vulcanian Ditches, Pits, and Jakes. In Carappa, a Province of
Popagon, is a Mountain raging with Smoke and Flames; the City Paruquipa, has a
Mountain near it, casting forth continually Sulphurous Fires. At the Valley of
Peru, called Mulahallo, is another Vulcano; to these may be added the Southern
part of the Magellanic Sea, continually belching forth its Flames, called
therefore Terras de Fuego. In the Northern America, are observed 7 formidable
Vulcanoes, three in New-Spain, one in Nicaragua, three in Callifornia.

4. In Europe, 5 chief ones are noted, viz. Aetna in Sicily, by the Monuments
of all Writers, most famous. Strongulus (and some other of the Liparitan
Islands, not very remote from Sicily, especially that Notorious Vulcana, to
which is adjoined another called Vuleanilla,) said all to have burnt
heretofore, called the Vulcanian Islands. The Mountain Hecla in Izland, is the
furthest North, and Chimer a in Greece, besides many others in each particular
Country; at least, Fire, Wells, Pits, and Orifices, etc. Among all which,
Italy, throughout all Ages, is the most Notorious for such underground Hearths
and Aestuaries.

Neither are Germany, France, Spain, and other Countries wholly destitute of
theirs; where, though there be none answerable to the other, yet the frequent
Sulphurous Craters, Vomiting forth Smo^^ and Flames; and the innumerable
multitude of hot Bathes and Wells every where, do betray some Store and
Workhouses of Subterraneous Fire, creeping between the Conservatories and
Abysses of Water. In Misnia in Germany, the Mountain Carbo, ever and anon,
rages with Fume and Fire, etc. In the farthest Tracts of the North, toward the
Poles, in the Region of Tinsci in Tartary, are reckoned four. In Lapland, high
Mountains belch forth Flames like Aetna. In Izeland, the Famous Hecla, and in
Greenland next to the Pole, is a huge Vulcanian Mountain, etc.

Not to mention the particular Eruptions of other Vulcanoes, we will take
notice only of the Burnings of Aetna. It is said to have broke forth, A. M.
2600, witness Berosus; afterward in the time of Janigena. In the time of the
Arganauts, A. M. 2714. In the time of Aeneas his expedition, A. M. 2768, again
about A. 3180, till near 3600, Witness Thucidides, who lived at that time. In
the time of the Roman Consuls, there were four remarkable Burnings; that about
3830. was prodigious; another in the time of Julius Caesar; another in the time
of Caligula; another in the time of St. Agatha the Martyr, other in these
following years, A. C. 812, 1160, 1284, 1329, 1408, 1444, 1536, 1554, 1633,
1650, 1669, 1687.

CHAP. L. Strange Winds and Hurricanes.
BEing got upon the Tops of Hills, the next thing that presents before us, is
the Wind which blowern, (as our Savior says,) where it lists, but mostly
upon the highest Grounds, and greatest Plains, whether of Earth or Sea, and
this Meteor is so strong sometimes, so strange, so always invisible, that is
may well go for one of the Wonders of Nature, enough to astonish and terrify.

When the Sun by some particular Occurent, raises great Multitudes of Atoms
from some one place, and they either by the Attraction of the Sun, or some
other occasion, take their course a certain way; the Motion of those Atoms we
call a Wind, which according to the continuance of the Matter from whence these
Atoms arise, end^re a longer or shorter time, and goes a longer or shorter
way; like a River, or those Eruptions of Waters they call in the Northern part
of England, Gypsies, which flow out at certain times, upon uncertain Causes,
and with an uncertain duration.

1. In some of the Caribbe Islands, the word Hurrica, signifies the Devil,
whence Hurricanes took its Name, it being commonly called in Latin, Tempestas
Diabolica; we seldom hear of any Hurricanes but between the Tropiques, and
within the Jurisdiction of the General or Trade Wind; which blowing perpetually
from the Eastern Points, if it chance to be repelled by a Land Breeze, or any
contrary Wind from the West; this must needs occasion strange Conflicts and
Seditions in the Air; and, were our Senses fine enough to discern the invisible
Commotions of the Atmosphere, we should see it oftentimes disturbed and
Fluctuating, no less then the most Tempestuous Seas. Hurricanes are most
Terrible near high Shoars and Islands, that lie Eastward from the Continent, so
that they infest the Philippine and Caribbe Islands, more then any other part
of the Habitable World. It Is strange, that they should be so dreadful in some
of the Caribbes, that Mevis and St. Christophers, have several times been
almost depopulated by them, when they never reach to Jamaica on the one side,
nor on the other, beyond Barbados, where they have seldom more then the Tail
of an Hurricane.

We have most Incredible Relations of the Storms in the way to Japan, which
have carried Ships a considerable distance from the Sea, up the dry Land; some
have been miserably Wrackt, and buried in the Waves, others split in a Thousand
pieces against the Rocks, that scarce one Ship in five escapes these Disasters,
in the Tempestuous Months about Autumn, or at the Change of the Monsoons.
Bohun's disc. of the Orig. and Prop. of Wind. p. 255.

Hurricanes are the True Images of the last Conflagration of the World,
formerly happening one in five or seven years, now more frequent: the manner
thus, ordinarily the Sea becomes Calm on a sudden, and smooth as Glass; then
presently after the Air is darkened, and filled with thick and gloomy Clouds,
after which, it is all (as it were) on a Fire, and opens on every side with
dreadful Lightnings, that last a considerable time, after which follow
wonderful Claps of Thunder, that seem as if the Heaven were rent asunder. The
Earth trembles in many places, and the Wind blows with so great an Impetuosity,
that it Roots up the Tallest and the greatest Trees which grow in the Woods;
beats down almost all the Houses, and tears up the Vegetables, destroying every
thing that grows upon the Earth, and very often compells Men, whilst this
dreadful Tempest lasts, to catch hold of the Trunks of Trees, to secure
themselves from being carried away with the Winds; some lie in the Caves of the
Rocks, or retire into the Hutts of the Negroes, and Caribbians, which are built
exceeding low, on purpose to elude the Shocks of these Tempests. But that which
is most dangerous of all, and which causes the greatest Mischief, is, that in
24 hours, and sometimes in less space, it makes the whole Circle of the
Compass, leaving neither Road nor Haven secure from its raging Force; so that
all the Ships that are at that time on the Coast, do Perish most Miserably. At
St. Christophers, several Ships being Laden with Tobacco, were all cast away by
an Hurricane; and afterward, the Tobacco Poisoned most of the Fish on their
Coasts.

When these Storms are over, a Man may behold the saddest Spectacles that can
be imagined. There may be seen pieces of Mountains shaken by the Earthquakes,
and Forests overturned; Houses beaten down by the Winds, many People undone by
the Loss of their Goods and Merchandise, of which they can save but little;
there may you see poor Seamen drowned, and Rolling in the Waves, with many
brave Ships broken in pieces, and battered against the Rocks; it is a thing so
Woeful and Deplorable, that should it happen often, none would be so confident
as to go to the Indies. Ibid. p. 280. etc.

2. The Tornadoes or Travadoes, in Greek Ecnephias, have for their Prognostic,
a thick Cloud, suddenly rising above the Horizon, which is easily visible in
those Countries, where the Air is genearlly defecate and Serene; the Cloud for
its smalness at first, called the Bulls-Eye, diffuses it self by degrees, and
at last, covering the whole Face of the Heavens with a Canopy of Darkness,
causes horrible Storms, Thunder and Lightning, swells the Raging Seas up to the
Clouds, which pour them down in Deluges of Rain, falling rather in huge
Cascades, and by Buckets full, then drops; sometimes with Hailstones of
Prodigious Bulk, commonly shifting all the Points of the Compass, in the space
of an Hour, and blowing in such sudden and impetuous Gusts, that Ship which was
ready to overset on one side, is no less assaulted on the other; sometimes
shifting without intermission, and otherwhile blowing in Starts; you shall be
alarmed with many of them in the same day; most toward the Coast of Africa, for
half an hour or three quarters at a time, our Seamen commonly meet with them
from 10th, 11th, or 12th Degree of Northern Latitude, likewise in the Tropic of
Capricorn, near the Promontory of Cape bon Esperance. Sometimes they are
attended with much Thunder and Lightning, and extreme Rain, so noiso^, that
they will make their Clothes who stir much in in it, stink upon their Backs.
Sir Tho. Pope Blunt's Not. Hist. p. 434.

3. Whirlwinds are very strange; we will here present the Reader with an
account of one which happened in Cambridge in New England, July 8. 1680. One
Samuel Stone having about two of the Clock in the Afternoon been in the Field,
the Wind then Southerly, he observed a Cloud in the North-west, in opposition
to the Wind, which caused a Singing Noise in the Air, and the Wind increased,
till the Whirlwind came, which began in the Meadow, near where he was, though
it was not so violent as it proved afterward, as it passed by him, it sucked up
and whirled about the Hay that was within the Compass of it; it passed from him
toward his House, over an Hill, tearing down several Trees as it went along,
and coming to his Barn, carried off a considerable part of the Roof, (about 24
foot one way, and 30 the other, full near the Dwelling house, where People
were, yet could not its fall be heard of them, (yet was it so great, that it
was heard by some a Mile of,) by reason of the great rushing noise of the Wind.
Afterward as it pressed toward his Neighbors House, it tore down some Trees
and Indian Corn, and there rose up in the Air for the space of a quarter of a
Mile, afterward it came down up (...) Earth, in a more violent manner; Matthew
Bridge his Neighbor, who was an Eyewitness of what happened, declares, that
he observed a thick Cloud coming along his Fathers Field, before his House, as
to appearance very black; in the inside of the Cloud as it passed over him,
there seemed to be a light Pillar, as he judged to be about 8 or 10 foot
Diameter, which seemed to him like a Skrew or solid body; its motion was
continually circular, which turned about the rest of the Cloud; it passed along
upon the Ground, tearing all before it, Bushes by the Roots, yea, the Earth it
self; removing Old Trees as they lay along on the Earth, and Stones of a great
Magnitude; great Trees were twisted and torn down, and carried a distance from
the place where they were; Branches of Trees, containing about a Load of Wood,
were blown 40 yards or more. The Cloud it self was filled with Stones, Bushes,
Boughs, etc. so that the Cloud seemed like a Green Wood, it went a Mile and a
half before it shattered, bearing down the Trees before it, and laying all flat
to the Ground; passing through a New Planted Orchard, it pulled up some of the
Trees by the Roots, and broke off others in the Bodies, as if shot off. Matthew
Bridge and his Boy were necessitated to lie flat upon the Ground, and this
Cloud and Pillar passed so near them, as almost to touch their Feet, bending
the Bushes down over them, and yet their Lives were preserved. John Robins a
Servant man, was suddenly slain by this Storm; his Body bruised, and many Bones
broken. Inc. Mathers, Remark, Provid. p. 313, etc.

To speak of other Winds and Tempests in other parts of the World, would be too
tedious, only one we shall relate, which happened in England lately.

October 30, 1669, betwixt 5 and 6 a Clock in the Evening, the Wind We^^erly,
at Ashley in Northamptonshire, happened a formidable Hurricane, scarce bearing
60 yards in breadth, and spending it self in about 7 Minutes of time. Its first
discerned assault was upon a Milk-maid, taking her Pail and Hat from off her
Head, and carrying it many scores of yards from her, where it lay undiscerned
for some days; next it stormed the Yard of one Sprigge, dwelling in West-thorp,
where it blew a Waggon's body off of the Axel-trees, breaking the Wheels, and
Axel-trees in pices, and blowing three of the Wheels so shattered, over a Wall.
The Wagon stood somewhat cross to the Passage of the Wind; another Wagon of
Mr. Salisburies, matched with great speed upon its Wheels against the side of
his House, to the astonishment of the Inhabitants; a Branch of an Ash-tree, of
the bigness that two lusty Men could scarce lift it, blew over Mr. Salisburies
House without hurting it, and yet this Branch was torn from a Tree an Hundred
yards distant from that House. A Slate was found upon a Window of the House of
Samuel Templer, Esquire; which very much bent an Iron Bar in it and yet it is
certain, that the nearest place, the Slate was at first forced from. was near
200 yards; not to take notice of its stripping of several Houses; one thing is
remarkable, which is that at Mr. Maidwell's Senior, it forced open a Door,
breaking the Latch, and thence marching through the Entry, and forcing open the
Dairy Door, it overturned the Milk-Vessels, and blew out three Panes or Lights
in the Window; next it mounted the Chambers, and blew out nine Lights more;
from thence it proceeded to the Parsonage, whose Roof is more then decimated;
then crosses the narrow Street, and forcibly drives a Man Headlong in the
Doors of Tho. Briggs; then it passed with a Cursory salute at Tho. Marsones,
down to Mr. George Wignils, at least a Furlong distance from Marston's, and two
Furlongs from Sprigges, where it played Notorious Exploits, blowing a large
Hovel of Pease from its supporters, and settling it cleaverly upon the Ground,
without any considerable damage to the Tharch. Here it blew a Gate Post, fixed
two foot and an half in the Ground, out of the Earth, and carried it into the
Fields, many yards from its first abode. Mathers Remarkable Providence. p. 320.

Anno 1401. The Devil appeared at Danbury in Essex, upon the Day called Corpus
Christi, in the likeness of a Gray-Fryar, who entering the Church, raged very
insolently, whereby the Parishoners were marvellously feared; the same Hour
with a Tempest of Whirlwind and Thunder, the Top of the Steeple was broken
down, half the Chancel shaken and scattered abroad; shortly after, Sir Roger
Clarendon, Knight, the Bastard Son (as it was said,) of Edward the Black
Prince, and with him his Squire, and a Young Man were beheaded, and 8 Friars
were brought to open Judgment, were Condemned and Hanged, that Published King
Richard to be alive. The Doc^ warning to Judgment. p. 262.

CHAP. LI. Damps.
DR. Plot reduces Damps either to Supernatural, or Subterraneal; both which, he
takes to proceed from Stagnations into the Subterraneal Vaults of the Earth,
for want of due Ventilations and Commerce between the Superior and Inferior
Air. The Material causes, says the Doctor, may be various, cither Simple or
Compound; as the Mere Corruption of the Simple Air alone, upon a long
Stagnation in the Coal-Rooms, and the Rifts and Clifts of the Rock of Coal it
self, may be its material Causes indeed; but the chief Cause of a Daemp, he
takes to be the want of motion in those Cavities, without which, the Air would
never have Corrupted, no more then Water which never Corrupts till it
Stagnate:, when indeed like the Air, it becomes Poisonous, tho possibly not to
that Degree; the Air being a Body much finer, and conveyed to the more tender
parts of the Body; whence it is, that in Old Works, wherein there has been no
digging for a long time, no laving, drawing, or pumping of Water, all which
keeps the Air in motion, and the Waters from Canckering, these Damps are most
frequent and most dangerous: whence i^^s too, that the Works where the Bed of
Coal is thin, and admits but of few or no sach Rifes, for the Air to Stagnate
or Corrupt in, are seldom or never troubled with them. Upon which account it is
likewise, that tho a Bed of Coal have many of these Rifts; and large ones too,
yet as long as there is a Profluence of Water through them, there is no danger
of their Entertaining such Damps, which as soon as made dry by a Sough or
Free-Level, the same Mine shall become much more liable to them; the wholsore
Air that was in them, whilst kept in motion by the Flux of the Water, now
Stagnating and Corruping to that degree, that it not only extinguishes the
Glowing heat of Coals, and the Flame of Candles, Torches, etc. but the Flammula
Vitae, too in most living Creatures, so that the Animal that respires it,
sometimes expires with is too. Plot's Hist. of Staffordshire, p. 133, 134.

1. Mr. Jessop says, there are 4 sorts of Damps common in those Parts. The
first, is known ever where; the External Signs of its approach, are the Candles
burning Orbicular, and the Flames lessening by degrees, until it quite
extinguish; the Intenral, shortness of Breath; those which escape swooning,
receive no great Inconvenience; those that swoon away and escape an absolute
Suffocation, are at their first recovery tormented with violent Convulsions,
the Pain whereof, when they begin to recover their Senses, cause them to roar
exceedingly. The Remedy is to dig a Hole in the Earth, and lay them on their
Bellies, with their Mouths in it; if that fail, they Tun them full of good Ale:
but if that fail, they conclude them in a desperate Condition.

2. The second sort is called the Pease-bloom Damp, because it smells like it.
It always comes in the Summertime, and that those Groves are not free, which
are never troubled with any other sort of Damps; he never heard it was Mortal,
the Scent perhaps freeing them from the Danger of a Surprise. Dr. Plot, takes
this kind to be the most common Damp in the Country, it makes their Ca^dles
first to diminish, to burn round, and at length to go out, perfuming the Stauls
with a Faint sweet smell, and are said to be sometimes visible, showing like a
thin Smoke, which may be seen fuming out of the Top of the Pit; it is thought
to arise from the Workmen's Breath and Sweat, mixed with the Steams of the
Golden Marchasite.

3. The third sort of Damp is said to be the most strange and most Pestilential
of any; those who pretend to have seen it, describe it thus: In the highest
part of the Roof of those Passages, which branch out from the main Grove, they
often see a round thing hanging, about the bigness of a Football, covered with
a Skin of the Thickness and Color of a Cob-web; this they say, if by any
accident it be broken, immediately disperseth it self, and Suffocates all the
Company; therefore to prevent Casualties, as soon as ever they epsy it; they
say, they have a way, by the help of a Stick and long Rope, of breaking it at a
distance, which done, they Purify the place with Fire, before they dare enter
in again.

4. The fourth, which they also call a Damp, is that Vapor, which being
touched by their Candle, presently takes Fire, and gives a Crack like a Gun,
produces the like Effects, or rather those of Lightning; hence it is commonly
called the Fulminating Damp, Philos. Transact Numb. 117. p. 391.

Mr. Jessop further observes, that Damps most generally come in the latter end
of May, and to continue during the heat of Summer, and in those places, which
have Damps all the Year long; yet they are most violent at that Season,
although it be certain, they do often return in the same Summer.

He also observes, there are some Damps that will quite extinguish all those
Fires that are let down into them, be they never so many, successively, or
never so great; and Fire is observed to be so far from Cuting, that it often
creates Damps in places not otherwise subject to them. Ibid. p. 453.

Mr. George Sinclar says, That the Fire of Fulminating Damps is in Scotland,
near Leith, which they there call Wild Fire. They do there prevent this Damp by
a Person that enters before the Workmen, who, being covered with wet Sackcloth,
when he comes near the Coal-wall, where the Fire is feared, he creeps on his
Belly with a long Pole before him, having a lighted Candle on the Top on'^,
with whose Flame the Wildfire meeting, it breaks with Violence, and running
along the Roof, goes out with a Noise at the Mouth of the Sink; the Person
that gave Fire escaping by creeping on the Ground, and keeping his Face close
to it, till it be over-past. George Sinclar's Miscell. Obs. p. 292.

Dr. Plot, in his Natural Histoty of Oxfordshire, tells, that in North Leigh in
that County, two Men of that place being employed to dig a Well, first Sickned,
and wisely withdrew from the Work; whereupon it was undertaken by two others of
Woodstock, who before they could do any thing confiderably in it, sunk down and
irrecoverably died in the Well; which being perceived by a Woman above, a
Miller hard by was called to their assistance, who also suddenly fell down upon
them, and dyed; to whom, after some deliberation taken, another Ventures down
with a Rope about his middle, but he fell from the Ladder, in just the same
manner, and though presently drawn up by the People above, yet was scarcely
recovered in an Hour or more.

And on the 20th of Augusst, 1674, upon a Buckets falling casually into a Well,
on the Southside of the said Town, about a Furlong from the former, a Woman
calls her Neighbor, a lusty strong Man, to go down by a Ladder to fetch up her
Bucket, who also unmindful of the former accident, soon granted her unhappy
request, for by that time he came half way down, he fell dead from the Ladder
into the Water; the Woman amazed, calls another of her Neighbors, a Lusty
young Man about 28, who hastily descending to give his assistance, much about
the same place also, fell down from the Ladder, and dyed, without giving the
least sign of his Change; so suddenly Mortal are the Damps of that place. Dr.
Plots Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire. p. 61.

The Doctor advises all such as are to go down into any deep Well, that may be
suspected to have any Malignant, noxious Steams, or Vapors, first to throw
down into them, a Peck of good Lime, which slaking in the Water, and fuming out
the Top, will so effectually dispel all such Poisonous Vapors, that they may
safely go down, and stay sometime unhurt. Ibid. p. 63.

CHAP. LII. Rain, Hail, Snow, Frosts, etc.
THE Governor of the World; to show his Wisdom, and make his power known, has
set the Sun in the Firmament, (among other Offices) to exhale and draw up the
Vapors and moisture from the Earth into the Upper Regions of the Air, and when
they are condensed into Clouds, he has the Winds ready to carry them about
from place to place, and when they are Sunn'd and Fanned sufficiently there,
and made pure and fit for our use; he does again either dissolve or congeal
them, and send them down to us in the several Species of Rain, Hail, Snow, etc.
O Lord, our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth!

1. The 30th of July, Anno 1662. was a very stormy and tempestuous day in
Cheshire and Lancashire. At Ormskerk there was such a Storm of Hail, as brake
the Glass-Windows, and did much hurt to the Corn. Mr. Heywood the Minister,
measured an Hail-Stone, after some of it was wasted, and found it 4 Inches
about, others were judged to be greater.

2. The 13th of October, Anno 1666. there was in Lincolnshire, a dreadful Storm
of Thunder and Hailstones, much bigger than Pigeons Eggs, and some fell as
large as Pullets Eggs. Ibid.

3. The 26th of June, Anno 1682. in New England there were the most amazing
Lightnings that had been known, grievous Hail falling with it. At Springfield
it was most dreadful, where great pieces of Ice, some 7, some 9 Inches about,
fell down from the Clouds with such violence, that the Shingles upon some
Houses were broken thereby, and holes beat into the Ground that a Man might put
his Hand in. Several Acres of Corn were beat down and destroyed by the Hail,
etc. Mather's Remarkable Providence, p. 318.

4. In the 23th year of King Henry II. a shower of Blood rained in the Isle of
Wight, which continued two hours together. Clark's Examples, p. 571.

5. In June, Anno 1653. a black Cloud was seen over the Town of Pool, which a
while after was dissolved into a shower of Blood, that fell warm upon Men's
hands: Some green Leaves, with those drops of Blood upon them, were sent to
London; attested by Eyewitnesses. Clark's Mirr. p. 484.

6. Before Caesar's Death, no only drops of Blood fell from Heaven, but also
Pitts and Pools flowed with Blood. Plutarch.

7. Anno 1620. it Rained Blood in Poland so abundantly, that the drops fell
very fast from the tops of the Houses: Soon after, the Tartars, with 40000 Men
invaded Poland, exercising incredible cruelty, killing in one place above 3000
Polanders: And the Turks, with 90000 men, fell into Walslady, where they had a
bloody Encounter with 12000 Poles, led by the Great Chancellor of the Kingdom,
who himself with the whole Army were slain, few or none escaping, Burtons,
Surp. Mir. of Nature, p. 99.

8. The 16th of July, Anno 1622. in the Dukedom of Wittenburg, it Rained Blood
on the Hands and Clothes of Labouring-men; and likewise upon Trees, Stones, and
other places in the Fields: In these parts at Noringen many thousands were
slain. Ibid. p, 101.

9. The 29th of June, Anno 1625. at Constantinople, began a most terrible
Tempest, with Thunder and Lightning, that all the City showed as if it had been
on Fire; at the end whereof, fell a Storm of Hail that brake Tiles and Glasses,
so that Stones were taken up of 150 Drams, and the next morning some of them
being weighed, they were about 7 and 8 Ounces a piece, wherewith they were sore
wounded; and the 3d of July after, fell another Tempest of Thunder and
Lightning, which burned a Woman and Child, and slew much Cattle in the Field.
Clarks Example, c. 103. p. 490.

10. Anno 763. when the Turks first brake forth from about the Caspian Sea,
there was such an extraordinary cold Winter, that the Euxine Sea was frozen 30
foot thick, Men walked upon the Ice for 100 miles into the Sea; yea, all the
Country from Lycia to Denubius, and on the other side, as far as Euphrates,
were so associated by the Frost, as if they had been all one Country. Some
pieces of Ice, like unto Mountains, fell upon and beat down the Walls of
several Cities. Ibid.

11. In the Reign of King John, were great Thunders and Lightning, and Showers,
with Hailstones, some as big as Goose Eggs. Clark's Mirr. p. 571.

12. Anno 1568 upon All Saints Eve, the Sea excessively swelling, in some
places overflowing, and in others bearing down the Banks, such a prodigious
and unheard of Deluge covered certain Islands of Zealand, with a great part of
the Seacoast of Holland, and almost all Friezeland, as destroyed much Land and
many Men. In Friezeland alone, were 20000 Persons drowned, whose Bodies, with
the Carcasses of Cattle, Household Goods, and broken Ribs of Ships floated all
over the Fields, the Land being indistinguishable from the Sea. Many were saved
from the tops of Hills, and Trees, being ready to starve, by Boats. Strada,
Clarks Examples, p. 490.

13. Anno 1586. it Rained Locusts in Thracia, and Ducks and Geese in Croatia,
as Leonclavius testifies, who was an Eye witness of it. The Locusts fell in
such multitudes, that they devoured all the Country: And on the contrary, the
Ducks and G^ese fed and nourished many. Cluverius Hist. Mundi. p. 742. Clark.
Ibid.

14. Anno 1608. a Frost began in December, and continued till the April
following, with such violence, that not only the Thames was so frozen, that
loaded Carts were driven over it, as on dry Land, but many Fowls and Birds
perished, and Herbs in Gardens were killed. Cark. Mir. p. 578.

CHAP. LIII. Concerning Thunderbolts or Thunderstones.
THunderbolts and Thunderstones are nothing else but the foeculent matter of
those Vapors and Exhalations, which are the material cause of the Thunder and
Lighening; for we sea by experience, that even our Urine has always some such
concreted dregs belonging to it; and sometimes perfect Stones made out of it,
either in the Reins or Vreters or Bladder; and why there may not be a
p^trification in this case, I know no Reason.

1. Avicenna says, That he saw a Thunderbolt which fell at Corduba in Spain,
and that it had a Sulphurous smell, and was like Ammoniac. It is possible, that
not only Sulphurous and Bituminous, but stony substances may be generated in
the Clouds with the Lightning. George Agricela writes, That near Lurgia, a
Mass of Iron, being 50 pound in weight, fell from the Clouds, which some
attempted to make Swords of, but the Fire could not melt it, nor Hammers bring
it into Form, Anno 1492.

2. At Ensisheimiun, a Stone of 300 pound weight fell from the Clouds, which is
kept in a Monument in the Temple there. Anno 1581, a Stone came out of the
Clouds in Thuringia, which was so hot, that it could not be touched, with which
one might strike fire as with a Flint. There is now to be seen at Dresden, a
Stone which descended out of a Cloud, and is reserved amongst the Am^anda
belonging to the Elector of Saxony; some lately living were present at the sall
of that Stone. Anno 1618, in Bobemia, a considerable quantity of Brass Metal
fell from the Clouds.

3. May 28, 1677, at a Village near Hana in Germany, there was a Tempest of
Lightning, and a great multitude of Stones of Green and partly Caerulean Color
fell therewith, and a considerable Mass of Mineral Matter, in traste like
Vitriol, being ponderous and friable, having also Metallic sparks like Gold
Intermixed. Gesner says, that a Gentleman gave him one of those Stones,
supposing it to be a Thunderbolt, and that it was 5 digits in length, and 3 in
breadth. This sort of Stone is usually in form like unto an Iron Wedge, and has
an hole quite through it. Boethius reports, that many Persons worthy of Credit,
affirmed, that when Houses or Trees had been broken with the Thunder, they did
by digging, find such Stones in the places where the Stroke was given;
nevertheless, that fulminous Stones or Thunberbolts, do always descend out of
the Clouds, when such breaches are made by the Lightning, is a Vulgar Error.
M^ther's remark. Prove. p. 113.

CHAP. LIVE. Comets, Blazing-Stars.
I am no Prophet, nor Prophet's Son, nor Astrologer, to pretend any skill in
the particular Significations of these fiery Meteors; and they that make a
Profession that way, I do humbly conceive, had need to be very modest: All that
I can assert with any Confidence in such Cases, is, that Comets are, as it
were, Colors hung forth, or a Hand stretched out, at the Windows of Heaven, to
signify the Indignation of the Almighty, that he is frowning and bending his
Bow, and making his Quiver ready, to shoot at the Inhibitants of the Earth; and
that they had best consider and examine, and prepare themselves to meet him in
the Way of his Judgments.

1. Before the last Destruction of Jerusalem, a Comet in the likeness of a
Fiery Sword, hung over the City for a year together; also at the ^east of
Passover, a great Light appeared about the Altar at Midnight, which continued
half an hour; also a Cow that was led to be Sacrificed at the Altar, brought
forth a Lamb, and c. Also a little before Sunset, were seen in the Air, Iron
Chariots, and an Army in Battle-Array, as it were begitting the City. Joseph.
Hist.

2. Before the Peloponesian Wars, there was a Comet, which continued 57 days
together; there was also so great an Eclipse of the Sun, the Stars appeared at
Noonday, Idem.

3. The same Year that Nero was adopted by Claudius, there appeared three Suns.
Ibid.

4. Irone the Empress, r^ling in Constantinople after the Murder of her Son
Constantine, the Sun was darkened for 17 days together. Isac. Chron. p. 276

5. In Flanders, Anno 1088, was seen a Fiery Dragon, flying in the Air, casting
out Flames from his Mouth, Ibid. p. 315.

9. The ^cast of Baster, before the coming of the Normans into this Kingdom,
there was seen for a Week together, a Blazing-Star of an^hideous and fearful
Form. Camb. Brit.

7. Anno School. While a Battle was Fought between the English and Scots, the Sun
appeared as red as Blood, so long as the battle continued. Camb. Brit. Irel. p.
162.

8. Anno 1342. October 11, the Moon being 11 days old, there was seen two Moons
at Dublin, the one in the East, the other in the West. Ibid. Ir. p. 188.

9. Anno 1406, in the Time of the Holy War, there appeared in Judea, a Comet
for 50 days; also three Suns, one on each side of the True, but smaller; a
great white Circle environing them and in it a Rainbow of four Colors the Bow
toward the Sun and reaching to the two other Suns. Purch's Pilg. v. 2. p. 1287.

10. Anno 1611, Three Suns were seen in the Firmament over Vienna. Turk, Hist.
p. 1311.

11. Anno 1618, there appeared in the Night over Constantinople a Comet in the
form of a crooked Sword, it was of a vast bigness; at the first appearing it
was whitish, but as it rose, the redder it was, and like unto Blood. Ibid, p.
1379.

12. In March following, 1650. three Glorious Suns were seen at once in
Cumberland, to the Astonishment of many Thousands that beheld them. Clark's
Mir. p. 483.

13. Anno 1648, Mr. Clark says, That in January, the Week before the Beheading
of King Charles the First, there was seen a fiery Meteor in the Air near
Bristol, on the South Side of the City, for diverse Nights together, in Form
long, with fiery Streams shooting out East and West. Ibid.

14. Anno 1572, in November, there appeared a new Star in Cassiopeia which
continued sixteen Months; soon after which, Charles the Ninth, King of France,
(who was the Author of the Parisean Massacre) died of exceeding Bleeding from
diverse parts of his Body, Cursing and Swearing; says Camb. in his Elizabetha.

15. A while after Charles the Fifth sickended, whereof he died, there was seen
a Blazing-Star in Spain, at first somewhat dim, but as his Disease increased,
so it grew in brightness, at last shooting its fiery Hair point blank against
the Monastery where he lay, in the very Hour that the Emperor died the Comet
vanished, which was Sept. 21. 1558. Strada.

16. The new Star in Cassiopeia is supposed to be set as a sign of the
Reformation and the Renovation of the Gospel Light, after a long interval of
Darkness.

CHAP. LV. Lightnings and Thunder.
I Know not well, whether the Philosophical Account of Lightnings and Thunder
will be accepted of in this Disputing Age, viz. That they are a Congestion of
Vapors or Exhalations in the Clouds, inkindled there by an Antiperistasis, and
so moving and diffusing themselves till they burst the Clouds, and break forth
with a loud Eruption, and quickness of Flame, to the Astonishment of us who
live beneath. But sure I am with the Psalmist, They are the Voice of the Lord,
and bring mighty Things to pass, sometimes to our Terror and Amazement.

1. In the time of Marcus Antonius the Philosopher we read, that the Quadi his
Enemies were stricken with Thunder at the Prayers of the Christian Soldiers,
whence the Christian Legion was called The Thundering Legion; presently (says
the Emperor of them in that Epistle) as they lay upon their Faces and prayed
to God, I know not whom, a cold Shower fell upon us; but upon our Enemies, Hail
mingled with Thunder, that we found immediately that the Hand of the mighty God
affisted us. Johnst. Not. Hist. cl. 3. c. 5. p. 79.

2. About Anno 105, in the Reign of Trajan, who raised the 3d Persecution
October. 22 there arose furious and violent Winds, which tore up Trees by the
Roots, uncovered and overthrew many Houses and c. Then followed Thunder and
Lightnings, which made the Night like Noonday; then fearful Thunderbolts,
which brake down stately Buildings, and slew many Men; and c. Clark's Mir. p.
489. Dion.

3. July 1654, at Salisbury in New England, one Partridge was killed by Thunder
and Lightning, his House being set on Fire thereby, himself with others
endeavoring to quench it, by a second Crack was struck dead, and never spoke
more. Ten others were struck, and lay for dead, but they all revived except
Partridge, in whose Clothes and Skin were Holes found like Shot-holes.
Remarkable Providence, p. 73.

4. October. 21. Anno 1638, at Withycomb in Devonshire, being Sabbath Day, whilst
the People were attending the Public Worship of God, a black Cloud coming over
the Church, there was suddenly an amazing Clap of Thunder, and with it a Ball
of Fire came in at the Window, whereby the Church was much damnified, and many
of the People struck down. Some of the Seats in the Body of the Church were
turned upside down, yet they that sat in them received no hurt. One Mr. Hill
sitting in his Seat by the Chancel, had his Head suddenly smitten against the
Wall, by which Blow he died that Night. Another had his Head cloven, his Skull
rent in three pieces, and his Brains thrown on the Ground whole: The Hair of
his Head by the Violence of the Blow stuck fast to the Pillar that was near
him. A Woman attempting to run out of the Church, had her Clothes set on fire;
and her Flesh on her Back torn almost t the very Bone. Clark's Examples, Vol.
1. chapter 104. p. 501.

5. Anno 1613, June 26, in the Parish of Christchurch in Hampshire, one John
Hitchell, a Carpenter, lying in Bed with his Wife, and a young Child by them,
was himself, with his Child, burnt to Death by a Flash of Lightning, no Fire
appearing outwardly upon him, and yet lay burning for the space of three Days,
till he was quite consumed to Ashes. Clark's Prodigies, p. 579.

6. Anno 1665, in February, there was a great Tempest, accompanied with Thunder
and Lightning in diverse places; at which time the stately Spire of Coventry
fell, and beat down a great part of the Church, killing one Man. And in
Hampshire, a Justice of the Peace riding by t the way, was slain and burnt by
Lightning. Ibid. p. 570.

7. Dr. Beard says, That a Man traveling between two Woods in a great Tempest
of Thunder and Lightning, rode under an Oak to shelter himself; but his Horse
would by no means stay under that Oak, but whither his Master would or no, went
from that Tree, and stayed very quietly under another Tree not far off; he had
not been there many Minutes before the first Oak was torn all to fitters with a
fearful Clap of Thunder and Lightning. Beard's Theat. p. 443.

8. Acosta says, That it seldom Thunders about Brasil; but such Lightnings are
frequent there, as make the Night appear brighter than the Noonday. On some
Snowy Mountains in Africa, the Cracks of Thunder are so loud, that they are
heard 50 Miles off at Sea. Mather's Remarkable Prove p. 131.

9. An Adversary of Mr. Bolton's riding abroad when it Thundered very
dreadfully, observing that his Wife, a Pious Woman, was not at all afraid,
(when he himself trembled greatly) answering, That it was the Voice of her
Heavenly Father, and c. Thereupon went to Mr. Bolton, begged his Pardon and
Prayers for the Wrong he had done him, and desired to know what he should do to
be saved. Upon which, he became a very reformed Man. Ibid.

10. Meurerus (in Comment, Meteorolog.) speaks of a Man, that, going between
Lipsia and Torga, was suddenly carried out of sight by a Thunder-storm, and
never seen more. Ibid. p. 128.

When Matthew Cole was killed with the Lightning at Northampton, the Demons,
which disturbed his Sister Anne Cole (40 Miles distant) in Hartford, spoke of
it, intimating their Concurrence in that terrible Accident. Ibid.

CHAP. LVI. Earthquakes.
OUR Savior has told us, That one jot of his Word shall not perish, till all
be fulfilled; that Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away: And we have reason
to suspect it, when we find the Pillars of the Earth shake so terribly, as
sometimes they do, and the Earth we tread upon (which one would think firm in
its Foundations) tossed with such frequent, and sometimes very dreadful
Concussion^s. What Lesson, methinks, so natural in this Case, as, Arise, let us
go hence: Let us cast Anchor within the Veil, and place our Treasures in that
City which has lasting Foundations.

1. Before the Birth of our Savor, Plato mentions a wonderful Earthquake,
whereby in a Day and Night a vast Island without the Stroights of Gibralter
called Atlantis, and bigger than Asia and Africa together, was wholly
overwhelmed, and afterward covered by a great Inundation of Water. He also
writes, that by another terrible Earthquake the Continent of Africa was rent
asunder from Europe and Asia, as it is at this Day, being not only contracted
by a little Neck of Land at the Red Sea. The famous Isle of Sicily was likewise
formerly a part of Italy, and by an Earthquake divided from it. And our Island
of Great Britain is supposed to be broken off from the Centinent of France by
that means. Herodotus says, that Egypt in ancient time was a Gulf of the Sea,
and by an Earthquake made dry Land. The River Indus in Asira, which receives
Fifteen other Rivers into it, altered its Channel, and the Neighboring Country
turned into a Wilderness by a lamentable Earthquake. The Isle of Delphos,
famous for the Oracle and Temple of Apollo, was wholly ruined by an Earthquake.
Strabo mentions a City situate about Sydon, that was wholly swallowed up
thereby. Pliny writes of twelve Cities ruined in in one Night; and St.
Augustine is cited for what is more strange, That in an Earthquake an hundred
Cities in Lybia were destroyed. tit. Livius. Hist. Josephus records, that about
29 Years after the Birth of Christ, there happened a tremendous Earthquake in
the Country of Judea, whereby diverse Beasts were slain, many People overwhelmed
in the Ruins of their Houses, and perished to the number of about 30000.

2. To relate those Earthquakes that have happened since our Savior's Birth,
as I find them mentioned by several Authors; of which, that which happened at
his Crucifixion is said to be the greatest that ever was, which shook not only
one part of the Earth as in other Cases, but the whole World trembled at once,
if famous Authors may be credited. In the tenth Year of Christ was a great
Earthquake in Cyprus, which overthrew many Cities; and in the 17th Year,
thirteen Cities in Italy were destroyed, and the River Tyber overflowed Rome.
In the Year 59, was a great Earthquake in Rome, at which time Nero's Supper was
burned with Lightning.

3. In the Reign of Trajan the Emperor, Anno 105, there happened a most
terrible Earthquake at Antioch, which destroyed many Cities and People, and
extended it self very far; with fearful Lightnings which made the Night as
light as Day, preceded with dreadful Thunderbolts that threw down stately
Buildings, killed many People, strong and unusual Storms of Wind, the Sea
wrought, the Waves swelled, the Earth shaken, Trees plucked up by the Roots,
multitudes buried in the Ruins of their own Houses. In Anno 107, a very great
Earthquake happened in Asia, with many prodigious Sights in the Air, as
fighting of Men, and c. Another in Galatia and Rome, where Lightning from
Heaven consumed the Temple of their Gods, with strong Winds, and horrible
Noises in the Earth. In Anno 120, an Earthquake in Nice, and two terrible Ones
in Palestina. In Anno 162, was a very great Earthquake in Bithynia; the Waves
of the Mediterranean Sea in a Calm elevated themselves to the top of a Mountain
far distant from it, and cast the Foam a great way upon the main Land.

4. In Anno 244, the Sun was totally Eclipsed, and there was so horrid an
Earthquake, that certain Cities together were swallowed up, and exceeding great
Darkness happened for many Days together. In the Year 300, there were great
Earthquakes, by one whereof 13 Cities in Campania were overthrown, and another
in Asia. Many Cities in the East fell to the Ground by an Earthquake; and Neo
Caesarea was overturned, and all its Inhabitants perished, except only such as
were saved with the Bishop in the Church. Dyracchium was demolished by an
Earthquake; Rome trembled for three Days and three Nights successively: And
indeed it was to General, that all Europe and Asia were shaken at once.

5. In the Year 366, in the Reign of Julian the Emperor, who was first a
Christian, and after revolted to Paganism, for which he was hamed the Apostate;
in despite and contempt of our blessed Savior, who had prophesied the Temple
of Jerusalem should be destroyed, and never rebuilt, he impiously resolved to
invalidate the same, and designed to build it magnificently with excessive Cost
and Charges; when they had dug up the Remainders of the old Buildings from
the lowest Foundation, and had cleared the Ground, so that there was not a
Stone left upon a Stone, according to our Blessed Savior's Prediction: The
next Day coming to the Place there was a great Earthquake, insomuch that the
Stones were cast out of the Foundation, so that many of the Workmen were slain.
The public Buildings which were nearest the Temple were likewise loosened, and
falling down with great Violence, buried those who were in them in their Rains,
some who attempted to fly away were found half dead. The Earthquake was scarce
over, but those who remained fell to work again; but when they attempted it the
second time, sudden Flashes of Fire came violently out of the Foundations, and
other Fire fell furiously from Heaven, and destroyed more than before, the
Flame continuing a whole Day together.

6. In the Year 367, in the Reign of Valens and Valentinian, Emperors of Rome,
there happened such horrible Earthquakes throughout the Western Empire. A
little after the Day-dawning there was a great Tempest of Thunder and
Lightning, which was followed by such a dreadful trembling of the Earth, that
the Sea was shaken therewith, and deserted the Shore, and its ancient Bounds
for a great space; many Ships were left on dry Ground, and swarms of People
flew thither to catch Fish; when suddenly the Sea, as disdaining to be
imprisoned, returned to its former Station with such Impetuosity, that it
overran its former Bounds, and, with the Fury thereof, overthrew a multitude
of Towns and Houses, with many Thousands of People.

7. In the Year 430, a great Earthquake reged in diverse places, and overturned
many Cities; some Authors affirm, it was so terrible, as to affect almost the
whole World, the Earth gaped and swallowed up many Villages, Fountains were
dried up, and Waters brake forth in places formerly dry. Great Trees were torn
up by the Roots; heaps of Trees were so shaken together, that they were raised
into Mountains. The Sea threw up dead Fishes; many Islands sunk, and
overwhelmed; Ships sailing on the Sea, were suddenly left on the dry Ground: In
short, many places in Bythinia, the Hellespont, and both the Phrygia's, were
distressed thereby. This continued six Months without intermission, and the
People of Constantinople not daring to stay in the City for fear of the fall of
their Houses, continued together with their good Emperor, and their Patriarch,
in the Fields instant in Prayers to the Almighty for the Removel of so dreadful
a Judgment.

8. In the Year 454, a great Earthquake at Rome, another at Vienna, Wolves and
other Beasts wander all the Year through the City, and devour Men. An
Earthquake in Russia, and at Constantinople, with two wonderful Blazing-Stars.
In the Year 458, a great Earthquake happened at Antioch, which the Citizens had
cause to remember: Before it began, some of the Inhabitants were seized with
extraordinary Madness, such as seemed to exceed the Fury of Wild Beasts, and to
be the Presage of that Calamity which followed soon after: For about the fourth
Hour of the Night, in September, almost all the Buildings of the new City were
overturned, which was well People, and none of it forsaken, or empty, being
curiously built by the Magnificence of diverse Emperors, who strove to Excel
each other in the Adornment of it.

9. In the First Century was a terrible Earthquake in Arabia, another in
Palestina, and a third at Constantinople, six Weeks together.

10. In the sixth, seventh, and eighth Centuries, an Earthquake at Antioch;
another at Palestina; another in England and Normandy; and diverse dreadful
Prodigies. About the same time, there was a violent Earthquake in
Constantinople, which lasted many Days; and every Hour the City suffered
extraordinary Shocks. Many Houses were thrown down, but the People betook
themselves to Prayer, Fasting and Repentance; and the Almighty had Compassion
on them: Many Cities in the East were ruined by it; and the City of Alexandria
was sore shaken therewith, which was the more Astonishing, because it seldom
happens in those Parts. Some Years after, Constantinople was shaken so
violently, that not only the Walls and Churches, but all Greece trembled
therewith. In the Year 801, whilst Charles the Great was in Italy, there was an
Earthquake with great Noises, which shook all France and Germany, but
especially Italy: It overthrew several Towers and Mountains, and the Church of
St. Paul at Rome was destroyed by it.

11. In the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Centuries, an Earthquake happened in
Scotland, another in France; a very great one in Asia; several terrible ones,
with Whirlwinds, in Germany; also a great Earthquake in England, where five
Suns appeared at once, and after, four Moons at once. In the Reign of King
William the Conqueror, Anno 1086, happened an Earthquake with a dreadful
Noise. In Anno 1100, in the Reign of King Henry the First, the Earth moved with
such Violence in England, that many Building were shaken down; in diverse places
an hideous Noise was heard, and the Earth through several Rifts cast forth Fire
for many Days together, which neither by Water, nor by any other Means, could
be suppressed. In Lumbardy in Ita^ (about the same time) was an Earthquake,
which lasted about six Weeks, and removed a Town from the place where it stood
a great distance. In the Year 1179, on Christmas Day, at Oxenhall near
Darlington in the County of Durham, the Earth was lifted up almost like a
Tower, and so continued all that Day, as it were, immovable till Evening, and
then fell with so horrible a Noise, that it affrighted the Inhabitants
thereabouts, and the Earth swallowing it up, made in the same place three Pits
of a wonderful depth, which were afterward called Hell-Kettles.

12. In the Year 1180, an Earthquake ruined a great part of the City of Naples.
The City of Catania in Sicily is destroyed with 19000 People by an Earthquake.
The K. of Iconium is swallowed up by an Earthquake, and in England many
Buildings were thrown down by the same means, amongst which, the Cathedral
Church of Lincoln was rent in pieces.

13. In the Year 1222, there were such Earthquakes in Italy and Lumbardy, that
the Cities and Towns were forsaken, and the People kept abroad in the Fields in
Tents; many Houses and Churches were thrown down, much People thereby crushed
to Death; the Earth trembled twice a Day in Lumbardy for 14 Days together;
besides, two Cities in Cyprus, and the City of Brescia were this Year destroyed
by Earthquakes. In the Year 1176, about the same time that Adrian the Fourth
was made Pope, was a dreadful Earthquake at Millain, and the Country round
about: In Italy there was likewise a great Earthquake, and another in England,
and a third in Germany.

14. In the Year 1300, there was such an Earthquake in Rome as never was
before, and 48 Earthquakes happening in one Year, whereby all Lumbardy was
shaken. A great Earthquake in London, which shook down many Buildings. Anothe
Earthquake did much mischief about Bath and Bristol, and two more happened in
England not long after. In the Year 1348, a terrible Earthquake happened at
Constantinople, which endured six Weeks, and reached as far as Hungary and
Italy; 26 Cities were overthrown by it.

15. In the Year 1456, there arose upon the Sea of Ancona in Italy, together
with a thick gloomy Cloud that extended above two Miles, a Tempest of Wind,
Water, Fire, Lightning and Thunder, which piercing to the most deep Abysses of
the Seas, forced by the Waves with a most dreadful Fury, and carried all before
it upon the Land, which caused so horrible an Earthquake some time after, that
the Kingdom of Naples was almost ruined, and all Italy carried the dismal Marks
of it. A Million of Houses and Castles were buried in their own Ruins, and
above 30000 People crushed to pieces, and a huge Mountain overturned into the
Lake De la Guard. Soon after was a dreadful Earthquake in Millan, another in
Hungary.

16. In Sept. 14. 1509, there happened a terrible Earthquake at Constantinople,
and in the County thereabouts; Bajazet the second, being Emperor, by the
Violence whereof, a great part of that Imperial City, with many stately
Buildings both public and private were overthrown, and 13000 People
overwhelmed and slain; the Terror whereof was so great that the People
generally forsook their Houses, and lay abroad in the Fields; yea, Bajazet
himself, tho very aged, and sore troubled with the Gout, lay abroad in the
Fields in his Tent. The Earthquake continued, as the Turks relate, for a Month,
with little intermission. In the year 1531, in the City of Lisbon, in Portugal,
about 1400 Houses were overthrown by an Earthquake and 600 more so sorely
shaken, that they were ready to fall, and many Churches cast to the Ground.

17. In 1538. Mr. George Sandy's gives a Relation of a Remarkable Earthquake
and Burning, which happened near the City of Puteoli, with the New formed
Mountain; for September 29, 1538. the Country thereabouts, having for several
days before been Tormented with perpetual Earthquakes, that no one House was
left entire, but all expected an immediate ruin: after the Sea had retired 200
paces from the Shore, leaving abundance of Fish and Springs of fresh Water
arising in the bottom; this Mountain visible ascended about the second Hour of
the Night, with an hideous roaring Noise, horribly vomitting Stones, and such
store of Cinders, as overwhelmed all the Buildings thereabouts.

18. In 1571, February 17, a Prodigious Earthquake happened in the Eastern
parts of Herefordshire, near a little Town called Kinaston; about 6 in the
Evening, the Earth began to open, and a Hill called Marckly Hill with a Rock
under it, made a mighty bellowing Noise, heard a-far off, and then lifted up it
self a great height, and began to Travel, bearing along with it the Trees that
grew upon it, the Sheep-folds and Flocks of Sheep abiding thereon at the same
time; having thus walked from Sunday Evening to Monday Noon, it left a gaping
distance, 40 Foot wide, and 80 Else long, the whole Field about 20 Acres; the
same Prodigy happened about the same time in Blackmore, in that County. A great
Earthquake at Constantinople; an Earthquake and Inundation in Holland; very
great Thunder and Earthquake in Spain; an Earthquake and Bowls of Fire in
Corinthia; the Sun seemed to cleave in sunder.

19. In 1580, April 6, being Easter-Wednesday, about 6 in the Afternoon,
happened a great Earthquake in England, which shook all the Houses, Castles and
Churches every where as it went, and put them in danger of utter Ruin; at York,
it made the Bells in the Churches jangle. In 1581, in Peru in America, there
happened an Earthquake, which removed the City of Augnangum, two Leagues from
the place where it stood, without demolishing it, in regard the Situation of
the whole Country was changed; another Earthquake in the same Country, that
reached 300 Leagues along the Seashore, and 70 Leagues in Land, and Levelled
the Mountains along as it went, threw down Cities, turned the Rivers out of
their Channels, and made an universal Havoc and Confusion; all this was done
says the Author, in the space of seven or eight Minutes; sometime before this,
above 40000 People perished in an Earthquake about Puel and Naples.

20. In 1590, happened a terrible Earthquake, which made Austris, Bohemia, and
Moravia, to Tremble, in 1591. In St. Michael Island, in the West Indies, there
was an Earthquake which continued about 16 days, to the extreme Terror of the
French, which inhabit there, especially when by force thereof, they perceived
the Earth to move from place to place, and Villa Franca their Principal Town
overthrown, the Ships that then rode at Anchor, trembled and quaked, insomuch,
that the People thought the day of Judgment was come. In 1593, another terrible
Earthquake happened in Persia, which overturned 3000 Houses in the City of
Lair, crushing to Death above 3000 Persons in their Ruins. In 1614, there was a
great Earthquake in Vercer, one of the largest of the Azor's Islands, belonging
to the King of Portugal, overturning the City of Agra, 11 Churches, 9 Chapels,
besides many private Houses, and in the City of Praga; hardly an House was left
standing; not long after, a dreadful Earthquake happened in St. Michael,
another Island of the Azores, the Sea opened, and thrust forth an Island above
a League and a half in length, at the place where there was above 150 Fathom
Water.

21. In 1622, was a great Earthquake in Italy, the shape of an Elephant was
seen in the Air, and three Suns; Armies Fighting, Monstrous Births, Waters
turned into Blood, unusual and impetuous Tempests, which overthrew several
Towers.

22. In 1627, an Earthquake happened in England, and a great Fiery Beam was
seen in the Air in France; Six Suns in Cornwall at once, and five Moons in
Normandy, In the same year, July 31, happened an Earthquake in Apulia in Italy,
whereby in the City of Severine, 10000 Souls were taken out of the World, and
in the Horror of such infinite Ruins, and Sepulcher of so many Mortals, a
great Bell thrown out of the Steeple by the Earthquake, fell so fitly over a
Child, that it enclosed him, doing him no harm, made a Bulwark for him against
any other danger.

23. In the year 1631, there happened a Terrible Earthquake in Naples; and the
Mountain of Soma, after many terrible Bellowings, Vomitted out burning streams
of Fire, which tumbled into the Adriatic Sea, and cast out huge deal of Ashes;
the like happened the year following, with great Damage and Loss to the
Neighboring places, in Houses, People, and Cattle, and in Apulia, 17000
Persons were destroyed by the same.

24. In the year 1631, there happened a Terrible Earthquake in the Island of
St. Michael, one of the Terceres, in the Atlantic Ocean, Westward; upon June
the 26th, this Island began universally to shake, which continued eight days,
so that the People leaving the cities, Towns, and Castles, were forced to live
in the open Fields; which was attended with a dreadful breaking out of Fire,
that had not the Wind by Divine Providence blown from the Isle into the Sea,
and drove back this outrageous Fire, without doubt the whole Country had been
burnt up and destroyed.

25. In 1560, about five a Clock, about the County of Cumberland and
Westmorland, was a general Earthquake, wherewith the People were so affrighted,
that many of them forsook their Houses, and some Houses so shaken, that their
Chimneys fell down. The same year, the Island of Santorim, at the bottom of the
Streights, in the Mediterranean Sea, not far from Candia, had formidable
Earthquakes and Fires; it was most remarkable upon September 24, 1650, which
shook the Isle till the 9th of October, with such mighty and frequent
Earthquakes, that the People fearing their immediate Ruin was approaching, were
on their Knees Night and Day before the Altars; it cannot be expressed what
Horror seized all Men, especially when the Flames breaking through all
Obstacles, strove to make themselves away, through the midst of the Waters of
the Ocean, about four Mites Eastward from Santorin, for the Sea all on a
sudden swelled thirty Cubits upward, and extending it self wide, through the
Neighboring Lands, overturned all in its way.

26. In 1657, the Spaniards felt a terrible blow in Peru, which, if it were not
a Mark of the Wrath of Heaven, (says the Author,) was at least a Sign, that
the Earth is weary of them, especially in those Parts, where they have stained
it with so much Innocent Blood. The City of Lima was swallowed up by an
Earthquake, and Calao, another City not far from it, was consumed by a Shower
of Fire out of the Clouds, 11000 Spaniards lost their Lives in this Calamity,
and the Earth devoured an 100 Millions of refined Silver, which the Lucre of
the Spaniards had forced out of her Bowels.

27. In 1660, an Earthquake happened at Paris in France, and at the same time
we had News, that part of the Pyrenean Mountains had been overthrown some days
before; they are certain Mountains that divide France and Spain; it did great
Mischief there, overwhelmed some Medicinal Baths, many Houses, and destroying
much People, one Church which sunk into the Caverns below, was thrown up again,
and stands very firm; but in another place, this was looked upon as a great
Miracle, especially by the French, who have disputed with the Spaniard, about a
Church standing upon the Frontier-Line, but now is removed near half a League,
within the acknowledged Limits of France.

28. In 1665, there was a great Tempest accompanied with Thunder, Lightning,
and an Earthquake in diverse places in England, at which time the stately Spire
of Trinity Church in Coventry, fell down and demolished a great part of the
Church.

29. In 1668, in Autumn, a great part of Asia and some parts of Europe were
infested with extraordinnry Earthquakes, the Cities of Constantinople and
Adrianople felt its effects, but not with that Violence and continuance as in
other places. In some parts of Persia, it continued for above fourscore days;
Torqueto and Bolio two considerable Cities, were by its great Violence laid
even to the Ground, and all or most of their Inhabitants buried in the Ruins,
above 6000 Persons Perished in the first of them, and above 1800 in the latter;
and in all the Adjacent Cities it raged with extraordinary Fury, destroying and
ruining the Buildings, killing many of the People, and the rest were forced to
quit the Towns, and take up their Lodgings in the Fields.

30. In 1687, October 20, the London Gazette gives a sad Relation of another
Earthquake in the Kingdom of Peru in America, whereby the City of Lima was
totally overthrown, and not an House left standing, burying many of its
inhabitants under its Ruins; at the same time Callao, Fenettei Pisco, Chancay,
Los, Florillos, etc. Most of the Seaport Towns were destroyed by an Inundation
of the Sea. which carried several Ships above 9 Miles into the Country, and
great numbers of People and Cattle were drowned, there being found when the
Water fell, at one place near the Sea side, above 5000 People dead, and every
day more were found, so that no account could be given of their number.

31. In 1688. a Dreadful Earthquake happened at Naples in Italy, which was
attended with the Rage and Roaring of Mount Vesuvius, On Saturday June 5, about
the 22th hour, happened there a Terrible Earthquake, tho; it lasted not long,
which frightened the Inhabitants out of their Houses with the Terror of
inevitable destruction, they betook themselves to the Piaza's, and open Public
places of the City; there is scarce a Palace or a House that has not received
some considerable damage; the next day there was another shook which threw down
many of the Houses. In The Neighborhood of Vdico, a City 16 Miles distant from
hence, a Mountain opened, and we have an account it was all Ruined, and that of
6000 Inhabitants, there are but few left alive, and great damages in several
other places.

32. In the same Year and Month, we have a Dreadful Account of an Earthquake
and Fire at Smyrna, in a Letter from an English Gentleman at Constantinople,
dated July 8, 1688. On June 30, Between 11 and 12 at Noon, there happened at
Smyrna a violent Earthquake, which in a Minute threw down many, and shattered
all the Houses in the City; it reached all the Adjacent parts, and Metelone and
Scio, where it did but small hurt; about 4 hours after, a dreadful Fire broke
out and consumed all the Town, except the Skirts and the Houses on the side of
the Hill; the most moderate computation of People destroyed is 5000.

33. In December following, several Earthquakes happened about Naples and
Beneventum, but without such unfortunate Accidents which attended them some
Months before; nevertheless that accident being fresh in memory, it is not to
be imagined, what a Consternation the People were in, and how they fell to
their Prayers in several Churches; the Monks in those quarters, made use of the
opportunity to Preach, that the end of the World was at hand, and for that
Reason, endeavored to give Alms; but the People are not now to be imposed upon
as formerly, when they used such ways, to rear such costly Foundations, that
are scattered over all Europe; they resolved to keep what they had, not finding
the Monks to make better use of their Money then they themselves could do.

May not these dreadful shakings of the Earth, seem plainly to presage those
Convulsions that happened soon after, and presignifie good as well as bad
events; not only the happy Revolutions in these three Kingdoms, but also the
horrid Ruins, Devastations, and Miseries, which the Ambition and Barbarity of
the French King, has occasioned lately in Christendom, and which do still
continue?

34. Dismal was the Calamity and Judgment which befell the Inhabitants of the
Island of Jamaica in the West Indies, upon Tuesday June the 7th 1692, by a
dreadful Earthquake; about 11 a Clock in the Morning the Earth suffered a great
Trepidation, which in a Minutes time was such, that several Houses began to
tumble down, and in 6 or 7 Minutes, or a quarter of an hour at most, made
terrible Havoc and Devastation; it threw down almost all the Houses and
Mountains, and threw them into the Sea, but Port Royal had much the greatest
share in this astonishing Judgment of God; the Minister of that place relates,
that the same Morning he had been at Prayers in the Church, which he never
neglected, to keep up some show of Religion amongst a most ungodly and
debauched People, and was gone to a place near to the Church, where the
President of the Council was, designing to Dine with one Captain Buden; but his
House upon the first Concussion, sunk first into the Earth, and then into the
Sea, with his Wife and Family, and others that were to Dine with him, the
Minister staying some time with the President, escaped the Danger. Yet soon
after, they found the Ground rolling and moving under their Feet; Sir, says the
Minister, what is this? He replied very composedly, It is an Earthquake, be not
afraid, it will soon be over, but it increased, and they heard the Church and
Tower fall, upon which they ran to save themselves; the Minister makes toward
Morgan's- Port, which being a wide open place, might be thought securest from
falling Houses, but as he came near, he saw the Earth open, and swallow up a
Multitude of People, and the Sea mounting over the Fortifications; he then laid
aside all thoughts of escaping, resolving to make toward his own Lodgings,
where he found all all things safe; he went to the Balcony to view the Street
in which his House stood, and saw never an House down there, not the Ground so
much as cracked; the People desired him to come down and Pray with them; he
persuaded them to kneel down and make a large Ring, which they did, Prayed with
them near an Hour, and after seriously exhorted them to Repentance, (the Earth
working all the while with New Motions, and trembled like the Rolling of the
Sea, insomuch that when he was at Prayer, he could hardly keep himself, when he
came to the Sea, he saw it had swallowed up the Wharf, with all those goodly
brick Houses upon it, and two entire Streets beyond that; he walked upon the
Tops of some Houses which lay Level with the Surface of the Water, from whence
he got into a Canoo, and then into a Longboat, which put him aboard a Ship
called the Siam Merchant, where he found the President safe. They could not
Sleep that Night for the return of the Earthquake, almost every hour, which
made all the Guns in the Ship jar and rattle. The shaking of the Earth still
continued with Thunder and Lightning, stormy and foul Weather.

The morning of this day was very fair and clear, affording no suspicion of the
least evil, but in the space of 3 minutes, about half an hour after 11 in the
morning, Port Royal, the fairest Town of all the English Plantations, was
staken and shattered to pieces, and sunk into and covered by the Sea, as to the
greatest part: It is reckoned there were lost 1500 Persons.

From St. Anns there was News. That above 1000 Acres of Wood-Land were turned
into the Sea, and carried with it whole Plantations; but no place suffered like
Port Royal, where whole Streets were swallowed up by the opening of the Earth,
and the Houses and Inhabitants went down together: Some of them were driven up
again by the Sea, which arose in those Breaches, and wonderfully escaped: Some
were swallowed up to the Neck, and then the Earth shut on them, and squeezed
them to Death; and in that manner several were left Buried, with their Heads
above-ground, only some Heads the Dogs had eaten. Great noises and bellowings
were heard some time after in the Mountains, which made them apprehensive of
Fire, but thanks be to God, no ill event has yet succeeded.

We have a further Account from the Parish of Vere in that Island, some Leagues
from P^rt-Royal, dated the 30th of June 1692. On Tuesday the 7th of June, about
11 in the morning, it pleased the Just God to visit us with a Terrible
Earthquake, which continued with much Violence and Terror for about a quarter
of an hour, (as most say) in which it overthrew all the Brick and
Stone-Buildings in the Country, whereof several in this Parish of Vere are
levelled with the Ground, or standing Monuments of the Wrath of God, so
shattered and torn, that they are irreparable; whilst these were tumbling, the
Earth opened in this place in multitudes of Places; and through their dire
Charms, spewed out Water to a considerable height, aboveground in such
quantities in some places that it made our Gullies run on a sudden, though
before exceeding dry, insomuch, that some were afraid of being overwhelmed at
once by the River and Sea joining together to swallow up the Country, these
gaping Mounths being no less than 12, 20 or more foot deep under the Earth, and
above two miles up in the Country, especially nigh the River in the purest
mould, which had no Clay nor other Consolidating matter beneath, where that was
we do not find any cracks of the Earth at all.

Our noted Town of St. John de la Vega, or the Spanish-Town, is utterly down to
the Ground, and its Church devoured in the same Ruins; Our Magazine, and only
Storehouse of Port Royal is 3 parts swallowed up in the Sea: A whole Street,
called the Wharf, (where most of the noted Merchants lived) sunk at once, from
one end to the other, with a general Crack at the beginning of the Earthquake,
together with two Forts and Guns, and c. thereon, and all that were upon or
nigh it perished in an instant, without any warning: Soon after 2 or 3 more
Streets in their whole length tottered and fell, and were immediately sunk
Ground and all together, deep into the Sea as far as the Jews-street: All the
Upper part of the Town, with the Church, and all above the Palissadoes is under
Water, even the very Palissado's it self where their Burying place was, is now
no longer Earth but Sea; and the Dead Corpse floated from them to all parts of
the Harbor. The Houses that yet remain are many of them so rent and torn, and
others so deeply sunk into the Wavers, even up to their Balconies, that they
are unserviceable. The Wall at the Palissadoes is utterly ruined, with the Port
belonging; and though Morgan's Line, and Walker's Fort yet stand, they are sorely
shaken and rent, and so sunk, that they are not Tenable, the whole place that
is yet above Water, sinking daily by those Earthquakes, we have ever since had,
sometimes 4, 5, 6 times more or less in 24 hours. The reputed number of the
Dead, (for perhaps there will never be an exact account) is reckoned about 1500
Persens, besides Negroes, who are said to be 6 or 700 more, a multitude of
whose black Corpse floated many days from one side of the Water to the other,
which caused such an intolerable stench, that the Dead were like to destroy the
Living, till at last some were sunk, and others dispersed by the Sea-Breeze.

Likewise Ligania, the first and principal Town for Planting, and imitating, if
not exceeding, the stately Building of Port Royal, is now brought to terrible
Desolation, and its fine new-built, and yet unfinished Church, buried in the
same Ruins with the Houses. By the fall of a Mountain into the Channel of the
River, which supplies both this Town and Port Royal, the River became dry for
16 hours together, to the terror of the Inhabitants.

Other Letters and these particulars; That this terrible Earthquake came from
the North, and attacked Port Royal on the Harbour-side, on which was the Wharf,
the whole length of the place, where stood the King's-House, a Bastion of 207
Guns, Carlisle Battery of 119 Guns, and the Houses of the greatest Merchants;
all those sunk in a moment from 3 to 5 Fathom Water; some were sunk in their
Houses, others Buried in the Rubbish; some who were got into clear Water and
could Swim, were carried away with drifts of Timber; nothing else was seen but
the dead and dying; nothing heard but Shreiks and Cries; the living were
covered with Wounds, Bruises and Blood; the Thunder roared over their heads;
the Earth trembled under their feet; the Rocks and Mountains were rent in
sunder, and Fireballs day and night fell from Heaven: it is impossible for
Tongue to speak, or Pen to write, the Sorrows and Terrors of that day.

35. In the same year 1692. on the 8th of September, an Earthquake was felt in
London, and in several parts of Essex, Kent, Sussex, Hamshire, etc. as
Sheerness, Sandwich, Deal, Maidstone, Portsmouth, and c. the People leaving
their Houses in many places. It shook Leeds Castle in Yorkshire so violently,
that all in the Castle, even the Lady her self, went out of it, and expected
its falling. A Person being in the Field hard by, the Ground shook so under him
that he could not stand, and being forced to lie down on the ground, was so
tossed up and down, that he received several Bruises.

At Maidstone in Kent, the People generally got out of their Houses, feraing
they would fall. It happened at London about 4 Minutes past two, and was felt
in most parts of the Dutch and Spanish Netherlands, as also in Germany and
France, and c. We have this Account from Holland, That on the 8th of September,
between 2 and 3 a Clock in the afternoon, all Holland was sensible of a
trembling of the Earth, which lasted about 3 Minutes. At Middleburg in Zealand
it continued some time, and caused the Earth to move so much, that the People
were forced to hold by what was next them in the Street: It caused the Bells in
the great Church there, and at the Hague, to jangle; and the Ships at Sea were
sensible of it.

The Gazette relates, That our Gracious Sovereign King William, being encamped
at Grammon in Flanders, at the same time there happened an Earthquake, which
lasted near a Minute, and was very sensible to the whole Camp. The King being
at Dinner in an old decayed House, which shaking very much, and every one
apprehending it was ready to fall, His Majesty was prevailed with to rise from
Table to go out of the House, but the surprise was soon over.

36. On the 7th of January 1692. about 10 at night, Mount Aetna in Sicily began
to roar in a most horrible manner, (which usually presages some dismal calamity
to ensue) It continued for two days; and about an hour after, the People of
Catania, which was nearest to the Mountain, felt a trembling under them for
near 3 minutes, (during which no noise was heard from Mount Aetna, but within a
Minute after, the roaring of the Mountain was redoubled with infinite terror,
and the top appeared all in Flames) this trembling of the 9th was felt in the
Cities of Mineo, Palaonia, Ragosa, Licodia, and most of the South parts of
Sicily at the same instant with that of Catania; but the most tremendous shake
of all happened on the 11th of January, under which dismal Calamity, the
ancient City of Catania, pleasantly seated, and full of Inhabitants of Quality,
with an University, and about 24000 People, in a Minute was sunk out of sight,
with a noise as loud as if thousands of Cannons had been discharged at once. In
the place where Catania stood, some heaps of Rubbish, and a great Lake of Water
appear at a distance.

Under the same dismal Calamity fell the ancient City of Syracuse, so famous in
History, that it was formerly reckoned one of the greatest in the World, having
in it about 16000 Inhabitants. By the Earthquake of the 9th, many principal
Houses, and the Castle, were torn in diverse Night, and so escaped the horrible
Devastation of the 11th, wherein two thirds of the Buildings were thrown down,
and above 7000 People buried in the rubbish.

Neither did Noto, though built upon a very high Rock, almost inaccessible on
all sides but one narrow way, partake of a less dismal Fate. The trembing of
the 9th did very much affect it, and on the 11th laid it in heaps in a Minute,
all the Inhabitants, except some few who fled from thence on the 9th, were
Buried in the Ruins of their own Houses, being reckoned about 7000, very little
Buildings standing in the whole Town.

Augusta, a City in a Peninsula on the East of Sicily, with a large prospect to
the Sea, Safe-Harbours, and considerable Trade, was much damaged by the
Earthquake of the 9th instant, and about 600 People killed by the downfall of
the Houses; and the following day, the rest of the Town, and the remaining
Inhabitants, by another dreadful shake were utterly destroyed and buried in
rubbish, so that of 6000 People none were left alive.

Lentini, the ancient Leontium, a Town of about 3000 Families, was burnt to the
ground on the 11th. Calatgirone, a Town well built of Freestone, by the shake
on the 11th, had the fifth part of the Buildings, and two Monasteries
demolished, but of 7000 People, 5000 made their escape. Mineo was shaken both
the 9th and the 11th; on the former, the Heavens were Serene, without the least
Cloud, but on the latter was a terrible Storm of Lightning and Thunder for 6
hours together: At both times, several Houses, and a large Church, were
overthrown, and it was judged about 4000 People perished. Pasceni, of about 200
Inhabitants, was so entirely ruined, that not one House or Person was saved.
The spacious Valley adjoining, which was formerly full of excellent Vines,
being turned into a new Lake, whose Water is of a brackish taste, and like
Brimstone. In Patuzolo, a place of about 1000 People, all were swallowed up.
Furla, another Town of about the same number of Souls had the like fate.
Sciorti, a bigger Town, was totally demolished, and the Inhabitants about 2000,
so utterly destroyed, that none was left to tell the News, In Militello, where,
of 6000 People no one is left to give tidings, how or when its Calamity
happened. The Country People, who dwell in the Mountains about it, affirm, that
for 3 days before they could not discern the Town by reason of a thick Fog that
surrounded, but that on the 11th in the morning it was no more seen. A great
part of the Mountain on the North-side is torn asunder, and one half
overwhelmed the Town, leaving a deep Gulf betwixt that and the other part of
the Mountain.

THE Curiosities of Art.

PART III.

By WILLIAM TVRNER, M. A. Vicar of WALBERTON, in SUSSEX.

And Moses said unto the Children of Israel, See, the Lord has called by Name
Bezaleel, the son of Vri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:

And he has filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding,
and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, and to devise curious
works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,

And in the cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood, to make any
manner of cunning work.

Exodus xxxv. 30, 31, 32, 33. LONDON: Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in
Jewen-street, MDCXCVII.

THE PREFACE TO THE Curiosities of Art.
WHen God made us, He instamp'd his own Image upon us; which Image is most
clearly apparent in those two great Distinguishing Faculties of Humane Nature,
the Understanding and Will. The one disposes us to a subtilty and sublimity of
Knowledge, the other to a Goodness of Temperance and Beneficence in our
Actions: And it is worthy a sober Remark, and pretty to observe, how Man has
exercised these Two Faculties in pursuit of these Ends, from the first
Creation; how his Intellectuals have mounted above the Sphere of Sense,
tranigressed the common Limits and Horizon of the dull unthinking Multitude,
and peer'd about with a Sagacity of Reason into all the Crevisses and secret
Recesses of Nature, to find out the utmost Bounds of Humane Power, and see how
far the Wit of Man might be stretched, and extended, without a Fault or
Fracture. I have already showed somewhat of the Divinity conspicuous in the
Great World; now I am to show somewhat of it in the Microcosm, in Man, the
Epitome of the World, the Top and Masterpiece of the visible Creation; and
that only in part too, viz. his Soul and Mind; (for I have spoken of his Body
elsewhere.) But the Mind being the more Noble and Excellent part of the Man,
and of it self so Spiritual, and not subject to Sense, I have no other way left
to give the Anatomy of it, but by summing up, and presenting to view its
Operations and Effects. We admire the Industry and Skilfulness of the Be, in
gathering Honey out of the Flowers, carrying it home, and disposing it in
several Cells, ingeniously contrived for the Purpose; the Wisdom of the little
Ant in a hundred particular Instances of her Polity and Managery of Business;
the curious Embroidery and Network of the busy Spider, in making Webs, and
pursuing her Game, for the catching of Flies; the strange and almost
stupendous Artifice of the poor Silkworm, which, by the Impulse of mere
Nature, works her self out of Breath, and spends her self, to cloth Nobles.
Let us sit a while at home, and call back our Rambling Thoughts, to contract
our Meditation and Prospect, and view our selves, and take notice of a more
lofty Design; and we shall certainly find the Humane Intellectuals flying at a
higher Game, pitching upon more Noble Objects, propounding more excellent Ends,
pursuing them with proper Means, ingenious and apt Methods. And I am confident,
upon a solid Speculation, we shall find our selves astonished at our own
Powers, and admire the wisdom of Him that made us, and be provoked to
Aemulation, by observing how others have out-stript us: When I consider, how
many wonderful Pheanomena of both Nature and Art the World is furnished with,
and we set as the principal Spectators of them, in order to be Highpriests, to
offer the Sacrifices of Praise, for the Rest of the visible Creation; methinks
I am ready to complain, that our Lives are contracted to so short a Span, that
we can hardly have time to look about us, and admire, and give due Praise; but
we must be gone off the Stage. Oh! think I, if we might but live now to a
Mathusalem's Age, or at least a Nestor's, or John of the Times, or but so long
as my Countryman, Part, what brave Schemes might we draw of Architecture! What
high Scaffolds might we raise! What wonderful Projects might we contrive! What
ingenious and subtle Ideas might we form! The Quadrature of the Circle, the
perpetual Motion, the scaling of the Skies, and a perfect Discovery of the
Lunar World, the Philosopher's Stone, Flying, Diving, Any thing, Every thing
would be but mean and ordinary, to employ our Wits upon. But God has wisely
prevented our Projection of these Babels, by reducing our Time to a short
Scantling of but a Span long, and confounding our Thoughts with a Thousand
Cares, and Abbreviating our Necessities to a little Compendium of Fearing God,
and heeping his Commandments, as the whole of Man Notwithstanding we have all
of us (almost) some spare Minutes left from our necessary Offices, which we
might, if we would, spend in a more noble way, upon more generous Exercises;
either of Veiwing or Doing, of Speculation or Action, or (which were much
better) both. I am not so fond, as to conceit, that I have given here a due
Account of all, or most of the Wonders and strange Improvements of Art; it is
enough to my purpose, if, tanquam canis ad Nilum, I have exhibited a short
Specimen, enough to beget Admiration and Emulation. Let my Reader read, and
wonder, and fall into an honest Indignation with himself, that he has suffered
his Sands of Time to run so fast in his Glass, and his Blood stagnate in his
Veins, and his Brains gather Phlegm and Water, whilst himself does nothing, or
nothing to purpose, or next door to nothing, in comparison, with those brave
Intellectuals he is endowed with. I am not for Domitian's pricking Flies with a
Pin; nor the Hungarian 's wooden Coat of Mail, the work of fifteen Years; nor
Myrmerides 's (...), coach with four Horses, so little, you might hide them
under a Flie's Wing; nor Collicrates 's Elegies, writ so small, that a
Cherry-stone might hold them; nor Mark Scaliot 's Lock, spoken of hereafter,
etc. These are all certainly but (...), a laborious Loss of Time, an Ingenious
Profusion of one of the best Talents we are entrusted with; and more than that
perhaps, of Two, viz. Our Time and Wit. Let People know their Strength (what
they can do) and consider the Price of Time they have allowed to act in, and
act accordingly, with a due Aim, and direct Tendancy to the Divine Honor,
their Neighbor's Benefit, and their own Happiness, and I do not doubt, but Men
will find better Work, and at last receive a Better, a more Comfortable, and
Satisfactory Reward.

Curiosities of Art. PART. III.
CHAP. I. The English Tongue Improved.
THE Art of Speaking is none of the least Extellencies of Humane Nature; the
Confusion of Tongues introduced a great Obscurity in delivering the Sense of
our Minds; and Men were many Ages blundering, and unskilful in expressing
themselves properly. Where Learning prevailed, the Languages were sooner
ripened to a Perfection and Purity. The English Tongue, by occasion of frequent
Intermixtures with other People, lay a long time corrupted with a variety of
Dialects. How it has been improved of late Ages, we may guess, by comparing
the Old Dialect with the New.

Of the old take these few Parcels out of Richard, a Religious Hermit, in the
Earl of Exeter 's Library, for a Specimen.

1. His Te Deum begins thus;

We heryen ye God, we knowlecnen ye Lord:
All ye erie worschips ye everlasting Fader.
All Angels in Hevens, and all ye poures in yis VVarld.
Cherebin and Seraphin cryen by be voice to ye unstinting.
2. His Benedictus thus.

Blessed be ye Louerd God of Israel, for he has visityd maad buying of his
puple.

3. The Magnificat thus:

My Soul worschips ye Louerd, and my ghost ioyed in God my hele, for he lokyd ye
mekeness of his hand maiden.

So for i ^en of yat blissefulle Schal sey me all generaciouns.

For he has don to me great yingis yat myrty is and his Nome hely.

4. Nunc dimittis. Louerd you leuest now yi Servaunt in pees, astir yi word
yat you have seyde before, for now I am ripe to die, for mine eghen hau seen
yin owen Son Christ, yat is yin owen hele to Men.

5. Mat. Cap. 1. The Bok of ye Generacoun of Jhu Crist, Sone of David, Sone of
Abraham, Abraham gendryde Isaac, Isaac forsoye gendride Jacob, Jacob forsoye
gendride Judas and his breyren.

6. Acts 1. Ye dedis of ye Apostlis. Theofile first I maad a Sermon of all
yingis yat ittu began to do, and to teache into the day of his assencioun; in
which he commandide in ye hoolst to his Apostlis which he had chosen, to
which he schewide himself alyve aftyr his passioun by many Argumentys,
appering to hem fourti dais.

7. Rem. 1. Paul ye Servaunt of Jhu Crist clepid an Apostle depromptyd into the
Gospel of God, which he had behote tofore by hise Profetis in hooli Scriptur
of his Sone.

Apoc. 1. Apocalipis of Jhu Crist which God 3 as to him to maak open to his
Servauntis which yingis hit behouey to be maad soon, etc.

8. Pater Noster thus: Ure Fadir in Hevene rich, Thy nome be haliid everliche,
Thou bring us to thy michilblisse, Thy will to wirche thu us wisse, Als it is in
Hevene ido, Ever in Earth ben hit also, That heli bred yat lastyth ay, Thou send
hious yis ilke day, Forgive ous all yat we haueth don, Als we forgive ych oder
mon, He let ous fall in no founding, Alt scilde ous fro ye foul thing. Amen.


9. The Creed thus: I believe in God Fadir Almighty, Shipper of Heven and Earth,
and in Jhesus Crist his onle thy Son ure Louerd, that is iuange church, the
hooli ghost, bore of Mary maiden, tholedepine undyr Pounce Pilat, picht on rode
tree, dead and yburiid, licht into hell, the third day fro death arose, steich
into Heuene, sit on his Fadir richt hand, God Almichty, then is comminde to
deem the quikke and the deed. I believe in the hooli Ghost, all hooli Church,
moan of Allehallwen, forgiuenis of sine, fleiss uprising, lif withuten end.
Amen. Wevers Fun. Men. p. 152.

Of the New, or Modern Dialect, there is no necessity of giving any Specimen at
all.

CHAP. II. Blind Persons Improved by Art and Industry.
WHere Nature is defective, there the Assistance of Art is required: Nothing
makes us more Ingenious than Necessity: Rather than Men will suffer all the
Inconveniences consequent upon a Total Eclipse of any of their Senses,
especially that of Sight, and the comfortable use of the Sun, they will set
their Brains upon the rack, and use the greatest intention of Thought, to
procure a Compensation.

1. Esther Elizabeth Van Waldkirk, Daughter of a Merchant of Shaffhausen,
Residing at Geneva, aged Nineteen Years, having been Blind from two Months old,
by a Distemper falling on her Eyes, nevertheless has been put on to the Study
of Learning by her Father, so that she understands perfectly, French,
High Dutch, and Latin; she speaks ordinarily Latin with her Father, French with
her Mother, and High Dutch with the People of that Nation: She has almost the
whole Bible by Heart, is well skilled in Philosophy, plays on Organs and
Violin; and which is wonderful in this condition, she has learned to write, by
an Invention of her Fathers, after this manner:

There was cut for her upon a Board, all the Letters of the Alphabet, so deep
as to feel the Figures with her Fingers, and to follow the traces with a
Pencil, till that she had accustomed her self to make the Characters.
Afterward they made for her a Frame, which holds fast her Paper when she
writes; and which guides her Hand to make strait Lines. She writes with a
Pencil rather than with Ink, which might either foul her Paper, or by failing,
might cause her to leave Words imperfect. It Is after this manner that she
writes often in Latin to her Friends, as well as in the other two Languages.
This is an Extract of a Letter written from Lions, by M. Spon. M. D. etc. From
the Journal, des Scavans, set forth March 25. 1680.

2. John Ferdinand, born in Flanders, being blind, yet overcame that which most
learned Men find hard: For he was at once a very Learned Poet and Philosopher;
he was also an excellent Musician, and played skilfully on diverse kinds of
Instruments. Camer. Hor. Subscis. p. 171.

3. Vldaricus Schonbergerus, a Doctor in Philosophy, though blind, yet he was
Learnedly skilled in the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and Syriack Languages; an
excellent Naturalist, an Acute Disputant in Philosophy, Skilful in Music,
Studious both in Picture and Sculpture; he would discharge a Gun with that
dexterity, that the Builet should often hit the Mark; he died of late Years at
Regioment, of which unusual Example, Simon Dachius has left to Posterity an
Elegant Elegy. Barthol. Hist. Anatom. Cent. 3. Hist. 44. p. 87, 88.

4. James Usher, Lord Primate of Ireland, was taught to read by his two Aunts,
who were Blind from their Cradles, yet were they admirably versed in the
Scriptures, being able suddenly to have given a good Account of any part of the
Bible. Clarks Lives, p. 190, 191.

5. Count Manifield, though Blind, yet with the touch alone, was able to
distinguish white from black. Barthol. Cent. 3. Hist. 44. p. 87.

6. Schenckius tells of one that, though Blind, yet received visible Species
through his Nostrils. Zacch. quest. Med. Legal. l. 5. Tit. 3. p. 325. Schen.
Obs. p. 1.

7. Sir Kenelme Digby says, he saw one so blind, that he could not discern when
the Sun shined; yet would play well at Cards and Tables, Bowls and
Shovel-Board, discern the Gestures of his Scholars by their Voice; walk in a
Chamber, or long Alley strait, and turn exactly at the ends; and by an effect
of the Light upon his Body, but chiefly on his Brain, know when the Sun was up,
and distinguish exactly between a clear and cloudy Day. Sir. Kehelme Digby's
Treatise of Bodies, c. 28. p. 253, 254.

CHAP. III. Persons Deaf and Dumb much Improved by Art.
ONE would think this Defect of Nature very deplorable, and hardly capable of
any Alleviation; for by it, is barred and obstructed all Correspondence with
the Reasonable Soul: no information can be taken in; no Communication permitted
without. The Ears are stopped, so that the Person cannot learn from others, nor
he express the Sense of his own Mind to others: So that what remains in such a
case, where all the Intercourse of Reason is damm'd up, but the Expectation of
a Bruitality and Sottishness of Nature to follow, yet even here the Wit of Man
has found out something like a Remedy to Cure, or in some measure to alleviate
and assist this great Malady, by finding out some uncommon way of conveying
Intelligence to the immured Soul, and pumping it of its own Sense and
Conceptions.

1. Mr. Increase Mather, of New England, tells us of a Man, and of a Woman, at
Weymouth, both of them Deaf, and the Woman so from her Infancy; and yet that
she understands as much concerning the State of the Country, and of particular
Persons therein, and of observable Occurrences, as almost any one of her Sex;
and (which is more wonderful) tho she is not able to speak a Word, she has by
Signs made it appear, that she is not ignorant of Adam's Fall, nor of Man's
Misery by Nature, nor of Redemption by Christ, and the great Concernments of
Eternity, and of another World, and that she her self has had experience of a
Work of Conversion in her own Soul. I have made Enquiry about this Matter, of
some, that are fully acquainted therewith, and have from a good Hand received
this foregoing Account.

2. Matthew Prat, aged about Fifty-five Years, was in his Minority by his godly
Parents educated Religiously, and taught to read; when he was about Twelve
Years old, he became totally deaf by Sickness, and so has ever since
continued; after the loss of his hearing he was taught to write; his Reading
and Writing he retains perfectly, and makes much good Improvement of both;
but his Speech is very broken and imperfect, not easily intelligible; he makes
use of it more seldom, only to some few that are wonted to it. He discourses
most by Signs, and by writing: He is studious and judicious in Matters of
Religion, has been in Church Fellowship a Partaker of all Ordinances near
Thirty Years, has approved himself unto good Satisfaction therein, in all ways
of Church Communion, both in public and private, and judged to be a
well-wrought Convert, and real Christian.

3. Sarah Prat, his Wife, being about Forty-three Years old, was also quite
deprived of Hearing by Sickness, when about the third Year of her Age, after
she could speak, and had begun to learn Letters; having quite lost her Hearing,
she lost all Speech (doubtless all remembrance and Understanding of Words and
Language) her Religious Parents being both dead, her godly Brother, Ephraim
Hunt, (yet surviving) took a Fatherly Care of her, she also happily fell under
the Guardianship and Tuition of the Reveread Mr. Thomas Thatcher, who labored
with design to teach her to understand Speech or Language by Writing, but it
was never observed, that any thing was really effected; she has a notable
Accuracy and Quickness of understanding by the Eye, she discourses altogether
by Signs, that they that are able to discourse with her in that way, will
communicate any Matter much more speedily (and as full as can be by Speech, and
she to them) her Children Sign from the Breast, and learn to speak by their
Eyes and Fingers, sooner than by their Tongues: She was from her Childhood
naturally sober and susceptible of good civil Education, but had no knowledge
of a Deity, or of any thing that does concern another Life and World: Yet God
has of his infinite Mercy, revealed himself, his Son, and the great Mysteries
of Salvation unto her by an extraordinary and wonderful working of his Spirit
(as it is believed) in a Saving Work of Conversion. An Account of her
Experiences was taken from her in writing by her Husband; upon which she was
examined by the Elders of the Church, they employing her Husband, and two of
her Sisters, intelligent Persons, and notably skilled in her Artificial
Language, by whose help they attained good Satisfaction, that she understands
all the Principles of Religion: Those of the Unity of the Divine Essence,
Trinity of Persons, the Personal Union, the Mystical Union; they made most
diligent Enquiry about, and were satisfied, that her Knowledge and Experience
was distinct and sound, and they hoped saving. She was under great exercise of
Spirit, and most affectionately concerned for, and about her Soul, her
Spiritual and Eternal Estate. She imparted her self to her Friends, and
expressed her desire of Help: She made use of the Bible, and other good Books,
and remarked such Places and Passages as suited her Condition, and that with
Tears: She did once, in her Exercise, write with a Pin upon a Trencher, three
times over, Ah poor Soul; and therewithal burst out into Tears before diverse of
her Friends: She has been wont to enquire after the Text; and when it has
been showed to her, to look and muse upon it: She knows most, if not all
Persons Names that she has Acquaintance with: If Scripture Names, will readily
turn and point to them in the Bible: It may be conceived, that although she
understands, neither Words, Letter nor Language; yet she understands things
Hieroglyphically: The Letters and Words are unto her but signs of the things,
and as it were Hieroglyphics. She was very desirous of Church Communion in all
Ordinances, and was admitted with general and good satisfaction, and has
approved her self to the best Observation, a grave and gracious Woman: They
both attend public Worship with much Reverence and Constancy, and are very
inoffensive (and in diverse respects) exemplary in their Conversation: Thus far
is that Narrative written, June 27. 1683.

I suppose, no one that rightly considers the Circumstances of this Relation,
will make a Scruple about the Lawfulness of admitting such Persons to
participate in the Holy Mysteries of Christ's Kingdom. All judicious Casuists
determine, that those who are either born, or by any accident made Deaf and
Dumb, if their Conversation be blameless, and they able by signs (which are
Analogous to Verbal Expressions) to declare their Knowledge and Faith; may as
freely be received to the Lords Supper, as any that shall orally make the like
Profession. Of this Judgment was Luther, and Melancthon, Gerhard, Balduinus in
his Cases of Conscience, Lib. 2. Chap. 12. does confirm this, by producing
several Instances of Dumb Persons addmitted to the Communion. It Is certain,
that some such have been made to understand the Mysteries of the Gospel, so as
to suffer Martyrdom on that account.

4. In the Year 1620. One that was Deaf and Dumb being solicited by the Papists
to be present at Mass, chose rather to suffer Death. It is a thing known, that
Men are able by Signs to discourse, and to communicate their Sentiments one to
another.

There are about thirty Mutes kept in the Ottoman Court for the Grand Seignior
to sport with: Concerning whom, Mr. Ricaut reports, page 62. that they are able
by Signs not only to signify their Sense in familiar Questions, but to recount
Stories, and understand the Fables of the Turkish Religion, the Laws and
Precepts of the Alcoran; the Name of Mahomet, and what else may be capable of
being expressed by the Tongue.

This Language of the Mutes, is so much in fashion in the Ottoman Court, that
almost every one can deliver his Sense in it.

And that Deaf Persons have been sometimes able to write, and to understand
what others say to them, by the very motion of their Lips, is most certain.

5. Cammerarius tells us of a Young Man and a Maid then living in Noremburg,
who, though Deaf and Dumb, could Read and Write, and Cipher, and by the motion
of a Man's Lips knew his meaning.

6. Platerius speaks of one Deaf and Dumb Born, that yet could express his
mind in a Table Book, and understand what others wrote therein, and was wont to
attend upon the Ministry of Oecolampadius, understanding many things by the
motion of the Lips of the Preacher,

7. Mr. Clark in his Examples, (vol. 1. chap. 33.) says, That there was a
Woman in Edenburge, in Scotland, (her Name was Ceanet Lowes) who being
naturally Deaf and Dumb, could understand what People said, merely by the
moving of their Lips. It is famously known, that Mr. Crisp of London, could do
the like.

8. Borellus, gives an Account of one, that lost his Hearing by a violent
Disease, when he was five Years old, yet if they did but whisper to him, he
could by their Lips perceive what they said.

9. There is one now living, (or not many Years since was so) in Silesia, in
whom, that Disease of the Smallpox caused a total Deafness, who nevertheless,
by exact observing the motion of Men's Lips, can understand what they say; and
if they do but whisper, he perceives what they say better than if they
Vociferate never so loudly. He attends upon public Sermons, being able to give
an Account of what is delivered, provided, that he may but see the Preacher
speaking, though he cannot hear a word.

It is consistent with Reason, that Mutes should understand what others say, by
the motion of their Lips, since it is evident, that the Lips are of great use
in framing Speech. Hence Joh calls his Speech, the moving of his Lips, (Chap.
16. ver. 5.) and we know that Tongueless Persons by the help of their Lips, and
other Organs of Speech, have been able to Speak.

10 Ecclesiastical Story, informs us of several Confessors of the Truth, who
after their Tongues were cut out by bloody Persecutors, could still bear
witness to the Truth.

11. Honorichius, (that cruel King of the Vandals) caused the Tongues of many
to be violently plucked out of their Mouths, who after that, could speak as
formerly; only two of them, when they became guilty of the Sin of Uncleanness
were able to speak no more; this has been Attested by three credible Witnesses,
who knew the Persons. See Mr. Baxters Church History, p. 130.

12. There is lately Published (in Latin) a very strange Relation of a Child in
France, (his Name was Peter Durand) who being visited with the Small Pox when
he was about six Years old, his Tongue putrified, and was quite consumed; after
which, (the Uvula in his Mouth being longer than it was before,) he could by
the help of the other Organs of Speech, discourse as plainly as if he had never
lost his Tongue. These things are Mavelous.

13. And yet I have lately met with a passage more strange than any of these
Related. There is, (or was in the Year 1679) living near Kerchem in Germany, a
Man (his Name is John Algair,) who suddenly lost the use of his Speech; the
case has been so with him, that fourteen Years together, he could never speak
but at one hour of the Day, just as the Sun comes to the Meridian, he has the
liberty of his Speech for an hour, and no more, so that he knows exactly when
it is twelve a Clock, because then he can speak, and not a Minute before that,
nor a Minute after One. This is Related in the Germanic Ephemeridies of
Miscellaneous Curiosities for the Year 1679. Observat. 188.

It is evident, that the Sun has a marvelous Influence as to some Diseases,
which the Bodies of Men are subject unto. For in Egypt, though the Plague rage
the Day before, on that very day when the Sun enters into Leo, it cease; when
also the Floods of Nilus increase, as Geographers inform us.

Moreover, it is possible by Art to Teach those that are by Nature Deaf and
Dumb to Speak. The Dectilogy of Beda is pretty, whereby Men speak as nimbly
with the Fingers, as with the Tongue; taking five Fingers of the one Hand for
Vowels, and the several Positions of the other for Consonants. But that Deaf
Persons may learn to speak, happy Experience has proved, and that by many
Instances.

14. Acustre, has given an Account of the Method by him successfully observed
in Teaching a Boy to Speak, that was Born Deaf. After the use of some Purgative
Medicines, he caused the Hair to be shaved off from his Head over the Coronal
Suture; and then frequently anointed the shaven place with a mixture of
Aquavitae, Salt Petre, Oil of Butter, Almonds, etc. having done this, he began
to speak to the Deaf Person, (not at his Ear, but) at his Coronal Suture, and
then after the use of Unctions, and Emunctions, the sound would pierce, when at
his Ears it could not enter, so did he by degrees teach him to speak. ( Vide
Ephem. German. Anno, 1670. Observation 350.)

But others have with good Effect followed another kind of Method.

15. There was a Spanish Noble Man, (Brother to the Constable of Castile,) who
being Born Deaf, and also Dumb, from his Infancy. Physicians had long in vain
tried Experiments for his relief. At last a certain Priest undertook to teach
him to speak: his Attempt was at first laughed at, but within a while the
Gentleman was able (notwithstanding his Deafness still remained) to Converse,
or Discourse with any Friend. He was taught to speak, by putting a Cord about
his Neck, and straining, or losening the same, to advertise him when to open or
shut his Mouth, by the Example of his Teacher; Nor was there any difference
found between his Speech, and that of other Men, only that he did not regulate
his Voice, speaking commonly too high. (Vide Conferences of Virtuosi. p. 215.

16. Not long since, Fran. Mercur. Helmont designing to teach a Deaf Man to
speak, concluded it would be more easily practicable, if the Experiment were
made with an Eastern, wide Mouth Language, which does remarkably expose the Eye
to the motion; of the Lips, Tongue, and Throat. Accordingly, he cried with the
Hebrew Tongue, and in a short time his Dumb Scholar became an excellent
Hebrician. Others have lately been as Successful in their Attempts, to cause
Deaf Persons to speak, and understand the Europaean Languages. We need not go
out of our own Nation, for there we find living Instances.

17. In the Philosopical Transactions for the Year, 1670. Number. 61. an Account
is given concerning Mr. Daniel W^aley, of Northampton in England, who by an
Accident lost his Hearing when he was about five Years of Age, and so his
Speech, not at once, but by degrees, in about half a Years time, In five Years
1661. the Learned and Ingenious, Dr. Wallis of Oxford, undertook to teach the
Deaf Gentleman to speak and write. Nor did the Doctor fail in attaining his
end, ^or in the space of one Year, the Dumb Man had read over great part of the
English Bible, and had attained so much skill, as to express himself
intelligibly in ordinary Affairs, to understand Letters written to him, and to
write Answers to them. And when Foreigners out of curiosity came to Visit him,
he was able to pronounce the most difficult words of their Language, (even
Polish it self,) which any could propose unto him. Nor was this the only Person
on whom the Doctor showed his skill; But he has since done the like for
another, (a Gentleman of a very good Family) who did from his Birth want his
Hearing. Likewise, Dr. Holder, in his late Book about the Natural Production of
Letters, gives Rules for the Teaching the Deaf and Dumb to speak.

18. Edward Bone of Ladock, in Cornwall, was Servant to Mr. Courtney also: He
was Deaf from his Gradle, and consequently Dumb, (Nature cannot give out, where
she has not received) yet could learn and express to his Master that was
stirring in the Country; especially if there went any news of a Sermon within
some Miles distant, he would repair to that place with the soonest, and setting
himsef directly against the Preacher, look him steadfastly in the Face while the
Sermon lasted. To which Religious Zeal his honest Life was also answerable;
assisted with a firm Memory, he would not only know any Party, whom he had once
seen, for ever after, but also make him known to another, by some special
Observation and Difference. There was one Kemp not living far off, deffected
accordingly, on whose meetings, there were such Embracings, such strange,
often, and earnest Tokenings, such hearty Laughters, and other passionate
Gestures, that their want of Tongue, seemed rather a hinderance to others
conceiving them, than to their conceiving one another. Fullers Worthies. p.
206. in Cornwall.

Other Defects of Nature supplied by Art.
1. The Indians presented Augustus with a young Man, with Shoulders or Arms
that could perform with his Feet, what others did with their Arms and Hands,
could bend a Bow, shoot Arrows, and sound a Trumpet. Xiph. in August. p. 55.

2. My self and others, (says Camerarius,) being once at Lombourg, in the House
of Erasmus Neustetetur, he sent to a place not far off, for one Thomas
Sckiveiker, a young Man of one and thirty Years of Age, descended of a
Worshipful House, and Born without ever an Arm; who did with his Feet all that
a ready Man could do with his Hands. Having seated himself in a place equal
with the highth of the Table, whereon the Meat was placed; he took a Knife with
his Feet, begins to cut Bread and Meat, which he carried with his Feet to his
Mouth; and likewise, the Cup with as much ease as another would have done with
his Hands. After Dinner, he wrote Copies in Latin, and German Letters so fair
and so straight, that every one of us desired to have some of them to keep, as
a special Monument. Being requested, he did with a Penknife make Pens very
good to write with, which he gave us. While he was thus doing, I observed the
make of his Feet, and saw that his Toes were long, fit to lay hold of things:
This sight, as it was pleasing to us, so it was at another time to the Emperor
Maximilian the II. who passing that way, desired to see the Man; and having
observed the strange recompense of Nature, dismissed him with a Princely Gift.
Camir. Hor. Subsi. Cent. 1. chapter 37, p. 169.170. Keckerm. in Phys. l. 1. c. 4.
p. 1370.

3. Of late there was a Man Born without Arms, that went about Germany, who had
learned by Custom, turned into Art, to handle a Sword, and flourish it about
his Neck, to fling Javlins, and do other things so nimbly, and withal so
surely, that he would commonly hit the Mark. All other, the Duties of the
Hands, he performed with his Feet; he was after broken upon the Wheel, for
sundry Robberies, and Murders by him Committed. Came. Hor. Sub. Cent. 1 Cap.
37. p. 170.

4. I have seen a Woman in Basil, Spinning Artificially with her Feet, Sweeping
the House, and performing all other the Offices of a good Houswife, Plat. Obs.
1.3. p. 593.

5. The said Platerus says, He saw a Man, who with his Head and Shoulders,
would take hold of things, and use them after various manners, with Instruments
and Weapons held in that fashion, to Cleave, Cut off, Dig and Strike, with a
wonderful Force, and yet both he, and the Woman before mentioned, were without
Arms. Plat. Ob. Ibid.

6. A Suedish Woman, called Magdalene Rudolph Thuinby, was here of late at
Hasnia; she was Aged Forty Two, Married to a German Solider; she was born
without Arms; and that there might be no suspicion of Fraud, by her Consent, I
saw that she had nothing but Shoulders; yet though she thus was maimed, she
performed all Offices with her Feet, with that dexterity and readiness, that
she is deservedly the wonder of the Spectators, and may seem to have no want of
her Hands; with her Feet she Spins, and Threads her Needle; she Weaves, she
Charges and Discharges a Gun: with Scissars, and a Knife, she cuts Paper into
diverse artifical Figures; she plays at Tables and Dice, she drinks, and Swathes
her little Infant; she knows how to bring her Feet to her Breast and Head, so
as to take her Child to her Breast, as if she did it with her Hands. She Feeds
both her self and her Child; she combs her Hair; to conclude, without trouble
she does all, that is sufficient for her own necessity, and to gratify others
Curiositly. Barthol. Hist. Anat. Cent. 3. Hist. 26. p. 61.

7. There is a Woman of Britain, who was born with Arms and Legs, distorted in
so strange and unusual a manner, that she might well seem unfit (to any Man
that saw her) to do any thing; yet she had acquired from officious Nature, such
a dexterity, that she could Spin with her Tongue, with the same she could
Thread a Needle of the smallest size, with great Expedition; with the flexure
of her Tongue only, she could readily tie that fast Knot, which we call the
Weavers Knot; and with the same Tongue she would Write, and that in a fair
Character; amongst others, she so wrote the Name of my Son Petrus Talpius,
which I yet keep by me. Nicho. Talpii. Obs. Med. l.3. cap. 5. p. 273.

8. Pictorius Villinganas gives an Account of a Spaniard born without Arms,
that with his Feet could Spin, and use the Needle with great curiosity: He shot
from a Bow in such manner, that he seldom did miss the Mark; and would with an
Ax give so strong a Blow, as to cut in sunder at one stroke, a reasonable piece
of Wood. Kecker in Physic. Lib. 1. c. 4. p. 1370.

9. Keckerman also speaks of a Scholar, that had but one little Finger on each
hand, and his Feet were triangular, without any Toes; yet had he more force in
one Finger, than others had with Five; he wrote curiously and swiftly, and
stood so firm, that in very slippery places, he would seldom slip. Johnst. Not.
Hist. cl. 10. c. 5. p. 335.

CHAP. IV. Improvements in Physic, and Experimental Philosophy, etc.
HVmane Wit has arrived in this last Age to so high a degree of Daring, that
without any limits to the Modesty of their Disquisition, they have laid open
all the Secrets of Nature, and so dissected all the Bodies they have met with,
and separated their parts with so strict and Chemical Anatomy, as to unravel
the whole Texture, and dissolve all natural Bodies into their first Principles;
and by that means have made such excellent Discoveries, as former Ages cannot
Parallel, and future Times have scarce room left to be employed in.

1. A. C. 1669. Mr. Wills, of Trin. Col. Oxon. To know in what measure Herbs
might perspire, took two Glass Vials, with narrow Necks, each holding one Pound
eight Ounces, and two Drams of Water, filled these with Water, put a Sprig of
Mint, weighing an Ounce in one, and set both the Glasses in the Sun; after ten
Days he found in the Bottle where the Mint was, only five Ounces four Drams of
Water remaining, so that one Pound two Ounces and six Drams, were spent; the
Mint weighing scarce two Drams more than at first. From the other Glass, the
Sun had exhaled near one Ounce of water; so that there was in those ten Days
spent by the Mint, one Pound, one Ounce, six Drams of Water, that is, each Day
above an Ounce, and an half, which is more than the weight of the whole Mint:
So that he concluded the same of all Plants, which Malpighius did of the
Silkworm, That those Animals will eat in a Day more than the weight of their
Bodies. Ibid.

2. There has been lately found out a curious way of Grafting different Vines,
one upon the other; for Example, in the Physic Garden at Oxford, the white
Frontiniac grafted upon the Parcely Vine, grows, and bears very well; also the
early red Cluster, or Current Grape, upon that Luxuriant Vine, called, the Fox
Grape. Ibid.

3. The Improvements made of late Years in Chemistry are very great, though the
first Essays made in that Art were hissed at, as very ridiculous and
contemptible: It must be confessed, That many unskilful Men have derived much
Disgrace upon the Study: Notwithstanding, many pretty and admirable Effects
have been at last found out, which has abundantly satisfied all Judicious Men,
that there is something more in the Principles of it, than the World would a
good while believe. It Is an Element I have been little Conversant in, and
therefore cannot be supposed to say much of it. This is certain, that they have
found out several ways of dissolving Natural Bodies, and separating their
various Substances, by Menstruum, Amalgamation, Liquation, Calcination, etc. Of
Extracting Juices, Oils and Spirits out of them; of Fermenting, Fixing,
Subliming, and Transforming one Metal, or Mineral into another; as Transforming
Tin into Silver, or Lead, changing Lead again into Tin, Antimony into Lead,
making Lead heavier, extracting Quicksilver out of it, and again converting
Lead into Quicksilver; Transforming Brass or Iron into a more worthy Metal;
drawing Water out of Quicksilver, making Quicksilver grow to be a Tree, giving
a golden Tincture to Silver, and Extracting Gold out of it; Counterfeiting and
Coloring precious Stones; polishing of Metals, Extracting Salts, Tinctures,
Essences, Gums, etc. Tempering, Hardening, and Softening Iron, etc.

4. Sir Christopher Wren contrived how to make Diaries of Wind and Weather, and
of the various Qualifications of the Air, as to Heats, Colds, Droughts,
Moisture, and Weight, through the whole Year, and this in order to the History
of Seasons, with observations which are the most Healthful or Contagious to Men
or Beasts; which the Harbingers of Blights, Mildews, Smut, etc. To this end he
contrived a Thermometer, to be its own Register, and a Clock to be annexed to a
Weathercock, which moves a Rundle covered with white Paper, upon which the
Clock moving a black Lead Pensil, the Observer, by the Traces of the Pensil on
the Paper, may know what Winds have blown during his Sleep or Absence, for 12
Hours together; he has discovered also many subtle ways, for easier finding
the degrees of Drought, and Moisture, and the Gravity of the Atmosphere; and
amongst other Instruments, has Balances, that show the Pressure of the Air,
by their very easy Inclinations. He has made Instruments also, to show the
Mechanical Reason of Sailing to all Winds; and others of Resiration, for
straining the Breath from thick Vapors, to try whether the same Breath thus
purified, will serve again. Dr. Plot's Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire, c. 9. par.
30. etc.

5. The Honorable Mr. Boil invented a Pneumatic Engine, with the help of Mr.
Hook, called the Air Pump, far above that of Magdeburgh; by the Assistance
whereof he has accurately Examined the Elastical Power, Pressure, Weight,
Expansion, and weakness of this Element; and has found out so many new things
relating to the height and gravity of the Atmosphere, nature of a Vacuum,
Flame, and excandefcence of Coals, Match, Firing of Gunpowder; propagation of
Sounds; Fluidity, Light, Freezing, Respiration, etc. that to give an Account of
all, according to their Merits, would be to Transcribe the Author himself. Ibid.

6. The same Noble Person invented the Barometer, or Weather-Glass, whereby the
gravity of the Atmosphere has been daily observed by Dr. Wallis, for many
Years together, and the Quicksilver in the Tube found never to ascend much
above 30 Inches, and never to descend much below 28, which is supposed to be
the whole Latitude of its Variation. Ibid.

7. The same Ingenious Dr. Wallis, has observed many Years together the Temper
of the Air, by a the Air, by a Thermometer, whereof he kept the Notes still by
him, very particular for every Day. Ibid.

Which latter Instrument, though graphically delineated by Robert de Fluctibus,
in a M. S. of 500 Years standing at least, yet has still received other useful
Advancements from Sir Chr. Wren, who finding the usual Thermometers not to give
so exact a measure of the Airs extension, by reason the Gravity of the Liquor,
as it stands higher or lower in the Glass, weighs unequally on the Air, and
gives it a Contraction and Extension, besides what is produced by Heat and
Cold; he thereofre invented a circular Thermometer, in which the Liquor can
occasion no such fallacy, it remains continually of one height, and moving the
whole Instrument like a Wheel on its Axel. Ibid.

8. Mr. J. Jones, of Jesus Coll. Oxon, contrived a Clock, which moved by the
Air, equally expressed out of Bellows of a Cylindrical Form, falling into Folds
in its descent, much after the manner of Paper Lanthorns: these (instead of
drawing up the weights of other Clocks) are only filled with Air, admitted into
them at a large Orifice at the top, which is stopped up again as soon as they are
full, with a hollow Skrew, in the head whereof there is set a small brass
Plate, about the bigness of a silver Halfpenny, with a Hole perforated scarce
so big as the smallest Pins head: through this Hole the Air is equally
expressed by Weights laid on the top of the Bellows, which descending very
slowly, draw a Clock-line, having a counterpoise at the other end; that turns a
Pully-wheel, fastened to the Arbor or Axis, of the Hand that points to the
Hour: which devise, though not brought to the intended Perfection of the
Inventor, that perhaps it may be by the help of a Tumbrel or Fusee, yet highly
deserves mentioning. Ibid.

9. Mr. John Young, M. A. of Magdalene Hall, has improved the Hygroscope: It Is
made of two Deal, or rather Poplar Boards, who rationally concluding, that the
Teeth of the thin pieces of Brass placed across the Juncture of the two Boards,
must needs in its passage from bearing on one side of the Teeth of the Pinion,
to the other, upon change of Weather, make a stand as it were, in respect of
the motion of the Axel of the Hand; thinking a pretty stiff Spring, cut on the
under side, after the manner of a File, placed flat, and not edg-ways, and
bearing pretty hard upon an Axel of Copper, may turn the Hand upon Change of
Weather in the punctum of Reversion, without any more than a negative Rest;
which being an Opinion so very rational and unlikely to fail, when brought to
the Test, I thought fit to propound to the Ingenious. Ibid.

10. Dr. Willis has given us the Anatomy of Blood, in his Book de Febribus,
and declared the true Causes and Nature of Fermentations in the Juices, and
upon them built his most Rational Doctrine of Fevers, Intermitent, Putrid and
Malignant, with particular Observations concerning them, much different from
the ways of the Ancients.

11. To these he has superadded, the Spagyrical Anatomy of Vrin.

12. His Method of Diffecting the Brain is new, and very Natural. And although
he was not the first that mentioned two Souls in a Man, the Sensitive and
Rational, yet perhaps no Body has proved it so well.

13. Sir Christopher Wren first found out the way of Injecting Liquors into the
Veins of Animals, and did exhibit it to the Meetings at Oxford, about the Year
1656. by which Operation diverse Animals immediately purged, vomited,
intoxicated, killed, or revived, according to the quality of the Liquor
injected.

14. Hence arose the Transfussng of Blood out of one Animal into another, by
Dr. Lower, 1665.

15. The same Author was the first that Published the rrue Method of dividing
the Heart into several Muscles, and assigning to it a Muscular Motion, and
thereby showing several ways whereby it may be impeded or disturbed; he has
done good Service to the Pathalogical Part of Physic.

16. Whether Walaeus, Bartholin, or any other, were the first that found out
the Circulation of the Blood, I cannot say; but Dr. Lower's Computation of the
Frequency of the Bloods Circulation through the Heart, is very ingenious, and
the Cause he assigns of the florid Color of it, when emitted, seems new and
probable.

17. Dr. Majo has lately taught us, That the Air is impregnated with a
Nitro-acrial Spirit, and that it difused almost throughout the whole System of
Nature; and that Fire it self, as to its Form and Effence, is nothing else but
the same Spirit put into Motion; and that all Fermentations, whether tending to
Generation, Perfection, or Corruption, depend on this Spirit.

18. Mr. Tyson has lately observed, that many other strong Scented Animals,
besides the Hycena Odorifera, the Civet-Cat, the Castor, or Beaver, the Gazella
Indica, or Capra Mosci (from whence our Musk) and the Fishes Sepia, Loligo,
Purpura, have sollicular Repositories, or Bags, near the Exit of the Intestinum
Rectum, wherein they keep those Humors or Liquors, that are the Vehicles of
their Scents. This he has observed in Pole-Cats, Foxes, Weasels, Cats, etc.
Which Vessicles, or little Bags, are found by pairs, one on each side of the
Gut, proportional to the bigness of the Animals.

To Instance in all the particular Discoveries and Improvements made in
Anatomy, Physic, etc. would be a Task sufficient to make up a large Volume by
it self.

CHAP. IV. Improvements in Music.
IN Music it would be too tedious to determine, Whether the Improvement or
Alteration has been greater: Certain it is, That several old English
Instruments are laid aside, as the Orpharian, the Polyphone, an Instrument
surely not to be despised, considering its rare Structue, and the esteem had of
it by Learned, and therefore most Judiciously Musical Persons of this Age, viz.
Sir F. Pruscan, and Dr. Rugely, The Bandore, the Ghittern, Cittern, etc. The
Treble Viol also is much out of Doors, since the Violin came so much in
request, The Base, and Lira Viol, in the making whereof, Wroth was, without
dispute, the best Workman that ever wrought, keep pretty well in repute,
especially the first, because it cannot be wanted well in Consert, etc.

1. The Lute is not wholly laid aside, but within this 20 or 30 Years much
neglected, to what it was formerly, notwithstanding the great Improvement of
this Instrument among us, within a hundred Years, by reason of the diversity of
Tunings received from France, some of whose best Lute-Masters brought over not
only these Harp-Tunings, but themselves also, and by their active Hands, and
airy Fancies, obliged the Musick-Lovers of our Nation, with Transcendant
Harmony.

2. The Fine easy Ghittar, whose Performance is soon gained, at least after
the brushing way, has at this present over-topt the noble Lute. Nor is it to
be denied, but that after the pinching way, the Ghittar makes some good work.

3. The Theorbo, which is no other than an Arch-Lute, keeping to the old
Tuning, is still generally made use of in Consorts. And there are yet some
among the Judicious, who think it the most agreeable and becoming Associate to
Vocal Music.

The Organ has been wonderfully advanced of late Years, by the addition of
several Melodious Stops.

5. The Harpsicon is of late mightily Improved, by the Invention of the Pedal,
which brings it so near to the Organ, that it only seems to come short of it in
Lungs.

6. Here may not be unfitly mentioned, that Musical Automaton (a kind of
Harpsicon) which by a Clockwork-motion discharges a certain set number of
Tunes, according as it is would up to this or that Tune Of this sort of
Automata there is to be seen a very neat Piece of Art, of Reed-work, at a House
at St. Mary-Overs-Dock, the Artificer thereof, Mr. Tho. Hill, of Westminster.
His Pitch-Pipe, for the Tuning of Musical Instruments to Consort; which is
particularly worthy note for exactness, variety, and curious Work, above any
thing that is to be seen elsewhere of this Nature.

7. The Harp is increased in repute; and though the Welsh Gut-string formerly
gave place to the Irish Wire-string, now the Spanish Gut-string comes up with
it.

8. The Violin is now arrived to a great Perfection of Performance.

9. The Flagiolet within this 20 or 30 Years, and since that the Flute, have
been highly in vogue, and frequented in use. Present State Eng. Part 3. p. 90.
etc.

10. In Music, to pass by a Harpsecord that I met with at Sir Tho. Penystons,
with Cat's Gut-string; it has been lately observed here at Oxford, that though
Viol, or Lute-strings, rightly Tuned, do affect one another, yet most of them
do it not in all places alike, as has till now been supposed: For if the lesser
of two Octaves be touched with the Hand or Bow, each half of the Greater will
answer it, but will stand still in the middle; and if the greater of the two
Octaves, be touched on either of its halves, all the lesser will answer it, but
if touched on the middle, the lesser will not stir, etc. Dr. Plot's Not. Hist.
Oxfordsh. c. 9. p. 288. Dr. Marsh has offered a Solution of this Phenomenon
in all its cases. Concerning which, vide Ibid.

One Hooper of Oxford, could so close his Lips, as to fing an Octave at the
same time. And I know, says Dr. Plot, two other Persons now living here, that
can do it, though their Lips be set in that posture, yet they shut them so
close, that they can by no means pronounce any thing articulate. But he that
excells them all, and indeed to a miracle, is one Mr. Jos. Dring, a young
Gentleman of Har-Hall, who sings a Song articulately, ore Patulo, and all in
Octaves, so very strongly, and yet without much straining, that he equals, if
not excells the loudest Organ. He performs it in the lower part of his Throat,
and it came casually on him at first, upon over-straining of his Voice. Ibid.

CHAP. V. Improvements in Astronomy.
ONE would think the Heavenly Bodies were out of Man's reach, or that the
Ancient Inhabitants of Phoenicia, Egypt, Chaldea, Greece, etc. had in so many
Thousand Years made so many Observations upon them, that nothing more could be
added; and yet we have made fresh remarks here, and useful Discoveries and
Improvements; not to speak of the World in the Moon, which some have asserted,
and undertaken to make out for very probable; or the Foramina, and Cavities in
others, or the new Star in Cassiopea.

The Fleet Astronomer can bore,
And thread the Spheres with his quick-piercing Mind;
he views their Stations, walks from Door to Door,
Surveys, as if he had designed
To make a Purchase there: he sees their Dances,
And knows long before,
Both their full-eyed Aspects, and secret glances.
Herbert. 1. The Silver Sphere (a most exquisite Piece of Art, which ws sent by
the Emperor Ferdinand, to Soliman the Great Turk) is mentioned by Paulus
Jovias, and Sabellicus. It was carried by twelve Men unframed; and re-framed in
the Grand Seignor's Presence, by the Maker of it, who likewise delivered him a
Book, containing the Mystery of using it; of which Du Bartus thus:

Nor may we smother, or forget ungrately,
The Heaven of Silver that was sent but lately,
From Ferdinando as a famous work,
Unto Bizantium to the greatest Turk;
Wherein a Sprite still moving to and fro,
Made all the Engine orderly to go.
And though the one Sphere did always slowly glide,
And contrary the other swiftly slide.
Yet still the Stars kept all their Courses even,
With the true Courses of the Stars of Heaven;
The Sun there shifting in the Zodiac,
His shining Horses never did for sake
His pointing Path; there in a Month his Sister
Fulfilled her Course, and changing of her luster,
And form of Face, (now larger) lessor soon,
Followed the Changes of the other Moon.
Knowles Turk. Hist. p. 713. 2. The Duke of Holsteine has ordered a Globe to
be made in the City of Cottorp; it is a double Globe, made of Copper, ten Foot
and half in Diameter; so that within it ten Persons may sit at a Table; which,
with the Seats about it, hangs at one of its Poles. There a Man may see (by
means of an Horizontal Circle within the Globe) how the Stars and Sun its self,
out of its Center, moves of its self, through its Ecliptic Degrees, and
rises and sets regularly. The Motion of this Globe exactly follows that
of the Heavens, and deriveth that Motion, from certain Wheels, driven by Water,
which is drawn out of a Mountain hard by, and let in, as it requires more or
less, according to the swiftness of the Spheres. Olearius Travels, p. 339.

3. A. 1635. There was at Liege an English Jesuit, named Linus, who had (says
Kircher) a Phial, or Glass of Water, wherein a little Globe did float, with the
24 Letters of the Alphabet described upon it, on the inside of the Phial, was
an Index or Style, to which the Globe did turn and move it self at the Period
of every Hour, with that Letter that denoted the Hour of the Day successively,
as tho this little Globe kept Pace and Time with the Heavenly Motions, And
Kircher himself had a Vessel of Water, in which (just even with the Surface of
the Water) were the 24 Hours described. A piece of Cork was set upon the Water,
and therein were put some Seeds of the Heliotrope, or Sun-Flower; which, like
the Flower it self, did turn the Cork about, according to the Course of the
Sun, and with its Motion, point out the Hours of the Day. Gass. in Vit.
Paeiresk. 1.5. p. 185. Hist. Man. Arti. c. 1. p. 10.

4. Galileo could by the help of a round Box, held toward the Sun, produce a
Light that would shoot it self into a very dark Room, and ascend by Degrees as
a Vapor, that is kinded by the Sun, to the admiration of all Spectators. It
was a Concave Box that he used. Fortes. Feriae Ac. p. 123.

Curious Inventions of Clock-work.
5. Gaffarel tell us, That he saw at Leghorn a Clock, brought thither by a
German, to be sold, which had many Rarities in it; for besides an infinite
number of strange Motions, which appeared not at all to the Eye, you had there
a Company of Shepherds, some of them playing at Bagpipes, with such Harmony,
and exquisite Motion of the Fingers, as that one would have thought they had
been alive, others dancing by Couples, keeping exact Time and Measure, whilst
others caper'd and leaped up and down with so much nimbleness, that my Spirits
were wholly ravished with the Sight (says he). Gaffar, Curios. c. 7. p. 236.

6. Copernicus made an excellent Clock, in which there was not only to be
heard, a number of different Noises, occasioned by its various Motions, but
also most exactly to be discovered the Circuitions of all the Celestial Orbs;
the Distinctions of Days, Months, Years; there the Zodiac did explicate its
Signs: So performing the Circle of the Year; there the playing Ram began the
Spring, Cancer produces the Summer, Libra enriches it with Autumn, and the
Slothful Scorpio makes the Winter. Here also the Moon changes in the Nones,
shines out more bright in the Ides, and shamefully conceives her Conjuction
with the Sun in the Kalends. But those things which the Ingenious Artificer
presented, and as it were, produced in the Scene, upon the entrance of every
Hour, marvellously delighted the Spectators, every Hour made Show of some
Mystery in our Faith. The first Creation of the Light, the powerful Separation
of the Elements, and all other intermediate Mysteries he had traced upon this
Engine, even to the great Eclipse that was, when our Savior suffered on
Mount-Calvary; to insist upon the particulars, was the work of an Age; the Eye
that is the Devourer of such Beautiful Objects, embrace more in an Hour, than
the Tongue is able to represent in a considerable space of time. Fortes. feria
Acad. page 58.

7. A. 1571. Conraldus Dusipodius invented the most famous Clock at Strasburg.
Before the Clock stand a Globe on the Ground, showing the Motions of the
Heavens, Stars, Planets, namely, of the Heaven, carried about by the first
Mover, in 24 Hours, of Saturn, by his proper Motion, carried about in 30 Years,
of Jupiter in 12, of Mars in 2, of the Sun, Mercury and Venus in one Year, of
the Moon in a Month. In the Clock it self there be two Tables on the Right and
Left Hand, showing the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, from the Year 1573. to A.
1624. The third Table in the midst is divided into three Parts. In the first
Part the Statues of Apollo and Diana, show the Course of the the Year, and the
Day thereof, being carried about in one Year; the second Part shows the Year of
our Lord, and of the World, the Equinoctial Days, the Hours of each Day, the
Minutes of each Hour, Easter Day, and all other Feasts, and the Dominical
Letter; the third Part has the Geographical Description of all Germany, and
particularly of Strasburgh, and the Names of the Inventors, and of all the
Workmen. In the middle Frame of the Clock is an Astrolabe, showing the Sign in
which each Planet is every Day, and there be the Statues of the seven Planets
upon a round piece of Iron, lying flat; so that every Day the Statue of that
Planet that rules the day, comes forth, the rest being hid within the Frames,
till they come out by course at their day, as the Sun upon Sunday, and so for
all the Week. And there is a Terrestrial Globe, and the Quarter, and the Half
Hour, and the Minutes are showed there. There is also the Skull of a dead Man,
and two Statues of two Boys; whereof one turns the Hourglass, when the Clock
has struck, the other puts forth the Rod in his Hand at each Stroke of the
Clock. Moreover, there be the Statues of the Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter,
and many Observations of the Moon. In the upper part of the Clock are four old
Men's Statues, which strike the quarters of the Hour, the Statue of Death
coming out at each Quarter to strike; but being driven back by the Statue of
Christ, with a Spear in his Hand for three Quarters; but in the fourth Quarter,
that of Christ goes back, and that of Death strikes the Hour, with a Bone in
his Hand, and then the Chimes sound. On the top of the Clock is the Image of a
Cock, which twice in the Day croweth aloud, and clappeth his Wings. Besides,
this Clock is decked with many fine Pictures; and being on the inside of the
Church, carries another Frame to the outside of the Wall, wherein the Hours of
the Sun, the Courses fo the Moon, the Length of the Day, and such other things,
are set out with great Art. Morrison's Itenerary, Part 1. Cap. 1. Page 31.

8. At Dresden a Cockoo sings by Clock-work, a Horseman rides, a Ship sails, an
old Woman walks, a Centaur runs and shoots, and a Crab creeps upon a Table, so
well, as to amaze and delight. Dr. Ed. Brown's Trav. p. 167.

CHAP. VI. Improvements in Navigation.
NONE of the Elements have escaped the Inquisition of Humane Study; Men have
adventured not only to Travel upon the Surface of the Waters, and cut through the
Surging Waves, but to dive to the bottom, and examine all the Secrets of the
vast Ocean; and to that end have made considerable Improvements in the Art of
Navigation. But being my self a Land-Animal, I am not able to say much upon the
Point, only for a Spur to the Industry and Emulation of others, take these few
subsequent Remarks.

1. The Chard and Compass is well known to be a late, but ingerrious, and
useful Invention, far beyond the old wild way of Sailing by the Coasts of the
Land; and much conducive to the mutual Traffic and Commerce of diverse Nations,
I wish, I could say, it had been more so to the Propagation of Learning, and
True Religion.

2. The Longitude upon the Sea (complained of lately by Seamen and Pilots; who
having lost sight of the Land, and knowing by Observation of the Compass and
Altitude, at what Distance they were from North and Sourth, but not able to
discern the Longitude, viz. the Distance from East to West) has been lately
put into a fair way of Discovery by Mr. Huggens, by the help of the Pendulum;
whose Exactness is such, that it fails not one Moment: And the Certainty of
this Experiment is recommended by Captain Holms, in a Letter, written from
London, January, 1665. etc.

3. Sir William Petti invented a Vessel or Ship of a new Form, called the
Experiment, like two little Ships, joined together by a Platform, so that
between the two there might be a space almost as large as the two Ships
together, through which the Water had an entire Liberty to pass; the Keel of each
being 80 Foot long, the bigness with the Platform, only 32 Foot, the height
from the Keel to the Platform 14. In War it would carry 50 pieces of Canon, 200
Men, with three Months Provision; if used for Merchandise, it would carry 300
Tuns. The Advantages expected from it were, that it would be swifter than other
Ships, as being capable of carrying twice or thrice as many Sails, as others;
and having no Ballast, it would be higher; and surer, because the figure of its
sides, with the Water, which runs between the two Ships, would keep it from
running aground; and having no Ballast it would not sink, what Breaches soever
it might meet with; especially, if assisted by some pieces of Canon; besides,
its Keel would defend it (being supported by many straight Planks) if it should
touch the Ground with all its weight; and lastly, it would turn more speedily
than those Ships, whose Rudder receives only the broken Water by the round
Sides of them, and ross less in a Tempest; and in calm Weather would to with
Oars betwixt the two little ones, beneath the Platform, etc. but what the Event
of this Experiment is I am not able to say. This Description that I have given,
is taken out of a Letter, written from London about it. The Young Students
Library, p. 208.

4. A Doublet of Buoyant Matter, lately invented; which being put over or under
a Man's Clothes, will bear his Head above Water for 24 Hours, tho he cannot
swim, was tried this Month of June, A. 1696. below London Bridge, and proved
effectual; as we are informed by the Flying-Post, Numb. 167.

CHAP. VII. Improvements in Law.
THAT Law might be reduced into the Method of an Art or Science, has been the
wish of many Learned Men: I dare not undertake any such Work my self; yet for
the Curiosity of my Reader, I will present him here with something of a Scheme,
which I had lying by me, Extracted out of Sir Mat. Hales Pleas of the Corwn,
Sir H. Finch 's Common Pleas, etc.

1. Pleas of the Crown, have a Respect either to 1. Capital Offenses. 1.
Against God, as 1. Heresy. 2. Witchcraft.
2. Against Man.



1. Capital. 1. Treason. 1. High, as Compassing the Death of the King, Queen,
Prince; Levying War against him, Violation of the Queen, Princess, killing of
the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justice of one Bench or other, Justice in Eire, of
Assizes of Oyer and Terminer, in their place, Counterfeiting and Clipping of
the King's Coin; Refusing the Oath of Supremacy on the Second Tender, Extolling
the Bishop of Rome; Priests coming into the Realm

2. Petit, A Servant killing of the Master; a Wife her Husband; Ecclesiastic
his Superior; Son his Father, etc.

2. Felony, against Life, as Felo de se, Chance medley (doing a lawful Act)
without Intent of Hurt, and Death following. Death per infortunium, without
procurement of another, the Cause is Deodand, ex necessitate, viz. Murder,
proceeding from Malice precognitated; Manslaughter, on a sudden Falling out.
Against Goods, Larceny simple, and grand, of the value of 12 Pence, feloniously
taken. Complicated Larceny, or mixed with Robbery, viz. Taking from the Person,
and putting him in fear, or from the House. Piracy. Burglary, viz. or Breaking
by Night, and entering into a House with a Felonious Intent. Arson maliciously
and voluntarily burning the House of another. Hindrances of Amesning a Felon to
public Justice; by breaking of Prison (Rumper Prison) Escape. Rescure, in a
Person that is a Stranger.

Felonies by Statute. Conspiring to kill the King; Witchcraft; Buggery
(Penetratio and emissio cum carnali cognitione.) Rape; taking a Woman against
her Will.

Malicious cutting out Tongues, or pulling out Eyes; Stealing or avoiding
Records. Multiplication of Gold or Silver; Hunting unlawfully in Forests,
Chases, Wartens. Embezilling of the King's Armor; Subjects passing Sea, to
serve Foreign Princes, etc. Purveyors, and wandering Soldiers in certain Cases;
Marrying a Second Husband or Wife, the First living; except the Man be under
14, the Woman under 12, when married, absent 7 Years, after a Divorce, after
Nullity obtained. Jailer compelling Prisoner to be Appelor, etc. Transportation
of Silver, or Importation of False Money. Exportation of Wool, etc. Stealing
Falcons. Receiving, etc. Popish Priests, Jesuits. Egyptians above 14. Rogue
adjudged to the Galleys, and returning without License. Forging a Deed after a
former Conviction. Sending Sheep beyond Sea, after former Conviction: Servants
Embezilling the Goods of their Masters, etc. Cutting Powdike; Forcibly
detaining Persons in Cumberland.

2. Not Capital, or Trespasses, which are,

1. Greater, 1. Misprision of Treason, or Felony Negative, viz. Knowing and not
Revealing; Receiving a Traitor, Counterfeiting Coin, etc.

2. Theftbote, when the Owner does not know the Felony, but takes his Goods
again, or other amends not to Prosecute.

3. Misprisions positive, discovery by one of the Grand Jury of the Persous
Indicted, etc. dissuading from witnessing against a Felon, etc. Reproaching a
Judge, Assaulting an Attorney against him, or abusing a Juror; Rescuing a
Prisoner from Bar of B. R. B. C. Striking in Westminster Hall, etc. in
presence of Justices of Assize, of Oyer and Terminer, Drawing Sword upon any
Judge, or Justice, etc.

4. Maihem, Cutting off the Hand, or striking out a Tooth; but not the Ear.

2. Lesser, or Ordinary, Neglect of Duty, Bribery, Extortion, Affrays, Weapons
drawn, or Stroke given or offered; but Words-no-Affray. Riots, more than two
meeting, to do some unlawful Act, and doing it. Forcible Entries and Detainder:
Forcible Entry, i. e. Manu forti, with unusual Weapon, Menace of Life or Limb,
breaking Door. Barretries. Riding Armed, going Armed. Deceits and Cousenages;
Nusances; decay of Bridges and Highways; Inns and Alehouses; Perjury and
Subornation of it; Champetry, Embracery and Maintenance; Engrossing,
Fore-stalling; Regrating; in Respect of Religion, altering the Prayers,
Reviling the Sacraments, etc.

Thus far Sir Matthew Hale: Others do add; Challenging to Fight, and receiving
the Challenge, Striking in the Churchyard with a Weapon maliciously; Striking
an Officer in doing his Office; a Servant striking his Master, Dame, Overseer;
unlawful Assaulting, Imprisoning, Beating, or wounding another; chafing,
killing, or hurting his Cattle; breaking or entering into his House, or Land,
cutting, spoiling, eating up, or treading the Grass or Corn; breaking the
Walls, digging, or carryhing away his Earth or Coal; felling, cutting or
breaking Hedge or Trees; carrying away his Wife, Son and Heir, Ward, etc.
Unlawful Arresting his goods or Cattle, breaking or cutting his Sluices;
Shearing his Sheep, letting the Water out of his Mill-pond, beating his Servant
so as to hinder his Work; pro curing to take away unlawful Corn growing; or rob
any Orchated or Gardens, or break or cut away any Hedge, Pale, Rails, etc. pull
up or take away any Fruit Trees; cut or spoil any Wood, Under-woods, Poles,
Trees standing, (not being Felony) unlawfully breaking into any Ground,
enclosed for Deer, or hunting, taking, or killing (in the Night) any Deer or
Comes; conspiring to Indict another unjustly for an Offense, whereof he is
lawfully acquitted; devising and spreading any false News and Seditions;
Libelling and promoting any scandalous Writing; slandering one with such Words
as Traitor, Felon, Thief, Robber, etc. Selling that which is not a Man's own;
or false and deceitful Wares, or playing with false Dice; a Miller changing his
Grist; Misfeasance by Nuisance; as stopping a Ditch, to the drowning of my
Ground; over-riding my Horse; disturbing me in my way, office, burial, etc.
stopping of my Lights, laying blocks in the Highway; watering Hemp or Flax in
any common River, Stream or Pond; getting Goods by counterfeit Letters,
Forg-ing Deeds, Testaments, etc. going Armed in an unusual manner; Three, or
more, coming together with intent violently to commit an unlawful Act, as to
beat, wound, pull down, etc. it is a Rout; if they do it, a Riot; if they meet
only; it is an unlawful Assembly; stirring up another to do such an Act; an
Affray made in disturbance of the Peace; divulging Prophesies to disturb the
Realm, if charged within six Months; making forcible entry into Lands, and
detaining them forcibly; one under the degree of Knight, above 15, Required by
a Justice to Suppress a Riot, and refusing.

Note, Some of these may be reduced to some of the former Heads; and others
fall under the Consideration of Common Pleas.

Note, Again the Penalties are as follows: 1. For Counterfeiting Coin,
Drawing and Hanging. 2. In other Treasons, Drawing, Hanging and Quartering. 3.
For Women, Drawing and Burning. 4. For Peteit-Treason, The Man Hanged, the
Woman Burned. 5. For Felony, Hanging. 6. For Petit-Larceny, Whipping, and
Forfeiting of Goods. 7. For Death, per Infortuniam, forfeiture of Goods. 8. For
Death, se defendendo, Forfeiture of Goods. 9. For Misprision of Treason,
Forfeiture of Goods, and perpetual Imprisonment. 10. For Trespasses, various,
sometimes Fine, sometimes Imprisonment, sometimes good Behavior, Whipping,
Amends, etc.


In the next place are considerable, 1. The Jurisdiction, or Court, viz. the
King's Bench, Jail-delivery, Oyer and Terminer, Assizes, Justices of Peace,
Sheriff, Coroner, Court Leet. 2. The means of bringing Capital Offenders to
Trials, which are, 1. By Appeal. 2. By Appover. 3. Indictment.
3. Process. 4. Arraignment. 5. Demeanor of the Prisoner, viz. Whether he
stands Mute, or Answers. 6. Pleas, which are either Declinatory, or Pleading,
etc.


2. Common Pleas. wherein are considerable,

1. Possessions, viz. Hereditaments; or Chattels, Real, or Personal.

2. Wrongs, viz. Trespasses upon the Case, Disturbance, Nuisance, Deceit; real
wrongs, as Discontinuance, Ouster, Intrusion, Abatement, Disseisin, etc.
Rescons, Replevin, Denier, Usurpation, etc.

3. Writs, Real or Personal, viz. Praecipe, si fecerit te Securum, etc.

Concerning which I have much more to say, but am afraid of Surfeiting the
Press, or swelling the Volume, or VVriting Impertinently, and countenancing a
Litigious Reader.

CHAP. VIII. Of Heraldry.
PRinces are generally looked upon as People of a more Effeminate Spirit, and
less studious than others; as if their Supremacy of Power and Honor had
betrayed them to such a Dissolusion of their natural Wit and Briskness, that
they were not fit for any thing of Ingenuity and Prudence of Invention in the
Managery and Conduct of their Great Business; Yet we find them sometimes
beating their Thoughts upon the Anvil, to find out, and devise proper Methods
for the Encouragement and Reward of their Deserving Subjects.

We shall present the Reader with a short Account of the Peerage, or Degrees of
Nobility of England:

1. Dukes are created by Patent, Cincture of Sword, Mantle of State, Imposition
of a Cap, and Coronet of Gold on their Heads, and a Verge of Gold in their
Hands.

2. Marquesses, first governors of Marches and Frontier Countries, are Created
by a Cincture of a Sword, a Mantle of State, Imposition of a Cup of Honor,
with a Coronet, and Delivery of a Charter or Patent.

3. Earls are created by the Cincture of a Sword, Mantle of State, put upon him
by the King himself, a Cap and a Coronet put upon his Head, and a Charter in
his Hand. They are styled by the King Consanguinii nostri, our Cousins; and may
use the Style of Nos: (but so may Viscounts too.) All Earls are Local, except
the Earl-Marshal of England, who is also Officiary; and the Earl Rivers, who is
denominated not from the Place, but Family.

4. Viscounts are so made by Patent.

5. Barons (so called from Baron or Varon, Vir in Spanish) are made by Writ,
and called thereby to sit in the Higher House of Parliament, but most usually
by Patent. The Earls Palatines and Earls Marches of England had anciently their
Barons under them; and in Cheshire there are still such Barons; But these not
holding immediately from the King (as the Bishop of Man under the Earl of
Darby) are no Peers.

The Head of the Barony is some Castle or chief Seat of the Noble Man, which is
not to be divided amongst Daughters (if there be no Son) but must defcend to
the eldest Daughter. All the Lords of England are Feudatories to the King,
swearing Fealty, and doing Homage to him.

Their several Titles are thus. A Duke has the Title of Grace, and may be
styled Most High, Potent and Noble Prince; a Marquess, Most Potent, and Noble
Lord: But so may Earls and Viscounts also. A Baron, Right Noble Lord. Their
Coronets differ thus:

A Baron has six Pearls upon the Circle: A Viscount has the Circle of Pearls
without number: An Earl's Contronet has the Pearls raised upon Points and
Leaves low between. The Marquess, a Pearl, and a Strawberry-leaf round, of
equal height: And a Duke's Coronet, only Leaves without Pearls. Note, That the
Dukes of the Blood Royal bear a Coronet of Crosses, and Flower-de-luce, which
is the same with that of the Prince of Wales, and his is the same with the
Kings, the Arches, Globe, and Cross, on the top of the King's Crown.

Their Parliamentary Robes are thus distinguished: A Baron has but two Guards
on him Mantlet, or short Cloak; a Viscount two and a half; an Earl three; a
Marquess three and a half, and a Duke four; Also the Mantle of a Duke,
Marquess, and Earl, is faced with Ermin; that of a Viscount and Baron with
plain white Fur.

Their Marks of State are thus. A Duke may have in all places out of the King's
Presence, a Cloth of Estate hanging down, within half a Yard of the Ground; so
may his Duchess, and her Train born up by a Baroness; and no Earl to wash with
a Duke, without the Duke's Pleasure. A Marquess may have a Cloth of Estate,
reaching within a Yard of the Ground, and that in all Places out of the
Presence or the King or a Duke; and his Marchioness to have her Train borne by
a Knight's Wife; and no Viscount to wash with a Marquess, but at his Pleasure.
An Earl also may have a Cloth of Estate without Pendants, but only Fring, and a
Countess may have her Train borne up by a Gentlewoman, out of the Presence of
her Superiors, and in her Presence by a Gentleman. A Viscount may have a Cover
of Assay holden under his Cup, while he drinks; but no Assay taken, as Dukes,
Marquesses, and Earls may have, and have a Travers in his own House; and a
Viscountess may have her Gown borne up by a Woman, out of the Presence of her
Superiors, and in their Presence by a man. A Baron may have the Cover of his
Cup holden underneath, whilst he drinks, and a Baroness may have her Gown
borne up by a Man, in the Presence of a Viscountess.

All Dukes eldest Sons are born as Marquesses, and the younger as Lords, with
the addition of their Names; as Lord Thomas, Lord John, etc. A Marquess's
eldest Son is called Lord of a Place, and the younger Sons, as Lord Thomas,
Lord John, etc.

And Earl's eldest Son is born as a Viscount, and shall go as a Viscount, and
shall have as many Powderings as a Viscount; so their younger Sons are said to
be born as Barons, but shall go after all Barons, and before all Baronets.

An Earl's eldest Son is called Lord of a place, and all his Daughters Ladies;
but his youngest Sons are not Lords. A Viscount's eldest Son is no Lord, nor
his Daughters Ladies and therefore the eldest Sons, and the eldest Daughter of
the first Viscount of England is said to be the first Gentleman, and
Gentlewoman without Title in England; yet a Viscount's eldest Son is said to be
born a Baron.

6. The next Degree to Barons are Baronets, which is the lowest Degree of Hoour
that is Hereditary. An Honor, first instituted by King James, An. 16 11. given
by Patent to a Man and his Heir, Males of his Body, lawfully begotten; for
which, each one is obliged to pay in the Exchecquer so much oney as will, for
three Years, at Eight Pence per Diem, pay 30 Foot Soldiers, to serve in the
Province of Vlster, in Ireland; which Sum amounts to 1095 l. which, with Fees,
does commonly arise tp 1200 l. Baronets have Precedence before all Knights,
except Knights of the Garter, Knights, who are Privy-Counsellors, and Knights
Banorets, made under the King's Banner, or Standard, displayed in an Army Royal
in open War, and the King personally present, or the Prince of Wales. Baronets
have the Privilege to bear a Canton of their Coat of Arms, or in a whole
Scutcheon, the Arms of Vlster, viz. In a Field Argent a Hand Gules: Also in the
King's Armies, to have place in the Gross, near the King's Standard, with some
other particular for their Funerals. The whole Number of Baronets are not to
exceed 200 at one and the same time; after which Number completed, as any one
for want of Heirs, come to be extinct, the Number shall not be made up by new
Creations, but be suffered to diminish, as appears by their Patent. No Honor
is ever to be created between Baronets and Barons.

The word Knight is derived from the German word Knecht, signifying Originally
a lusty Servitor. The Germans, by public Authority. bestowed on their young
Men, able to manage Arms, a Shield and a Javelin, as fit for Martial Service,
and to be a Member of the Commonwealth, accounted befoe but a part of a Family;
and such a young Man publicly allowed, they called Knetcht; from whence we had
our Institution of Knighthood.

The thing Knight is at this Day signified in Latin, French, Spanish, Italian,
and also in High and Low Dutch Tongues, by a word that properly signifies an
Horseman, because they were wont to serve in War on Horseback, and were
sometimes in England called Radenhyts, id est, Riding Soldiers, the Latin
Milites, according to the common Law.

1. Knights of the Garter, so called, because the Garter is an Emblem of
Concord or Combination; to prevent all Sinister Interpretation whereof, the
King commanded that Motto or Impress to be wrought on the Garter, Honi Scit,
qui Maly Pence. This Honorable Company was anciently a College or Corporation
of 25 Companions, called Knights of the Garter; 14 secular Canons or Priests;
26 poor Knights, who had an Allowance for their Prayers to God, and St. George
of Cappadocia; and a Sovereign Cuardian, viz. the Kings; a Prelate; a Prelate
of the Garter, and a Chancellor, viz. the Bishops of Winchester and Salisbury;
a Register, of late, the Dean of Windsor; a King at Arms, an Usher, a College
in the Castle of Windsor, and the Chapel of St. George.

Their Garter is Blue, decked with Gold, Pearl and Precious Stones, and a
Buckle of Gold, to be worn daily on the left Leg, upon pain of forfeiting 10
Shillings; their Habit is a Surcoat, a Mantle, a high Black Velvet Cap, a Gold
Collar, composed of Roses, enamelled Red, within a Garter, enamelled Blue; when
they wear not their Robes, they are to wear an Escutchion of the Arms of St.
George, viz. A Cross with a Garter, and a Star. Eight Emperors have been of
this Order, 27 Foreign King, etc. None convict of Heresy, Treason or
Cowardice, can be of this Order.

2ly. Knights of the Bath (for we pass over Knights, Baronets, as absolute) are
so called from their Bathing, used before they were created. The first of this
sort were made by Henry IV. A. 1399. They are now commonly made at the
Coronation of a King or Queen, or Creation of a Prince of Wales. They wear a
Scarlet Ribbond Belt-wise. They are still made with much Ceremony, too long
here to be described.

3ly. Knights Batchelors, Quasi Bas Chevaliers, ( Equites Aurati, from the Gilt
Spurs, usually put upon them) Knights of low degree. These were anciently made
by Jirding with a Sword and Gilt Spurs, and was bestowed only upon Sword Men,
for their Military Services, and was reputed an Excellent and Glorious Degree,
and a noble Reward for Courageous Persons; but of late being made more common,
and bestowed upon Gownmen; contrary to the nature of the thing it is become of
less Reputation. They are made thus; The Person kneels down, the King with a
drawn Sword touches him on the Shoulder, saying, Sois Chevalier au Nom de
Dieu, and the Advance Chevalier. A Knight being to suffer Death, is first
ungirt, his Sword taken away, his Spurs cut off, his Gantlet plucked off, and
his Coat of Arms reversed.

4ly, Esquires, in French, Escuyers, Scutigeri, Armigeri, so called, because
either they bo^^ a Shield before the King, or some of the Nobles in War, or
else because they bear a Coat of Arms, or both; and they are, 1. All younger
Sons of Viscounts and Barons; all Sons of Earls, Marquesses and Dukes. 2.
Esquires of the King s Body. 3. Eldest Sons of younger Sons of Barons, etc. 4.
Esqui^es Created, by putting about their Necks a Collar of sses, and bestowing
on them a pair of Silver Spurs. 5. Persons in Superior Public Office, are
reputed Esquires, viz. Sergeants at Law, Justices, Mayors, Counselors,
Batchelors of Divinity, Law or Physic, High Sheriffs, etc. 5ly, Gentlemen are
such, whose Parents have always carried Coat of Arms, etc.


CHAP. IX. Improvements in the Military Art.
THAT we may not leave any considerable Art untouched, we shall say a little of
the Advancement made in the Art of destroying Peoples Lives; not by secret
Plots or Villainous Poisons, or Devilish Witchcraft, the Sciences of Hell, and
the Philosophy of Devils; but in a Military, Open and Hostile manner; by the
Art of a Public and Lawful War: And this likewise seems to have received much
Addition and Improvement by the Ingenioso's of the last Ages: Though perhaps in
Fire-darts the Ancients were as ingenious as we, as I shall take notice
afterward.

1. Friar Bacon is supposed to be the first Inventer of Gunpowder, as is
gathered out of his Epistle ad Parisiensen; where speaking of the secret Works
of Nature and Art, he has these Words, In omnem distantiam quam volumus
Possumus artificialiter, componere Ignem, combruentem ex sale Petrae, and
aliis; which alia, as Dr. Wallis saw it in a Manuscript Copy of the said Roger
Bacon, in the Hands of Dr. Langbain, late Provost of Queen's College, were
Sulphur and Carbonum Pulvis; concerning which, after a while, he further adds,
Praeter hac sunt alia stupendia Nature, etc. that is of Saltpeter, and other
Matters, viz. Sulphur, and the Dust of Coal; he could make Fire that should
burn at what distance he pleased; and further, that with the same Matter he
could make Sounds like Thunder, and Corruscations in the Air, more dreadful
than those made by Nature: For (says he) a little of this Matter rightly
fitted, tho not bigger than ones Thumb, makes a horrible Noise, and shows a
violent Corruscation, which may be ordered many ways, whereby a City or Army
may be destroyed -- the Fire breaking forth with an unspeakable Noise, -- which
are wonderful things, if a Man knew exactly how to use it in due Quantity and
Matter. Whence it is plain he either invented or knew Gunpowder, and in all
Probability it was invented here at Oxford, where he made the rest of his
affrighting Experiments: And that out of his Works, Constantine Ancklitzen of
Friburg, or Bertholdus Swartz, and the rest of the Improvers, in all likelihood
might have their pretended Inventions. Dr. Plot's Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire, c.
9. Par. 40. etc.

2. Thucidides says, that those that besieged the Platenensis, when Engines
would do no good, they fell to Fireworks; for casting about the Wall Bundles of
Stuff, and throwing in Fire, Brimstone and Pitch, they burnt the Wall; whence
arose such a Flame, that until that time no Man ever saw the like. Heron
teaches, that in burning of the Walls, after you have made a hole through, you
must put Wood of the Pinetree under, and anoint them with dry Pitch, and
powdered Brimstone together, with Tar or Oil, and set this on Fire. And
elsewhere he teaches to burn with a Pot; take an earthen Pitcher, and bind it
about with Plates of Iron on the outside, and let it be full of Small-coal; let
there be a hole about the bottom to put in the Bellows; for when the coals take
Fire, by sprinkling on ov Vinegar, Piss, or any other sharp Matter, the Walls
are broken. Vegetius teaches what combustible Matter must be used; and he
uses burning Oil, Hards, Brimstone, Bitumen. Burnign Arrows are shot in
Cross-bows into the Enemies Ships; and these being smeared over with Wax, Pitch
and Resin, they quickly fire the Decks, with so many things that afford Fuel to
the Fire.

3. Ammianus Marcellinus described Fire-Darts, a king of Weapon made after such
a fashion: It is an Arrow of Cane, joined with many Irons between the Shaft and
the Head, and they are made hollow after the fashion of a Woman's Distaff, in
the midst of it, it has many small holes, and in the very hollow of it, is put
Fire with some combustible Matter, and so it is easily shot forth of a weak
Bow; for a Bow that is strong, puts out the Fire; and there is no means to put
it out, but by casting on Dust or Lees of Oil. Livy, Some came with burning
Torches, others carrying Tow, Pitch, and Fire Darts; and the whole Army shined
as if it were all in Flames; but in the concave part of this Dart there was
Glue and Fuel, for Fire not to be extinguished, of Colophonia, Brimstone,
Saltpeter, all mingled with Oil of Bays. Others say, with Oil of Petre,
Ducks-grease, the pith of the Reed of Ferula, Brimstone; and, as others think,
with Oil, Tallow, Colophonia, Camphire, Rosin, Tow. The old Warriors called
this an Incendiary Composition: But in Compositions for Arrows and Darts, that
they might burn the more vehemently, they put melted Varnish, Printer's-Oyl,
Retreoleum, Turpentine, made up with the sharpest Vinegar, pressed close, and
dried at the Sun, and wrapped over with Tow, and with sharp Irons to defend it,
wrought together, like to a bottom of Yarn: All which, at last, only passing
over one hole, and smeer'd with ^olophon and Brimstone.

4. There are certain Aeolij Sclopi, or VVind-Muskets, which some have devised
to shoot bullets without Powder, or any thing else but Wind or Air, compressed
in the bore of it, or injected by a Spring, and these, they say, discharge with
as much Force, as others with Powder. Hist Man. Arts. c. 3. p. 34.

CHAP. X. Improvements in Architecture.
THE Art of Building is accounted Liberal, and the Architect himself had need
to be indifferently skilled in Philosophy, though the Carpenter and Mason must
be content to go in the number of Mechanics: And though every Age has had
somewhat to boast of in the Excellence of their Buildings, yet still the last
has had room enough left for Employment of their Wits, and Improvement of the
Art.

1. The Walls of Babylon: This City was Seated on the Banks of the River
Euphrates, which ran through the midst of it, over which Semiramis built a
Bridge of a Mile long, being both strong and stately; each Stone being bound
together with clips of Iron, fastened with melted Lead. Nebuchadnezzar built
there a stately Palace, where he raised Stoneworks like Moutains, which he
planted with all manner of Trees: He made also Pensile Gardens, hanging, as it
were in the Sky, borne upon Arches, four Square, each Square containing 400
Foot, filled above with Earth, wherein grew all sorts of Trees and Plants; the
Arches were built one upon another, even to fifty Cubits high; he likewise made
Aqueducts for watering these Gardens; he erected an Image of Gold in the Plain
of Dura, 60 Cubits high, and 6 broad. The Compass of the VValls were 365
Furlongs, or 46 (some say 60) Miles; in height 200 Cubits, and 50 Cubits in
breadth, that six Chariots might meet on the top; they were finished in one
Year, by the hands of 200000. Workmen: Semiramis caused an huge Obelisk, or
Pyramid, to be cut out of the Armenian Mountains, all of one entire Stone, 150
Foot long, and 24 Foot thick, which was four Square, and was brought to
Euphrates, and from thence to Babylon, where she Erected it. The VValls of this
City were Cemented with Lime and Bitumen. the Temple of Cusk, or Jupiter Belus,
was four Square, each side containing two Furlongs, with thick towering VValls,
and entered by Four Gates of polished Brass; in the midst thereof there was a
Tower, sometimes reckoned one of the World's wonders (which as well in breadth
as height) contained half a quarter of a Mile; upon the which were raised
eight other Towers, one above another, with easy Stairs to ascend up to the
top, where there was a Chapel, with a Sumptuous Bed, and a Table of Gold. In
the top of this Chapel were placed three golden Statues; one of Jupiter 40 Foot
long, the other of Ops, the Third of Juno. Treasure of Times, l. 2. c. 12. And
Burton's Surprising Mir. p. 199.

2. The Colossus of the Sun which was at Rhodes; it was the Figure of a Man
composed of Brass, of an incredible bigness, in height like a mighty Tower, so
that it can hardly be imagined how it was raised, and made in that manner. It
contained 70 Cubits in height, and was 12 Years in making, it cost 300
Talents. It fell by an Earthquake, after it had stood 66 Years; few Men could
embrace one of its Fingers, the least of which was greater than any Man
whatsoever; standing with his two Legs striding over an Haven, between which
Ships might pass, with their Masts and Sails up, In the Year 600, a Jew bought
this Image as it lay on the Ground, and loaded 900 Camels with the Brass
thereof. Ibid.

3. The Pyramids of Egypt, whereof Three were most Celebrated, situated on the
South of Memphis, and on the West of Milus; it is related, that for Erecting
them, there were 360000 Men employed for 20 Years together: The largest of them
is situate on the top of a Rocky Hill, which rises an hundred Foot above the
Plain: It was built for the Sepulcher of Chcops, an Egyptian King: Each side of
this Pyramid is 693 Foot; the whole Circumference of the Basis and Foundation,
contains 480249 sauare Feet, or 11 Acres of Ground; the height and breadth are
both the same, that is, 693 Foot; the Ascet to the Top is by degrees, the
lowermost Step is about four Foot high, and Three in breadth; the Second is
like the first, retiring inward from the first Three Feet, and so runs about
the Pyramid like the first; in the same manner is the third Row placed above
the Second, and so in order the rest, like so many Stairs rising one above
another to the top, which is about 9 Foot Square, consisting of Three Stones
only, yet large enough for 60 Men to stand upon. No Stone in the whole Building
being so little as to be drawn by any of our Carriages, yet were brought
thither from the Arabian Mountains, Ibid.

4. The Tomb of Mausolus, King of Caria, built by his Queen Artemisia. The
Stone of the whole Structure was of most curious Marble, 411 Foot in Circuit,
and 25 Cubits high, supported with 30 gallant Pillars, excellently Engraven:
This Building was open on all sides, with Arches 73 Foot wide, framed by the
most Exquisite Workmen of that Age; that ever after all Sumptuous Tombs are
called Mausoloe. It is recorded, that Artemisia, after the Death of her
Husband, lived in continual Mourning, and that she died before the work could
be fully finished, having drunken the Bones of her Husband beaten into Powder,
which she buried in her own Body, as the choicest Sepulcher she could provide
for him.

5. The Temple of Diana at Ephesus, contained 425 Foot in length, and 220 in
breadth, so artificially contrived, that it was 220 Years in furnishing; it was
founded in Lake, to prevent the Danger of Earthquakes; it had 127 Pillars of
Marble, 70 Foot in height, of which 27 were most curiously Engraven; and all
the rest of Marble Polished, each of these Pillars were erected at the Charge
of so many Kings of Asia; the Doors of the Temple were of Cypress, which after
400 Years were as fresh, as if they had been new made; the Roof was of Cedar;
the Image of Diana was made by one Camesia, some say of Ebony, others of the
Vine, having holes in it, filled with Spikenard: it was adorned with rich and
unvaluable Gifts. Is was contrived by Ctesiphon, and after it was finished, was
fired seven times, but last of all by Erostratus, who observing the Sovereign
Magnificence thereof, was resolved to burn it, to get himself a Name. Some
write, that this Temple was afterward rebuilt much more sumptuous and
magnificent than before. Ibid.

6. The Watch Tower Pharos, was built by Ptolomy Philadelphus, King of Egypt,
for the Benefit of Saylors, to guide them over the Bar of Alexandria; It was of
a wonderful height, ascended by Degrees; and having many Lanthorns on the top,
wherein Lights were burned every Night, flaming like a Beacon for Direction to
Seamen: It was erected of Marble, mavelous in curious Workmanship, and
Situate upon a Mountain, encompasse with Water. The Workman Sostratus, of
Cnidus.

7. the Idol of Jupiter Olympus, which stood in his Temple at Achaia, between
the Cities of Ellis and Pisa; this Statue was renowned as well for Artificial
Perfections, and admirable Workmanship, as for the greatness thereof, being 60
Cubits high, composed by the excellent Workman Phidias, of Gold and Ivory. Ibid.

8. The Temple of Jerusalem was built upon a Rocky Mountain, the Plain on the
Top whereof was at first scarce big enough for the Temple and Court, the Hill
being very steep, but the People bringing Earth thither, they at last made it
large enough, and with wonderful Curiosity and Labor, enclosed the Hill with a
Treble-Wall; the Foundations of the Temple were laid 300 Cubits deep, The
Stones thereof were four Cubits, the Porches were double, supported by many
stately pillars, 25 Cubits high, all of one piece of white Marble, the Tops of
them were of Cedar, so exactly wrought, as astonished the Beholders; These
Porches were 30 Cubits broad, and the compass of all was six Furlongs. The
Courts were curiously wrought, and paved with all sorts of Stones. The way to
the inward Temple was all enclosed with Stones, wrought like Lattice-work,
which were three Cubits high of curious Workmanship: To this there was an
Ascent of 14 Steps, and above, it was four square, and enclosed with a Wall by
its self, 40 Cubits high on the outside, and all covered with Stairs, to ascend
up to it; and within, it was 25 Cubits high, at the top of the 14 Stairs,
within the Wall, was a Level, compassed with a Wall of 300 Cubits, which had
Gates in it, and between the Gates were Porches, opposite to each other,
reaching to the Wall of the Treasury, supported with mighty Pillars; all the
Gates were covered with Plates of Gold and Silver, only one was covered with
Corinthian Brass, which for Beauty far excelled the other, dazzling and
surprising the Eyes of the Spectators. In every Gate were two Doors, each of
them 30 Cubits high, and 15 broad, an on each side they had Seats 30 Cubits
long, and 40 in height, each of them supported with two Pillars, 12 Cubits
thick, only the Gate which was covered with Corinthian Brass was 50 Cubits
high, and the Gates 40, more richly adorned than the rest: Lastly, the Holy of
Holies was Situate in the midst of all, and had 12 Stairs to go up to it; the
fore part of it was 100 Cubits high, and as many broad; backward it was 40
Cubics, on each side it had, as 'twere, two Shoulder, rising up in height 20
Cubits: The first Gate was 20 Cubits high, and 25 wide, and had no Doors to
show; that Heaven was always open, etc. All the fore part was gilded, and all
within was covered with the Gold; the inward part was divided into two Rooms,
whereof the first only might be seen, which was in height 90 Cubits, in length
49, and in breadth 20: Round about the Wall was a Golden Vine, whereon hung
many Clusters all of Gold, every Cluster being about six Foot long; it had
Golden Gates 55 Cubits high, and 16 broad; it had curious Hangings of the same
length, admirably wrought with Purple, Violet, and Scarlet Silk; all the
Fabric was so exquisitely and richly wrought, that it wanted no Workmanship;
for it was all covered with a Massy Plate of pure Gold, which astonished the
Beholders; the top was all set with Rods of Gold, sharp like Pikes at the ends,
lest Birds should sit thereon, and defile it. The Stones wherewith it was built
were 45 Cubits in length, six broad, and as many thick. Joseph. Hist. l. 6.

9. Rome, when first built, was but 22 Miles in compass; situated upon dainty
Hills, in a most Healthful Air; the River Tiber running by it, about 16 Miles
distant from the Sea. It was almost round in compass. The Suburbs in Process'
of Time grew so great, that Aurelian the Emperor built new Walls, which were
almost 50 Miles in compass; the Walls were adorned with 740 Turrets: And yet
again, the Suburbs in a little time grew so great, that one of them was 15
Miles long, and reached even to the Sea. And in Augustus his time, there were
numbered in Rome above 320 Thousand poor People, relieved by the Public:
Besides a great number of Bondmen; few rich Men but had 100 and some 400 a
piece: Seneca says, that the number of Inhabitants were reckoned to be at
fea^^ four Millions. There were in it 424 Temples erected to their Idol Gods.

10. There were two Capitals in Rome; the old built by Numa, the new begun by
Tarquin, Priscus, finished by Horatius Pulvillus, Consul: It was 800 Feet in
compass, almost four square; it was ascended on the South side by 100 Steps; it
would hold 8000 Men; it was covered with Brass Tiles, all gilt with Gold; there
were three Chapels in it, to one of which (viz. Jupiter's) Augustus gave 16000
pound weight of Gold, and Jewels, worth almost as much more; 12000 Talents were
spent in gilding of it. The Gates were covered with thick Plates of Gold; the
very Foundation cost Tarquinius 40000 pound weight of Silver, the Pillars of it
were cut out of a Quarry of Rich Marble, called Pentick Marble. Clark's
Descript. of Countries, p. 126.

11. The Pantheon, built by Agrippa, Son-in-Law to Augustus, was 144 Feet in
breadth, and as much in height, covered with Brass, richly gilt; burnt by
Lightning, in the Reign of Trojan, and rebuilt by Hudrian. Ibid.

12. The Temple of Peace, built by Vespasian, was 300 Foot long, and 200 broad,
was the most beautiful of all the Temples, mightily enriched with Gifts,
Statues, Pictures, and Rarities; the Vessels of the Temple of Jerusalem were
brought hither by Titus. In the time of Commodus it was burnt with Fire, either
from Heaven, or out of the Earth, upon the occasion of an Earthquake. Ibid.

13. The Baths of the Romans were infinite in Number; some paved with Silver,
and set with Rows of Pillars: Antonius his Bath had 1600 Seats of polished
Marble in it. Ibid.

14. The Appian Causey, built by Appius Claudins, Censor, reached from Rome to
Capua at first, afterward to Brundusium, was 350 Miles long, 25 Foot broad, of
Flints, hewn and laid close; and at every Miles end there were high Stones, to
tell the number of the Miles; together with Monuments, and pretty Inscriptions.
Ibid.

15. Vienna, seated on the Banks of Danubius is very large in Circuit, if you
take in the Suburbs; but the walled part not above three miles in
circumference; fairly built of Stone, and well paved; many Houses six stories
high, and some Cellars four Stories deep; but with an Adit or Tube, from the
lowest to the top, to let the Air in. Famous for many fair Churches and rich
Convents; but especially for the Cathedral Church of St. Stephen, which
contains diverse Monuments of Princes and great Persons, dark with the thickness
of the painted Glass, the Steeple and Spire remarkably high, about 465 Foot;
the Spire having very large Crockets, above a ^ard long, and adorned with
Folcage-work. In the Steeple there is a Clock, whose Case being of Wood, was in
part burnt down by Lightning, and therefore Water is always kept in this place,
to extinguish the Fire, and a Man continually watches in the place where the
Bells hang. Dr. Edw. Brown's Trav. Page 136.

I desire my Reader to stop here a little, and consider, whither (when these
pompous Structers and Towering Spires are so often checked by Divine
Providence, as deep Searches into mines and the Bowels of the Earth by strange
Damps) there be not a serious Remark and Consideration due upon the Matter.

16. Venice, the wonder of Cities, is built upon 4000 Islands, chained together
by 4000 Bridges, upon this occasion; the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and Longobards,
overflowing all Italy, the People flying to these Isles for Refuge; and
finding, the Air gentle, associated themselves, by conjoyning Bridges. The
nearest part of the Continent is 5 Miles distant; she is above 8 Miles in
circuit, 20000 Boats or Gondolaes belong to her. Her Motto is Nec Fluctu, nec
Flatu, movetur. A Man may walk in the Streets in the Winter in Silk Stockins,
and Satin Pantofloes, without being dirted. An Arm of the Seu runs through
almost every street; the Structures are magnificent and ravishing. She has 150
Churches and Monasteries. But most remarkable are, 1 st. St. Mark's-Church, of
rare Mosaic Work, very rich in Furniture; the Walls inlaid in many places with
precious Stones of diverse colors, the inside from the middle to the highest
part, glisters with Gold; the Vaults enriched with curious Pictures: The lower
part, from the Gilding to the Pavement, joined together with Tables of Marble;
the Pavement of Marble, of diverse Figures and Colors; the Seats of red
Porphyrie, the gilded Arches are sustained without, at the entrance of the
Church, by more than 300 Exquisite Pillars; on the top of this Entrance foar
great Brazen Horses, all gilded over, in a posture of running and neighing. The
Church has six Steeples, each of which being sharp pointed, has a naked Man
in white Marble upon it. Every thing within or without is adorned, has a naked
Man in white Marble upon it. Every thing within or without is adorned either
with Marble, Gold, or Precious Stones. 2dly. The Arsenal is three Miles in
compass, has above 300 Artificers perpetually at work, Arms for 200000 Men,
Galleys in the Dock 200, besides the Galeasles, and Galeons, etc. 1000 Coats of
Plate, garnished with Gold, and covered with Velvet, fit for any Prince in
Christendom. 3dly. The Treasury of St. Mark, which has enough in it to pay fix
King's Ransom, Jewels of all sorts and sizes, and Armor, all of Massie-Gold,
beset with Pearls and Precious Stones, etc. a great Iron Chest, with this
Inscription, when this Chest shall open, the whole Earth shall tremble, etc.
Ibid.


17. Grand Cairo, in Egypt, one of the greatest Cities in the World, is
situate on a most beautiful Plain, near a Mountain, called Mucatun, two Miles
from the River Nile; environed with stately Walls, and fortified with Iron
Gates; having most admirable Palaces, Colleges, Temples, Bath-Stoves; and a
famous Exchange, called Canan Halila, (where the Merchants dwell;) together
with a stately Hospital, whose yearly Revenue amounts to 200000 Pieces of Gold,
called Caraffi. It has 18000 Streets; in one of which are 60 Cooks Shops;
next, stand Shops, where delicate Waters and Drinks are sold; next, Shops,
where are diverse Confections of Honey and Sugar; next, Fruits, as Quinces,
Pomegranats, etc. then Eggs, Cheese, Pancakes, etc. afterward Artificers,
Drapers, Mercers, etc.

It has Many Suburbs; as Bed-Zuaila, a Mile and half in length, of about 12000
Families: Genseli-Talon, adorned with a most admirable Palace, and sumptuous
Temple, etc. Bell-Eloch, of near 3000 Families, a Palace and stately College;
Stage Players, and such as teach Camels, Asses and Dogs to dance, etc. Bulach,
upon the Bank of Nile, of 4000 Families, Corn-Merchauts, etc. under which you
may see about a thousand Barques upon the River, etc. Caresa, of about 2000
Families, with many Sepulchers, and stately Vaults, etc. Ibid.

18. Quinsay, once the Regal City of China, in the Heart of the Country, and
not far from the Sea; formerly an hundred Miles in compass, of large Streets,
Channels and Marketplace; 12000 Bridges; some so high, that Ships might pass
under them; on one side a clear Lake of fresh Water, one the other a great
River; 10 chief Marketplaces, encompassed with high and fair Houses, and under
them Shops of Artificers, Merchants, etc. at which Markets many Streets meet;
and at the end of which was a Guild Hall; 12 principal Trades belong to it, to
every Trade 1000 Shops, to every Shop one Master, and 10, 20, 30 or 40 Workmen.
In the Lake are two Islands; upon each of them a Palace, richly funished with
Provisions for Weddings, and other Feasts, etc. The City contains 1600000
Households, and with the Country adjoining, yields to the King 16000000 and 800
Ducats of Gold yearly, besides 6000000 of Ducats, for Custom of Salt. Ibid. p.
41. It is said to have been 3 or 400 Years ago, 10 Leagues in length, and 5 in
breadth, compassed with a Wall of 30 Leagues; so broad at the top, that 12 Men
might ride abreast upon it. Bohun's Geogr. Dict.

19. In Holland the Hague is remarkable for its curious Buildings, and for
being one of the noblest Villages in the World; the Stat-house in Amsterdam is
a vast and curious Building; and the City of Leiden is no less famous for its
fine Buildings and Physick-Garden.

20. Paris, in France, is 12 Miles in circuit, situate on the River Saine,
having about 500000 People in it, 55 Colleges; the famous Church of Nostre Dame
(which is 65 Fathom long, 24 broad, 15 high, the Steeples 34 Fathom more.) The
King's Palace, called the Louvre; a place (says Dr. Heylin) of more Fame than
Beauty, of no Elegance or Uniformity, nor otherwise Remarkable but for the vast
Gallery, begun by King Henry the IV. and the fine Gardens of the Tuilleries
adjoining to it: Yet, as I have been informed, it has been graced with this
Distick, by an ingenious Poet, whom the King rewarded abundantly for his
flattering Wit.

Non Orbis Gentem, non Vrbem Gens habet Vnam,
Vrbsve Domum, Dominum nec Domus Vlla Parem.
21. Madrid, in Spain, the King's Seat, populous, but placed in a barren Soil,
upon the River Guadarama, concerning which I find little worthy Remark; but
near to Cucuca, about 7 Leagues from madrid, is the Escurial, or Monastery of
S. Lawrence, built by Philip II. King of Spain; a Building of that
magnificence, that nothing is comparable to it. The Front toward the West is
set out with three stately Gates, the middlemost whereof leads into a very
sumptuous Temple and Monastery, where are 150 Monks, of the Order of S.
Hierome, and a College. At the four Corners are four Turtets, of excellent
Workmanship, and Majestical Height; toward the North is the King's Palace, on
the South Beautiful Galleries, on the East pleasant Gardens, etc. Heylin.

22. London, in England, is especially remarkable for the Church of S. Paul;
the Tower, the Royal Exchange, the Bridge, the Tombs at Westminster, and the
Monumental Pillar.

23. Oxford, for Christs-Church-College, the Schools and Library, together with
the Theater, which is spacious and lofty, and yet without any Pillar to support
it. Concerning which, I shall add no more, because I design Brevity, and write
to my own Countrymen.

CHAP. XI. Improvements in Mechanics, Agriculture, etc.
IT IS wonderful to observe what excellent Pieces of Handiwork have been
wrought and presented to the World, by that one little Member of Man's Body,
that Piece of Flesh and Blood, no bigger than a Palm, only branched out like a
Cinquefoyl, into five Parts; how useful it has been to our necessities, and to
what a degree of Skilfulness and Dexterity it is arrived of late Years; though
it must be confessed, That the Brain has had the chief Stroke in its Guidance
and Conduct.

1. For Boulting of Meal, Cardan describes an Invention, whereby one Man, who
turns a Wheel, and puts Meal into a Dish, and when all places are full,
gathering up the Flower and Bran that is bolted, does the work of three Men;
any ordinary Person may do it. By which means likewise none of the Meal is
lost, and the Meal is sifted exactly, and all this without fouling the House:
Moreover, the Nature of the Instrument is to make two or three sorts of Flower.

2. For Grinding of Corn, there have been several kinds of Mills invented; as
first Water-Mills, Secondly Wind-Mills of several sorts, used in Italy, France,
England, etc. which will grind 3000 pounds of Corn in an Hour; in some places
Horse-Mills are used; and of late there has been Invented an Ingenious
Instrument, made of Steel or Iron, of no great bulk, very useful for grinding
of Malt, and some say, of any other Grain; but I fear it is not bought to that
perfection yet.

3. A Gentleman in Shropshire, one Mr. Peark, had a Water running by his House
side, which served to turn his Mill, to turn his Spit, and churn Butter.

4. At Mr. Fermors, at Tusmore in Oxfordshire, is a Mill, which with one Horse
and Man (who is carried round, as it were, in a Coach-box behind the Horse)
performs at pleasure these many Offices. First, it grinds Apples the common way
for Cider. And secondly, Wheat, which it sifts at the same time into four
different Finesses. Thirdly, Oats, which it cuts from the Husk, and winnows
from the Chaff, making very good Oatmeal; and lastly, makes Mustard; and all
these it performs severally, or together, according as desired. Dr. Plot': Not.
Hist. Oxfordsh. p. 264.

5. At Sir Anthony Copes, at Hanwel, there is also a Mill erected, that does
not only grind the Corn for the House, but with the same motion turns a very
large Engine for cutting the hardest Stone, after the manner of Lapidaries; and
another for Boring of Guns: And these, either severally, or altogether, at
pleasure. Ibid.

6. At Henly in the said County, the Malt-Kills are placed in the Backs of
their Kitchen Chimneys, so that drying their Malt with Wood, the same Fire
serves for that, and all other uses of their Kitchins beside. One Philps, a
Baker, of Magdalen-Parish, Oxon, who having a very great Oven, made it plain at
the top, and plastered it over, whereon laying Malt, he dried it with the same
Fire that he heated his Oven for his Bread, and thus made the best Malt that
Oxford afforded, and of necessity the cheapest, for it cost him nothing. Ibid

7. At Caversham in Oxfordshire, they make a sort of Brick, 22 Inches long,
and about 6 broad, called Lath-bricks, by reason they are put in the places of
the Laths, or Spars (supported by Pillars) in O^sts for drying Malt, which is
the only use of them, and are not liable to the Fire, as the wooden Laths are,
and hold the Heat so much better, that being once heated, a small matter of
Fire will keep them so, which are unvaluable advantages in the Malting Trade.
Also, about Burford, they make Malt-kilns of Stone, which, beside the great
Security from Fire, these also dry the Malt with much less Fuel, and in a
shorter time than the old ones would do; insomuch, that whereas they could
formerly dry with the ordinary Kiln but two Quarters in a Day, they now dry
six, and with as little Fuel. Now, if ordinary Stone prove so advantageous, how
would the Cornish warming Stone, that will hold heat well 8 or 10 Hours? Or
Spanish Ruggiola's, which are broad Plates like Tiles, cut out of a Mountain of
red Salt, near Cardona, which being well heated on both sides, will keep warm
24 Hours? Ibid. p. 252.

8. Mr. John Dwight, M. A. of C. C. College, Oxon, has discovered the Mystery
of the Stone, or Cologne-Wares (such as Jugs, Bottles, Noggins) heretofore made
only in Germany, and has set up a Manufacture of the same, which by methods
and contrivances of his own, in three or four Years time, he has brought to
greater Perfection, than it has attained, where it has set up a Manufacture of
the same, which by methods and contrivances of his own, in three or four Years
time, he has brought to greater Perfection, than it has attained, where it
has been used for many Ages. He has discovered also the Mystery of the
Hessian-Wares, and making Vessels for Retaining the penetrating Salts, and
Spirits of the Chemists, more serviceable than those Imported from Germany.

And has found out ways to make an Earth white and Transparent, as Porcellane,
and not distinguishable from it by the Eye, or by Experiments that have been
purposely made to try wherein they disagree. To this Earth he has added the
Colors that are usual in the colored China Ware, and diverse other not seen
before.

He has also caused to be modelled, Statues of the said Transparent Earth,
which he has diversified with great variety of colors, making them of the
colors of Iron, Copper, Brass, and parti-colored, as some Achat-Stones. The
considerations that induced him to this Attempt, were the duration of this hard
burnt Earth, much above Brass or Marble, against all Air and Weather; and the
softness of the Matter to be modelled, which makes it capable of more curious
work, than Stones that are wrought with Chisels, or Metals that are Cast.

And these Arts he employs about Materials of English Growth, as the
Stone-Bottles of a Clay, in appearance like to Tobacco-Pipe-Clay, which will
not make Tobacco-Pipes, though the Tobacco-Pipe-Clay will make Bottles; so
that, that which has lain useless to the Owners, may become beneficial to
them, by reason of this Manufacture, and many hands be set on Work, and
considerable Sums of Coin Annually kept at Home by it. Dr. Plot, Ibid. p. 250.

9. The Invention of making Glasses of Stone, etc. was brought into England
first, by Seignior de Costa, a Mountferratess; the Materials used formerly were
black Flints calcined, and a white christaline Sand, with about two Ounces of
Nitre, Tartar, and Borax, to each of them. But to avoid crizelling, they have
of late used great sort of white Pebies, from the River Po in Italy, with the
aforesaid salts, but in less Proportions, of which they make a Peble Glass,
hard, durable, and whiter than any from Venice. Dr. Plot, Ibid.

10. The Great Tun of Heidleburgh, is (if not lately burnt) kept in a great
Building of the Castle joining to the Cellars, containing 204 Faiders, and odd
measure, or about 200 Tuns; instead of Hoops, it is built with large
Knee-Timber, like the Ribs of a Ship, which are painted and carved, and have
diverse Inscriptions upon them, and supported by carved Pedestals: Upon one side
of it is a handsome Staircase to ascend to the top of the Vessel; upon the top
of which is a Gallery set round with Balistars, 43 Steps high from the ground.
Dr. Brown's Travels, p. 122.

11. I shall but just mention the new sort of Boxes or Colony Hives for Bees,
first invented by Dr. Wilkins, late Bishop of Chester; the ingenious
contrivance of his Coach-Wheel, to measure the Miles, by the same Author; the
Net contrived by Sir Anthony Cope, to catch all sorts of Fish within such a
compass; the Invention of an Ingenious Hopper, to let down Oats into a Stable,
by degrees, through a Square Pipe, to avoid the encumbrance of Oat-Tubs,
serving likewise for the feeding of Swine. Ibid.

12. Sir Philip Harcourt, in Oxfordshire, has a Kitchen so strangely unusual,
that by way of Riddle, it may be called either a Kitchen within a Chimney, or a
Kitchen without one; for below it is nothing but a large Square, and Octangular
above, ascending like a Tower, the Fires being made against the Walls, and the
Smoke climbing up them, without any Tunnels, or disturbance to the Cooks; which
being stopped by a large conical Roof on the Top, goes out at Loop-holes on every
side, according as the Wind sits; the Loop-holes at the side next the Wind,
being shut with falling Doors, and the adverse side opened. Ibid. Par. 130.

13. Flat Floors, having no Pillars to support them, and whose main Beams are
made of diverse Pieces of Timber are to be seen in the Schools, but especially
in the Theater of Oxford.

14. Amongst Foreigners, the Chinese a^^ very ingenious, in making Porcellane
Ware, which they have improved to the highest Degree, by training up their
Children in the Arts of their Parents. Corduba has attained to an excellent
Skill in dressing of Leather, called thence Cordovan-Leather; the Persians, in
making Silks; the Indians, in Indigo, and dyeing of Calicuts; Bilboae, in
making of excellent tempered Blad's; Foenza, in Italy, and Holland for fine
Earthen Wares; the Venetians, in making the Treacle of Andromacus, and fine
Glasses, called thence Venice-Treacle, and Venice-Glasses, etc. PresentState of
Eng. Third Part.

15. This Art in England (of Glass-making) is improved of late to a very great
height; though we cannot bring Glasses to that perfection, for want of those
Materials, which are only to be had there, viz. two sorts of Plants, called
Jazul and Subit, out of whose ^iouified Ashes the Venice-Glasses are blown. See
more concerning this afterward in this Chapter.

16. Woollen-manufacture is the most general of England, the chief prop of our
Trade and Commerce, the chief Support of the poor. The first broad cloth (so
called, because of the broad Looms wherein it was wrought) made in England, is
said to have been made by Jack of Newbury, in the Reign of King Edward the III.
The first famous Clothiers were the Webscloths and Clutbucks in Glocestershire:
For this ingenious and profitable Art or mystery of Woollen-work, there is no
place in England more famed than the City of Norwich, which has for a long
time flourished, by making of Worsted Stuffs; which being wrought here more
curiously than elsewhere, are thence called Norwich-Stuffs; which Work has
been brought to the greater perfection, by the Industry of the Dutch and French
Families, who have been here planted for several Years. No Nation ever loses,
but gets by the Transplantation of industrious Foreigners; who by Interest
and Converse, soon become one with the people, among whom they inhabit. The
Stuffs here vended (the chief Trade whereof, as also of Stockins, is to London)
are esteemed at 100000 l. per ann. which Stuffs are under the Government of two
Companies, the Worsted-Company, and the Russel-Company. The stockings of 60000
l. per ann. but there is another Town in this County, which is called Worsted,
seems to be the first noted place, wherein these Stuffs were substantially^
made; Kidderminster, in Worcestershire, drives a great Trade, in making of
certain Stuffs, which are thence called Kidderm-Stuffs; and in the same Shire,
the City of Worcester it self; and also Malmsbury for Woollen-Cloth. In
Warwickshire, Coventry; in Lancashire, Manchester, is much enriched by the
Industry of the Inhabitants, in making Cloth of Linen and Woollen. Taunton, in
Somersetshire, drives so great a Trade in mixed and white Serges, that there are
said to be sent up weekly to London, and other places, no less than 700 pieces,
a sort of them, besides a sort of course Bays; in the making whereof there are
weekly employed no less than 3500 persons. No less does Wakefield in the West
Riding of Yorkshire; Leeds also in the same County is accounted a wealthy Town,
by reason of its clothing. Exeter, by the quantity of Serges there made,
returns to London 10000 l. a Week. Stroud, in Gloucestershire, is a Town, not
only full of rich Cloathiers, but is also particularly eminent for the Dying of
Cloths, by reason of the peculiar Quality of the Water for that Purpose:
Tewxbury also in the same County is very rich in Clothing: Likewise Sudbury in
Suffolk; Hadley, in the same County. Reading, in Berkshire, which, through the
greatness of its Trade, is a very wealthy Town; and Newbury, in the same
County. So likewise Shirbourn, in Dorsershire; and also in Essex, Colchester,
Dedham, Coxal, and other places abound in Bays, Says, and other new Drapery.
Appleby and Kendal, in Cumberland, for its great Cloth-Manufacture.

17. Among the Woollen-Manufacture of England, may be reckoned the Weaving and
Knitting of Stookings; the use of which Woven and Knit Stocking, has not been
in this Nation longer than the beginning of King James's Reign; It being very
memorable what Dr. Fuller relates of one William Rider, an Apprentice at the
Foot of London Bridge, called St. Magnes-Church; who seeing in the House of an
Italian Merchant, a pair of knit Worsted-Stockins, which he brought from
Mantua, and taking special Observation of them, made a pair exactly like them,
which he presented to William, Earl of Pembrooke, and they are said to be the
first of that sort, worn in England, and thenceforward they became more and
more in use; so that for many Years they have been very much, and are now
altogether worn, and are a great part of the Trade in most places where there
is any thing of Woollen-Manufacture, especially at Norwich; also the Isles of
Jersey and Guernsey, have a particular Name. Present State of England, Part 3.
p. 74, etc.

The Silk-Stockin-Frame, a curious Contrivance, invented by an Oxford Scholar
(as Dr. Plot tells us (was first used at Nottingham, Ibid.

The Weavers-Loom-Engine, has not been in use many Years in England,
especially the highest Improvement thereof called the Duck-Loom, brought in a
few Years since, by Mr. Crouch, a Weaver in Bishopsgate-street. Ibid.

18. Bone-Lace, which is the chief of the Ornamentals, worn in this Nation, tho
not so totally as before Needlework came in fashion; which, tho brought to
great Perfection, yet has obtained less esteem, since those of Flanders, and
the Points of de Venice, in Italy, and Lorrain, in France, came into fashion;
yet Honyton in Devonshire is a noted Town for this sort of Workmanship; as
likewise Salisbury and Marleborough, in Wiltshire; Oldney, in Buckinghamshire,
Amersham and Chesham, in the same Shire, Blandford, in Dorsetshlre; which last
place also has been famous for making of Band-strings, and now Point-Laces, it
is said, are much made there. It is observed, that the only Thread, made in
England, till within a few Years, was made at Maeidston, in Kent. Ibid.

19. The Blanketing Trade of Witney is advanced to that height, that no Place
comes near it, the chief Material whereof is Fell-wool, which they separate
into five or six sorts, viz. Long Fell Wool, Head Wool, Bay Wool, Ordinary,
Middle, and Tail Wool: Long Fell Wool they send to Taunton, etc. for making
VVorsted Stockins; of Head Wool, and Bay Wool, they make the Blankets of 12,
11, or 10 Quarters broad, and sometimes send it to Keddermincter, for making
their Stuffs, and to Evesham, etc. for making Yarn-Stockins; or into Essex, for
making Bays; of the Ordinary and Middle they make Blankets of 8 and 7 Quarters
broad;and of those, mixed with the courser Locks of Fleece-wool, a sort of Stuff
they call Duffeilds, of which, and Blankets, consists the chief Trade of
Witney. Not Hist. Oxfordsh. p. 278.

These Duffields, so called from a Town in Brabant, otherwise called Shags, or
Trucking-Cloth, are made in Pieces, about 30 Yards long, and one Yard and three
Quarters broad, and dyed F^ed or Blue, to please the Indians, with whom the
Merchants truck them for Beaver and other Furs, etc. of their best Tail Wool
aremade Blankets, called Cuts of 6 Quarters broad, which serves Seamen for
their Harnmocks; and of their worst they make VVednell for Coller-makers,
VVrappers to pack Blankets in, and Tilt-Cloths for Bargemen. Ibid.

20. The Starch is made of the shortest and worst Bran, steept in a Water,
prepared for that Purpose (by a Solution at first of Roch-Allum, about a Pound
to a Hogshead, which will last for ever after) for 10 or 14 Days, in great
Tubs; then washed through an Ofier Basket, over three other Tubs, the sour
Water of the second Tub, washing it into the first; and the sore of the third
into the second, and clear water from the Pump, washing it into the third; the
fine Flower, thus washed from the Bran, let stand in its own water for about a
week; then being settled at the bottom, it is stirred up again, and fresh
Pump-water added, and strained from its smallest Bran through a Lawn-sieve;
then being left to settle again for one day, the water is drawn off to a small
Matter; then standing two Days more, it becomes so fixed, that with a Birchen
broom they sweep the water, left at the top, up and down upon it, to cleanse it
from Filth, and then pouring it off, they wash its Surface yet cleaner, by
dashing upon it a bucket of fair Pump-water. Then being cut out of the Tubs in
great pieces, with sharp Trowels, it is boxed up in Troughs, having holes in
the bottom to drain the water from it, always putting wet Clothes between the
wood and it; within a day they take it out, lay it on cold Bricks for two Days,
and dry it over a Bakers Oven, four or five Days together, to make Powder for
Hair; but if intended for Starch, they then give it the Stove, to give it the
Starch grain. Ibid.

21. Dr. Plot speaking of the Soles he met with in Oxfordshire, he mentions
these, viz. Clay, Chalk, and others from their different Mixtures, called Maum,
Red Land, Sour Land, Stone-brask, Sandy, and Gravelly.

For Clay, it being most kindly for Wheat, it is fallowed in May, stirred in
June or July, (when Manured) their Manure is sometimes Dung, sometimes with
Sheep folded upon it: Thus it ^es till the time of sowing Wheat; in case of
weeds they give it a second stirring before the last for Sowing. In strong Clay
the sow Cone-wheat, and the next year Beans, and the next (plowing in the
Bean-brush, at All Saints) Barley; if the Land be rank, Sprat-barley; the
fourth Year it lies fallow, and then after a Summer, till they sow it with
VVinter Corn again, etc.

For Chalk-lands, when designed for Wheat, it is tilled as the Clay, only laid
in four or six furrowed Lands, and soiled with the best Mould or Dung, but half
rotten; but Barley and Vetches are the most suitable Grain, Ray-Grass, mixed
with Nonesuch, or Trefoild, are most proper for the poorest sort.

For Maumy, viz. White-clay, Chalk, and some Sand, it is commonly sown with
Wheat, Miscellan, Barley, etc. having the same Tillage, kept high in Ridges,
Lying dry and warm as the Clay; Rottennest Dung is most proper here; Pease are
best after Wheat; a smart shower presently after the Sead-time, within two
Days, is dangerous.

Red-Land is tilled before the Clay; if moist when fallowed, the better: It
requires no double stirring; and if too fine, it runs to May-weed; Horse, Cow,
and Sheepfold Dong, agree well with it, which must be plowed in; for Wheat, in
the end of July; for Barley, slater, this lies fallow every other year.

Sour-Land, if of strong Swarth, is Fallowed, when the Sun is hottest; if it
has little Skin on the back, it is either left for cooler Tillage, or plowed
early in the Year: The sheepfold, and Pigeons Dung, and Malt Dust, is the
most proper Manure for this cold Land. It must not be stirred, or sown, very
wet; Wheat or Miscelan is a proper Grain, and Barley for Change; sometimes
Pease; if too wet, Rath-ripe Vetches.

Stone-brask, viz. a light, lean Earth, and a small Ruble-stone, or sour-ground
mixed with it; if swardy, it is Fallowed pretty late; if not sheepfold, dung in
Winter with some Hay-seeds, will make it Grassie, or else old Thatch, strawy
Dung, Shovellings in the Spring will assist the Grass: This is necessary,
because if not swardy, when Fallowed, they bring Money-wort, May-weed, etc.
This done in September, October, November, December, they fallow them as their
Swards direct; and if in either of the two last Months, called Winter-Fallows,
and are never stirred at all, but Sowed with Barley upon the second Earth, in
the beginning of Sowing, because they work most kindly, and will bear cold
Weather better, than when more finely Tilled. They lie every other Year Fallow
(as other Land) except where they fall among the Pease-Quarter, and Barley
following after Pease; they lie but one in four Years. When very poor, they are
Sown with Ray-Grass, Trefoil, etc. When not Swardy enough, nor callow, or light
enough, they are streak-fallowed, one Furrow Plowed, and the other left, to
keep them from Scorching.

Stoney-Land is Tilled, Manured, and Sown much in the same manner as the Clay,
adding the advantage of Chalking it; bearing excellent Wheat, Barley, Pease,
for some Years; but according to the Proverb, Chalkt Land makes a rich Father,
but a poor Son; at last it is only fit for Ray-Grass with Trefoil, etc.

Sandy, and gravelly light Ground, has much the same Tillage for Wheat and
Barley, as Clay, etc. only they require many times but two Plowings, especially
for Wheat, except Weedy, and then it must be stirred. It Is most agreeable
Grains are white, red, and mixed Lammas-Wheat, and Miscellan; and then after a
years Fallow, common or Rath-Ripe Barley, sometimes Winter-Vetches; half rotten
Dung is best.

Twelve Loads of Dung are accounted sufficient for common Field-Acre, Twenty
for a Statute-Acre: however, that Land is Soiled first and best, which is to
bear three Crops; some Sow Barley first, then Pease, or Beans, and Wheat last;
alleging, that Wheat following the Dung Year, on their best Land, is the more
liable to smut. In some places they use Chippings of Stone, and Woollen-Rags,
for Manure.

Two Bushess of Wheat and Vetches, two and a half of Barley, Oats and Pease,
and a Quarter of Beans is quantity enough for poor Ground; for the Richer a
third part more of each; they choose constantly Corn out of a Soil of a
different Nature, and Rich in its kind.

Against Smut, they both Brine and Lime their Corn, or else sowred strawed
Wheat: To prevent Mildews, they Sow pretty early, or else the long-bearded
Corn. Sometimes they Sow the single Cast, viz. at one bought; sometimes the
double cast, twice in a place. The Hackney-Bridle is two casts on a Land at one
time. In the Chittern Country they Sow Hentings, viz. before the Plow.

For Instruments they use the Foot and Wheel Plough, Harrows of 4, 5, or 6 Bars
a piece, each Bar armed with five Tines. Mr. Sacheverel contrived a way of
Howing the Earth from the Turf, as soon as a little dried; thereby first laying
his Ground even, and then Sowing it; by which means the Seed fell, and came up
in all Parts alike, and a less quantity served the turn. Sometimes they use a
Beetle, sometimes a weighty Roll, round, or Octangular. Mr. Sacheverel invented
one neither smooth nor angled, but notched deep and pretty broad; some a Roll
of a large diameter, and weighty, set the whole Length with edged Plates of
Steel, prominent from the Body of the Roll about an Inch and a half, for the
quicker cutting of Turf. Dr. Plot.

22. I shall conclude this Chapter with some Observations Extracted from a new
Piece, Entitled, An Essay upon Projects, written by that Ingenuous Mr. Foe. --
Invention of Arts, with Engines and Handicraft Instruments, for their
Improvement, requires (says the aforesaid Author) a Chronology as far back, as
the Eldest Son of Adam, and has to this Day afforded some new Discovery in
every Age. The Building of the Ark by Neah, so far as you will allow it a
humane Work, was the first Project I read of. The Building of Babel was a right
Project. The Use of the Lodestone at Sea, and the use of Gunpowder and Guns,
were very considerable Discoveries. For Handicraft Instruments, I know none
owes more to true Genuine Contrivance, without borrowing from any former use,
than a Mechanic Engine contrived in our time, called a Knitting Frame, which
built with admirable Symetry, works really with a very happy success, and may
be observed by the Curious, to have a more than ordinary Composition, for which
I refer to the Engine it self, to be seen in every Stockin-Weaver's Garret. The
Water-houses, for supplying of the City of London, and since that the New
River, both very considerable Undertakings, and perfect Projects, adventured on
the risque of success. After the Fire of London, the Contrivance of an Engine
to quench Fires, was a Project the Author was said to get well by. About the
Year 1680. began the Art and Mystery of Projecting to creep into the World.
Prince Rupert, Uncle to King Charles II. gave great Encouragement ot that part
of it that respects Engines, and Mechanical Motions. And Bishop Wilkins added
as much of the Theory to it, as Writing a Book could do.

The Prince has left us a Metal called by his Name; and the first Project upon
that was, as I remember, casting of Guns of that Metal, and boring them, done
both by a peculiar Method of his own, which died with him, to the great loss of
the Undertaker, who to that purpose had, with no small Charge, Erected a
Water-Mill at Hackney-Marsh, known by the Name of the Temple Mill. After this
we saw a Floating Machine, to be wrought with Horses, for the towing of great
Ships, both against Wind and Tide, and another for the raising of Ballast,
which, as unperforming Engines, had the Honor of being made, exposed, tried,
and laid by, before the Prince died.

The Project of the Penny-Post, so well known, and still practiced, I cannot
omit, nor the Contriver Mr. Dockwra, who had the Honor to have the injury done
him in that Assair, re-pair'd in some measure, by the Public Justice of the
Nation. For a farther account, see the Essay upon Projects, Writ by the
Ingenuous Mr. Foe.

CHAP. XII. Improvements in Fowling, Fishing, Hunting.
THese are Arts both for Pleasure and Profit, and therefore upon a double Score
worthy an Ingenious Improvement; and accordingly have had it from time to time;
of which I shall give only a short touch for Emulation sake, and no more.

1. Fr Fowling, Cardan advises thus: Nux Vomica will stupifie Birds, if you
mingle it with their Meat. I remember I took Crows in my Hand, when I had
powdered that Nut, and mingled it with Flesh. If small Birds eat Corn steeped
in Wine-Lees, and the Juice of Hemlock, or Aqua-vitae, or only in the Lees of
stronger Wine, or in the Decoction of white Helebore, with an Ox-Gall, this
will astonish them. Those Birds that Fly in Flocks to it, are catched in
Flocks; as Partridges, but Geese more than they, but chiefly Ducks. When you
would make some Tame of the wild kind, you must cut their wings, and make a
Trench about the Waters, and feed them there with Plenty of pleasant Food. For
Ducks, amongst other things, that is the best which we call Sargum. In the
Night, when the tame Ones cry, the wild Ones will comethither to Meat: For all
Creatures agree in four things; they all seek for Meat, all seek for Pleasure,
all Fight, and all are in Fear; and here they understand one the other.
Wherefore in your Nets you shall sometimes catch a Thousand Ducks at once.
This may seem strange, yet it is true, and there is no bette: way of Fowling;
you must choose tame Ducks that are most like the wild Ducks in their Color.
Cardan de Subtilit. But this Art of Decoying is much Improved of late Years.

2. There are other ways of Fowling, which are well known: in some places they
use low Belling; that is, they go about in the Night, with a Net in one hand,
to catch Birds in, a Candle to draw the Birds toward the Light into the Net, a
Club to beat the Hedges, and drive the Birds out, and a little Bell, which they
ring continually, to drown the noise of the Fowlers. In other places they use a
Stalking Horse, especially for the killing of Woodcocks, etc.

3. For Fishing. Sir Philip Harcourt in Oxfordshire, has so contrived his
Fish Ponds, that the Stews not only feed one another, and may be served by
letting the Water of the upper Ponds out into the lower; but by a side Ditch
cut along by them, and places out of each, may be any of them emptied, without
letting the Water into, or giving the least disturbance to any of the rest.
Plot's Not. Hist. Oxford. c. 9. p. 234.

4. Dr. Wilkins, when Warden of Wadham College, contrived an Engine for Fish,
of but few Gallons of Water.

5. Cardan has taught us an Ingenuous way to catch Fish thus: Fishes are taken
with Baits; now the Baits must have four Properties; they must smell well, for
this will make them come from remote places. Such things are Anniseeds, Juice
of Panace, and Cumin is best of them all: They must taste well, that they may
the more desire them, and they may be thereby deceived; such are Blood,
especially Hogs Blood, Cheese, Bread, principally of Wheat; Butterflies, the
best are golden-coloured. The Bait must Fume to the Head, that it may make them
drunk by its violent quality, as Aqua-vitae, Lees of Wine. Last of all, it
must be Stupifactive, to make them senseless. Such are Marigold-Flowers, that
are to be had new every Month; for this Herb, whose Flowers are yellow, cut in
pieces, will make great Fish astonished in one Hours time. So is Lime, for
though it corrects Water, yet it kills Fish. So is the Juice of all the
Tithymals, and both the Nux Vomica's, called Nux Metelli, or the sleeping Nut.
But nothing is better than that Fruit which is brought from the East, and is
called Coculus Indicus. It is a black Berry, like unto a bay Berry, but smaller
and rounder. Our Composition to take Fish is tried to be certain. Take a
quarter of an Ounce of Oriental Berries, Cumin-seed, and Aqua-vitae, of each a
sixth part of an Ounce, Cheese one Ounce, VVheat-meal 3 Ounces, make little
Pellats, beating all together. Cardan de Subtilitate.

6. For Hunting it is distinguished according to the Animals we pursue, or
those we hunt with: Those we pursue are Deer, Hares, Conies, Foxes, wild Bores,
Badgers, Otters, and sometimes Fowl. Those Creatures we hunt with, are Hounds,
Greyhounds, Beagles, and other Dogs, trained up for particular Games. In
Sussex is much used the hunting of Moles. Hawks are used for the hunting of
Fowl, and Ferrets for Conies, but what Improvements have been made in these
Arts, I leave the Curious to enquire.

CHAP. XIII. Curiosities in Writing, Cyphering, etc.
THE Art of handling the Pen is much more Gentile and Liberal, than that of
handling the Spade; and therefore no wounder, if we find more strokes in Wit
and Ingenuity in the one than in the other. I intend not now to speak much of
Brachygrphy, tho an excellent late Invention of Contracting Words and Sentences
into short Marks and Signatures, nor the Art of writing well, and giving
Letters their due and decent Mathematical Proportions, and Flourishes; but of
the Subtilty and Finenss of Delineation and Cyphering.

1. There was one in Queen Elizabeth's time that wrote the Ten Commandments,
the Creed, the Paternoster, the Queen's Name, and the Year of the Lord, within
the Compass of a Penny, and gave a pair of Spectacles of such an artifical
making, that by the help thereof she did plainly and distinctly discern every
Letter. Dr. heylin 's Life of King Charles I.

2. One Francis Alumnius was so notable in the Mystery of Writing, that he
wrote the Apostle's Creed, and the 14 first Verses of St. John's Gospel, in the
compass of a Penny, and in full Words: This he did in the presence of the
Emperor Charles the V. and Pope Clement VII. as is related by Genebrand in his
Chronology, and Simon Mayolus out of him, who said, he had the same Miracle at
home in his keeping. Hist. Man. Arts. Chapter 3. Page 34.

3. The Effigies of King William and Queen Mary, with the Lord's Prayer, the
Creed, and Ten Commandments; the Magnificat, the Prayer for the King and Queen,
the Prayer for the Royal Family, the Prayer for the Clergy and People, the
Prayer of St. Chrysostom, and the Blessing. Engraven within a Circle two Inches
and a half Diameter. Engraven and Sold by John Sturt, in Cranes-Court, in the
Old-Change, near St. Paul's. Price 2 d.

4. An Elegy on the Death of our most Gracious Sovereign lady Queen Mary,
engraven with so small a Circumference, that it may be set in Rings or Lockets.
Engraven and Sold by -- and set in Rings or Lockets by Thomas Sturt.

5. Mr. Mason, the Author of a New Shorthand, is also very famous, in writing
many things in a little Compass.

6. The written Picture of His Majesty King Charles the I. in St.
John's-College Library, taking up the whole Book of Psalms in the English
Tongue; and the written Picture of King James the I. and the Arms of England,
taking up the whole Book of Psalms in Latin, in the Hands of Mr. Morehead,
Rector of Bucknel, are pretty curiosities, and much admired. Dr. Plot's Not.
Hist. Ox. p. 276.

7. The Polygraphy, or Writing-Engine, invented by Mr. George Ridpath, a Native
of Scotland, that one Man may with great Facility write two, four, six, or more
Copies of any one thing upon so many different Sheets of Paper at once, is of
extraordinary Life for expediting Business, whereof many Copies is required,
either in Affairs of Law, State, or otherwise, and might be very useful
likewise to Merchants and Tradesmen, or any others, who keep Copies of their
Letters, and also to Authors, who may dispatch several Copies of any thing they
would consult their Friends in, without the Fatigue or Charge of transcribing,
as usual. It is likewise attended with this Advantage, that being moved by the
Foot while the Hand guides the Pens, it keeps the whole Body in Warmth and
Exercise, which prevents many of the usual Inconveniences of a Sedentary Life,
besides the time which the Engine saves in dispatch.

That same Gentleman did also invent a Tachygraphy, called Shorthand yet
shorter, which has this peculiar Advantage, yet he lays down a Method for
expressing all the signs of Cases, Tenses, Moods, and Degrees of Comparison by
their proper Places, which none that writ on that Subject before him, did ever
observe, and adds much to the Expedition of the Writer, and renders the Art
more natural Regular, and less burdensome to the Memory than formerly.

CHAP. XIV. Improvements in Sculpture, Picture, etc.
THE Ingenuity of Man has found out several ways to imitate Nature, and
represent natural Bodies to the Eye, by Sculpture, Picture, Carving, Wax-work,
etc. and tho some of the Ancients were famed for this Art, as Zeuxes and
Apelles, yet our last Ages have outstript them, and made considerable
Improvements, as may be easily discernable to those who are skilled in
Antiquities, and have observed the rude and course Pieces of the Ancients.

1. A Cat painted over one of the Compartments, including the Arms of the
University, in the South side of the Gallery, at the Schools of Oxford, looks
directly upon all Beholders, wherever they stand; which common, yet
surprising Effect of the Painter's Art, is caused, says Honoratus Faber, in all
Pictures of this Nature, by their turning the Nose to one Side, and the Eyes to
the other; whence it comes to pass, that such Pictures seem to look to the
Right side, because indeed the Eyes are turned that way; and to the Left in
like manner, because the point of the Nose is turned to the Left: Where, by the
way, he also notes, that it is necessary that all such Pictures be drawn on flat
Tables, so that the Beholder perceive not that the Eyes of the Picture are
turned contrary tothe Nose, which he must needs do if the Eyes of the Portrait
were unequal, concluding that no Figure can be made in Ritievo thus to look
every way. Dr. Plot Not. Hist. Oxf. p. 277.

2. To this place also belongs the Invention of drawing Pictures by
Microscopial-Glasses, by Sir Chr. Wren, and by the Invention of Mr. Bird,
Stone-cutter or Carver of Oxford, of sinking a Color a considerable depth into
the Body of polished white Marble, by the Application of it, to the outside
only, so that the same Figures delineated without, shall be as perfectly
represented within, deeper or shallower, according as he continues his
Application to the Surface a longer or shorter while. Ibid.

3. For Etching, which is painting in Copper, there is a very curious and
speedy way, lately invented by Sir Chr. Wren. Ibid.

4. Amongst the Rarities in the Repository of the Emperor at Vienna, there are
these particulars: A Picture in Oil of Ganymede, by Corregio; a fine Picture of
an old Man's Head in Oil, by Alb. Durer; a curious Landscape in Oil, by
Corregio; a Cupid, by the same Hand, with a fine Copy of it; an Indian Basket,
of an Indian sort, Filegrane, mixed with Birds; a Basin of Agate, finely wrought
with Silver Crawfishes in it; a noble Head in Oil, by Hans van Ach; a large
Agate, whereon is wrote the History of that Victory, which Augustus Caesar
obtained over the Dalmatians and Pannonians, about five Inches long, and four
broad, highly valued (an exact Cut whereof Dr. Edw. Brown presents us with in
his Description of Vienna;) an Onyx with the Head of Alexander and Olympia; a
Shell, with a Battle carved in it; a Chain, with the Heads of all the Austrian
Family; a Dog in a very large Sardonix; a noble Vessel, about a Yard and half
high, made out of one piece of Crystal; the Head of the Empress in another
Crystal; a fair Dragon in another; another, wherein the Picture of our Savior
may be seen thrice one way, and once another way; a Ship in an Emerald; a large
high Vessel of Bohemian Topaz; Flowers well made out of precious Stones; a Cup
out of the notable rich Smaragdus; Baccus and other Statues out of a very high
Rhinocerets Horn; a fine Picture of the Mountain Vesuvius; an Angel in Ivory,
with Hair and Cloths of Filegrane of Gold; all the Gospels written and painted;
the Picture of St. Catherine, of Siena, drawn by Sigismund, King of Poland; a
picture of the Emperor, as he gives Audience to be looked upon, through a
little round Hole; a neat Table of insaied Stone, made by the Empress Dowager,
Eleonora; a neat picture of an old Man, courting a young Woman, with this
Motto, Antum Anulum ne gestato with many others, which we forbear to mention.
Dr. Edw. Brown's Trav. p. 146. etc.

5. The Effigies of Her late Majesty Queen Mary, of Blessed Memory, is
curiously done to the Life in Wax, dressed in Coronation-Robes; with so Majestic
a Mien, that nothing seems wanting but Life and Motion, as Persons of great
Honor, upon the strictest View, have, with Surprise, declared: Likewise the
Effigies of several Persons of Quality, with a fine Banquet, and other
Curiosities in every Room, passing to and from the Queens Apartment. All to be
seen at Mr. Goldsmith's in Green-Court, in the Old-Jury, London.

CHAP XV. Curiosities in the Hydratilick Art, or Waterworks.
THE Water, of all the Elements, seems the least capable of the Operations and
curiosities of Art; yet (besides what I have spoken of in the Chapters
precedent, of Experimental Philosophy and Navigation,) we find this Fluid
Element reduced by the Wit of Man to many useul and pleasant Purposes: So that
we may conclude in good Earnest that the Brain of Man has left no part of the
whole Creation within its reach untried, unransacked, uncultivated.

1. At Tibur, or Tivoly, near Rome, in the Gardens of Hippolitus d'Este,
Cardinal of Farrara, there are the Representations of sundry Birds, sitting on
the tops of Trees, which, by Hydratilick Art, and secret Conveyances of the
Water, though the Trunks, or branches of the Trees, are made to sing, and clap
their Wings; but at the sudden Appearance of an Owl out of a Bush of the same
Artifice, they immediately become all mute and silent; it was the work of
Claudius Gallus, as Possevine informs us. Hist. Man. Art. Chapter 3. Page 37.

2. At the Mint of Segovia, in Spain, there is an Engine, that moves by Water,
so artificially made, that one part of it distendeth an Ingot of Gold, into
that breadth and thickness, as is requisite to make Coin of. It delivers the
Plate that it has wrought into another that printeth the Figure of the Coin
upon it, and from thence it is turned over to another, that cutteth it forth
according to the Print, in due shape and weight. And lastly, the several pieces
fall into a Reserve in another Room, where the Officer, whose Charge it is,
finds Treasure ready coined. Sir Kenelm Dighy's Bodies, Chap. 23. Page 207.

3. Sir Chr. Wrenn invented an Instrument, that measures the quantity of Rain
that falls, which, as soon as it is full, empties it self, so that at the Years
end it is easy to compute how much as fallen on such a quantity of Ground for
all that time; and this he contrived, in order to the discovery of the Theory
of Springs, Exhalations, etc. And also other Instruments, whereby he has shown
the Geometrical Mechanic of Rowing, viz. that the Oar moves upon its Thowle, as
a Veeti on a yielding Fulcrum, and found out what Degree of Impediment the
Expansion of a Body to be moved in a liquid Medium, ordinarily produces in all
Proportions, with several other Matters, in order for laying down the Geometry
of Sailing, Swimming, Rowing, and the Fabric of Ships. Plot's Not. Hist.
Oxford. Page 232.

4. Hither also belong the Locks and Turn-Pikes, made upon the River Isis, that
21 of King James, when it was made Navigable from Oxford to Bercot, which are
absolutely necessary for that purpose, on shallow Rivers that have great Falls,
to keep up the Water, and give the Vessels an easy Descent. For the first
whereof, provided the fall of Water be not great, a Lock will suffice, which is
made up only of Bars of Wood, called Rimers, set Perpendicular to the bottom of
the Passage, and Lock-gates put down between every two of them, or Boards put
athwart them, which will keep a Head of Water as well as the Turn-pike for the
Passage of a Barge, but must be all pulled up at its Arrival, and the Water let
go, till there is an Abatement of the fall, before the Boat may pass either
down or upwards; which, with the Stream, is not without violent Precipitation;
and against it, at many Places, not witout the Help of a Capstain at Land, and
sometimes neither of them, without imminent Danger.

But where the Declivity of the Channel, and fall of Water, is so great, that
few Barges will live in the passage of them; there are Turn-pikes, whereof
there are three between Oxford and Bercot, and are thus contrived. First, There
are placed a great pair of Folding-Doors, or Floodgates of Timber cross the
River, that open against the Stream, and shut with it, not so as to come even
in a straight Line, but in an obtuse Angle, the better to resist and bear the
weight of the Water, which by how much the greater it is, by so much the closer
are the Gates pressed; in each of which Floodgates there is a Sluice to let the
Water through at Pleasure, without opening the Gates themselves. Within these
there is a large Square, taken out of the River, built up at each side with
Freestone, big enough to receive the largest Barge afloat; and at the other
end another pair of Floodgates, opening and shutting, and having Sluices like
the former; which is the whole Fabric of a Turn-pike.

At the uppermost pair of these Gates the Water is stopped, which raises it in
the River above, and gives the Vessels passage over the Shallows; which, when
it comes to the Turnpikes, the Sluices are first opened, and the Water let in to
the Square, or enclosed Space between the two pair of Gates, where it must
necessarily rise (the lower Gates being shut) till at length it comes to be
level with the Surface of the River above: When this is done, the upper Steam
then making no such pressure on the Gates as before, they are eafily opened by
two or three Men, and the Vessels let in one at a time; which done, they shut
those upper Gates and Sluices as before: Then they open the Sluices or Gates at
the other end of the Turn-pike, and let the Water by degrees out of the
enclosed Square, till it be sunk down, and the Vessel in it, level with the
River below, and then open the Gates themselves, and let the Vessel out; the
upper Gates all the while being drove too, and keep so fast by the Water above,
that little of it can follow. And thus the Boat goes down Stream.

But when they return, they are first let into the enclosed space (where the
Water stands constantly level with that of the lower Channel) at the lower
Gates; which as soon as shut again, the Sluices are opened at the uppermost
Gates, and the Water let in, till it rises with the Boat upon it, to be equal
with the River above: This done, the upper Gates are easily opened as before,
there being no pressure upon them, and the Boat let out: So that
notwithstanding the Channel has much steeper descents where these Turn-pikes
are set, than at any of the Locks, yet the Boats pass at these with much more
ease and safety. Ibid.

5. Dr. Wilkins, late Bishop of Chester, when Warden of Wadham-College,
contrived an Engine, whereby of but four Gallons of Water forced through a narrow
Fissure, he could raise a Mist in his Garden, wherein a Person placed at a due
distance between the Sun and the Mist, might see an exquisite Rainbow in all
its proper Colors; which Distance I conceive was the same with that assigned
by Des Carts, viz. where the Eye of the Beholder is placed in an Angle of 42
Degrees.

6. A Clock at Sir Ant. Copes at Hanwel, moves by Water, and shows the Hour, by
the Rise of a new gilded Sun for every Hour, moving in a small Hemisphere of
Wood, each carrying in their Centers the Number of some Hour depicted black; as
suppose of one a Clock, which ascending half way to the Zenith of the Arch,
shows it a quarter past One, at the Zenith half an hour; whence descending
again half way toward the Horizon, three quarters past One; and at last
absconding under it, there presently arises another gilded Sun above the
Horizon, at the other side of the Arch, carrying in its Center the Figure two;
and so of the rest.

7. At the same place, in a House of Diversion, built in small Island in one of
the Fish Ponds, Eastward of his House, where a Ball is roast by a Column of
Water, and Artificial Showers descend at pleasure; within which they can so
place a Candle, that though one would think it must needs be overwhelmed with
Water, it shall not be extinguished, etc. Ibid.

8. But the most surpassing Waterworks are those of Enston, at the Rock first
discovered by The Bushel, Esquire; who cleansing the Spring, then called Goldwell,
to place a Cistern for his own Drinking, met with a Rock so wonderfully
contrived by Nature it self, that he thought it worthy of all imaginable
Advancement by Art. He made Cisterns, and laid diverse Pipes between the Rocks,
and built a House over them, containing one fair Room for Banqueting, etc.
Which, when finished, A 1636. together with the Rocks, Grove, etc. he presented
to the Queen; who in Company with the King himself, was pleased to honor the
Rock not only with her Royal Presence, but commanded the same to be called
after her own name, Henrietta. Which Structure (in the unhappy Civil Wars)
became neglected, and decayed, till at last it lapsed into the Hands of the
Right Honorable Edw, Hen. Earl of Litchfield, Lord of the Soil; who, A. 1674.
not only repaired the broken Cisterns and Pipes, but made a fair Addition to
it, in a sinall Island, situate in the passage of a Rivulet, just before the
Building set over the Rock. The Rock is Artificial in the middle of the Island,
covered with living Aqueous Plants; the Keeper of the Water turning the Cocks,
casts a Canopy of Water over the Rock, by an Instrument of Brass for that
purpose: In the middle of the Rock is a Column of Water rising about 14 Foot,
designed to toss a Ball. The Streams of Water that make the Canopy flow from
about 30 Pipes, set round the Rock, which streams while Persons strive to
avoid, by turning other Cocks, they are unavoidably besprinkled, either upon
their Heads or Legs, or the Reins of their Backs. In the Grot the Rock is to
beseen, made up of large craggy Stones, with great cavities between them, out
of which flows Water plentifully and perpetually, dashing against the Rocks
below, fed only with a single Spring, the natural Rock is about ten Foot high,
and as many broad; but advanced about four Foot more, by the addition of some
few Shelves of Lead, and dry Stones on the top; upon turning one of the Cocks
rises a Chequer Hedge of Water, and upon turning another two side Columns of
Water; and by turning of a third Cock a Column of Water rises in the middle,
which ascending into the turn of the Arch, and not rising again, is received
into hidden Pipes; into one of which, terminated in a very small Cistern of
Water, behind a Stone of the Rock, and having a Mouth and Languet just above
its Surface, the Air being forced into it by the Approaches of the Water, a
noise is made near resembling the Notes of a Nightingale: But when that Pipe is
filled, the singing cease, till the Water has passed away by another Pipe in
the lower part of the Rock; which, when almost done, a noise is heard like the
beating of a Drum, performed by the rushing in of Air into the hollow of the
Pipe, which is large, and of Copper, to supply the place of the Water almost
gone out; which done, the Nightingale may be made to sing again. From the
turned Roof of the Rock, by help of a brass Instrument, and turn of a Cock in
one of the Closets above, they can let down a Canopy of Water; and from the
top they can throw arched Spouts of Water crossing one another, etc. with some
other Sportive Streams of Water, a Cellar behind the Rock, to keep Liquors
cool, or place Music in, for the Surprizal of Strangers, etc. we think fitter
for the Eye, than the Pen to describe. Ibid.

CHAP. XVI.
TO Sum up all, I present my Reader here, with an Epitome of Artifices, a
Miscellany Compendium of little pretty Fancies and Curiosities, like the Webs
of the Silkworm, or Spider, of an Ingenious Texture and Contrivance, enough to
demonstrate the Fineness of Man's Wit; but whether sufficient to Compensate for
the Expense of his precious Talents, or no, Judge.

1. Mr. E -- ( formerly mentioned under the Chapter of Grod Wives) worked a
most curious wrought Bed, all with One Needle; which is so much the more
remarkable, as this Bed (by reason of its extraordinary bigness, and curious
Flourishes,) was near Ten Years in Finishing.

2. Amongst the Rarities of Dresden are to be seen, Castles of Gold, and Mother
of Pearl, many Fowls and Cups made of Shells, a fine Ostridge made out of its
Egg, with the Feathers of Gold, a Cup made out of the Ball taken out of an Ox's
Stomach, richly set, about a Foot long, 121 Heads carved on the outside of a
Cherry-stone, a Friar of Japan, carved in Box, a Glass Organ, etc. Dr. Brown's
Travels.

3. Dr. Wecker puts the Question, Whether material Statues may Speak by any
Artificial way? And he tells us, That Albertus Magnus was reported to have
performed it; and he supposes it may be done by VVind: For we see (says he)
that a Voice, or Sound, will be conveyed entire through the Air; that brass
Guns make a mighty noise, not to be heard before the slame be seen; and
therefore Sounds go with Time, and are entire, without interruption, unless
they break upon some place; the Echo proves this, striking whole against a
Wall, and rebounding back again, like a Beam of the Sun. So that he concludes,
Leaden Pipes, 2, or 300 Paces long, shall carry Sounds, or Words, so as to be
heard at the other end. He tells us, he was at the time of VVriting upon the
trial of it. To which I will add, That I have seen the like contrivance of Dr.
Wilkins, in a Statue set up in Wadham Coll. Garden, where there is a leaden
Pipe, one end whereof is in an Arbor not far distant, converyed under Ground to
the foot of the Statue (which is erected in the middle of a Cistern) and so
continued through the Body of the Statue, upward to the Mouth. But what the
effect of this Contrivance was, I cannot say, it being out of Order in my time.

4. In the 20th. Year of Queen Elizabeth, Mark Scaliot, Blacksmith, made a
Lock, consisting of 11 pieces of Iron, Steel and Brass, all which, together
with a Pipe-Key to it, weighed but one Grain of Gold: He made also a Chain of
Gold consisting of 43 Links, whereunto having fastened the Lock and Key, before
mentioned, he put the Chain about a Fleas Neck, which drew them all with ease.
Now all these together, Lock and Key, Chain and Flea, being weighed, the weight
of them was but one Grain and a half. Faith. Ann. p. 128.

5. Myrmecides wrought out of Ivory, a Chariot with four Wheels, and as many
Horses, in so little room, that a little Fly might cover them all with her
VVings. The same Man made a Ship, with all the Tackling to it, no bigger than a
small Be might hide it with her VVings. Plin, l. 7. c. 21. p. 167.

6. Praxiteles made a Statue of Venus for the Gridians, so lively, that a
certain young Man became so Amorous of it, that the excess of his Love deprived
him of his Wits. This Piece of Art was esteemed at that rate by King
Nicomedes, that whereas the Indians owed him a vast Sum of Money, he offered to
take that Statue in full Satisfaction of his Debt. Plin. l. 7. c. 38. p. 175.

7. Arthur Gregory, of Lime in Dorsetshire, had the admirable Art of forcing
the Seal of a Letter yet so invisibly, that it still appeared a Virgin to the
exactest Beholder. Secretary Walsingham gave him a Pension. Full. Worth. p.
284. in Dors.

8. Clavius says That when he was a Student in the Mathematics, for the great
Honor we had for Alex. Farnesius, we invited that Prince into our School, and
among other Gifts and Shows, that were presented him by the Ingenious, a
Mathematical One was imposed upon me. Then was it that the force of a Concave
was happily Serviceable to me: for by the virtue and power of it, I erected on
high the Name of Alexander Farnesius; impressed it in the Air, all the Letters
of it being radient and shining. Fortes. ^eriae Aca. p. 150.

9. Junellus Turrianus, to delight the Emperor Charles V. sent wooden Sparrows
into the Emperor's Dining Room, which flew about there, and returned: at other
times he caused little Armed Men, to muster themselves upon the Table, and
artificially move, according to the Discipline of War; which was done so beyond
example, that the Superior of the Order of S. Jerome, being unskilled in the
Mathematics, suspected it for VVitchcraft. Hist. of Man Arts. c. 2. p. 22.

I shall not here say (says Gafferel) any thing of that admirable Instrument,
which is to be seen in the hands of Mr. de Peyresk, one of the King's Council,
which shows the Hours of the Day, and the just time of the Ebbing and Flowing
of the Sea, by the motion of a little blueish Water, which is shut up within a
little circular Pipe of Glass, in which you shall sometime see this Water
quite conveyed away.

I shall also pass by Architas his wooden Fly (says he) and Eagle, which have
in our Days been made to Fly at Norimberg; the Author whereof has also made
admirable Hydraulicks, and a perpetual Rainbow, as Antonius Possevinus
reports: As also, the burning Glass which Proclus made, in imitation of that,
wherewith Archimedes burnt the Ships of the Romans, at the Siege of Syracuse.

The Statue of Memnon, which always yielded a strange Sound, at the Rising of
the sun, and those of Severinus Boethius (so much admired by Theodoricus, King
of Italy) who, as Cassiodorus says, made Serpents of Brass to hiss, Birds of
Brass to sing, and in a word, gave as it were, Life and Soul to all kind of
Metals.

The Art of Flying, which Lucian affirms, that himself has seen practiced; and
which was publicly shown upon the Theater in Nero's time, as Suetonius Reports.

The admirable effects which Roger Bacon promised, as a raising ARtificial
Clouds, and causing Thander-claps to be, and flashes of Lightning to be seen,
and afterward to have all this end in a Shower again.

The Figure of the Heavens made in Brass, by Turrianus of Cremona, much more
admirably done, than that of Archimedes; and was to be seen not many Years
since in Spain; together with a little Mill, which on one side made a noise, as
of a Mill-Clack, and on the other, cast forth the Meal ground.

The Tree, which they call Vegetal, which is made to grow in a Glass, in less
than a Nights space. The Rofe, and all other Flowers, which by Art are raised
up out of their own Ashes.

The burning Lamp, found in the Temple of Venus, which the Violence of VVind
could not extinguist; and that other Candle, made of a certain Stone lighted,
which was harder than any Iron; whereof Lucas Tudensis, and Tostatus make
mention.

Lastly, says he (for I still pursue the Pen of my Author) I shall also omit
to speak of the Invention of diverse Hydraulicks, in our own times, which they
do not imitate; as also those Statues of Men and Women, that Speak, though
inarticulately; that move of themselves, and play upon diverse Instruments; of
Birds that fly and sing; of Lions that roat; of Dogs that bark; and others that
fight with Cats, in the very same manner, as living Dogs do; and a thousand
other wonderful Inventions of Men, which are enough to aftonish our Senses.
Gaffarel unheard of Curios. Part 2. Chap. 7.

FINIS.
Directions to the Binder.
1. Place the General Title and Practical Introduction, being the small Letters
in Crotchets, concluding with [1] 2. Place B, B 2, and so on, concluding with
T. 3. Place the whole Second Alphabet. 4. Place the Third Alphabet, beginning
Page 93. with a single Letter, and concluding with P. 4. Place the other Third
Alphabet, beginning with Chap. 95. p. 1. and concluding with Y y. y. 5. Place
the Fourth Alphabet, which concludes with F f f f. 6. Place the Wonders of
Nature, which begins with a General Title and concludes with L. And in the last
place bind the Curiosities of Art, which begins also with a General Title, and
ends with 6 E 2.

Books Lately Printed for John Dunton.
A Complete History of the most Remarkable Providence, both of Judgment and
Mercy, which have happened in this present Age; extracted from the best
Writers, the Authors own Observations, and the numerous Relations sent him from
diverse parts of the three Kingdoms. To which is added, whatever is curious in
the Works of Nature and Art: The whole digested into one Volume, under proper
Heads, being a Work set on Foot 30 Years ago, by the Reverend Mr. Pool, and
since undertaken, and finished, by William Turner, M. A. Vicar of Walberton, in
Sussex; recommended as useful to Ministers, in furnishing Topics of Reproof,
and Exhortation, and to private Christians, for their Closets, and Families.

The History of all Religions in the World, from the Creation down to this
present time, in two Parts; the first containing their Theory, and the other
relating their Practices.

An Essay upon the Works of Creation and Providence, being an Introductory
Discourse to the ( History of Remarkable Providence.) To which is added, a
Scheme of the said undertaking. -- As also a Specimen of the Work it self, in
which is inserted, the Penitential Letter, written by Sir Dunc^ms Colchester,
(late of Westbury, in Glocestershire) with other Remarkable Instances of that
Nature. Price Bound, 2 s. These three written by Mr. Will. Turner, M. A. and
Vicar of Walberton, in Sussex.

The Excellency of a Public Spirit, set forth in a Sermon Preached, (since
much enlarged) at the Funeral of that late Reverend Divine, Dr. Samuel Annesly,
who departed this Life, December. 31. 1696. in the 77th Year of his Age, with a
brief Account of his Life and Death, by Daniel Williams, Minister of the
Gospel. Price Bound 1 s.

The Character of Dr. Sam. Annesly, by way of Elegy; with a Preface written by
one of his Hearers. Price 6 d.

Advice to those who never Received the Sacrament: Or, the True Penitent
Instructed, before, at, and after his Receiving the Lord's Supper; with
Meditations suited to the several Parts of that solemn Ordinance. The Whole
Written in a different Method from any thing Published on this Subject. By a
Person of Honor. Price Bound 2 s.

The Secret History of White Hall, from the Restoration of Charles II. down to
the Abdication of the Late King James. Writ at the Request of a Noble Lord, and
conveyed to him in Letters. By -- late Secretary, Interpreter to the Marquess
of Lovuois, who by that means had the Perusal of all the Private Minutes
between England and France, for many Years: The Whole consisting of Secret
Memoirs, and c. Published from the Original Papers. By D. Jones, Gent.

The whole PARABLE of Dives and Lazarus, Explained and Applied: Being several
Sermons Preached in Cripplegate, and Lothbury Church. Published at the request
of the Hearers. And recommended as proper to be given at Funerals Price bound 2
s.

A Narative of the extraordinary Penitence of Robert Maynard, who was Condemned
for the Murder of John Stockton, late Victualler in Grub-steet, and Executed
at Tybourn, May 4. Together with several Conferences held with him in Newgate;
as also a Copy of the Paper which he left to be Published after his Death. Both
by Mr. Joseph Stevens, Lecturer of Cripplegate and Lothbury Chruches.

The Dying Paftor's last Farewell to his Friends in Froome, Selwood,
Shepton-Malle^, brewton, Wincalton, and the Adja^ent Parts. Being several
Sermons on ^ John 3.15. Preached by that Learned, and Pious Divine, Mr. Henry
Albin, and prepared for the Press with his own Hand a little before his Death
To which is added, by another Hand, an Elegy on Mrs. Mary Hamblen, late of
Froome, in Somerser-shire. Price, bound 1 s.

Poems on several Occasions, VVrittep by the Ingenious Pindarick Lady.

The life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, lft for the Press under his own
Hand, in Foli^.

The first and second Volumes of the French Book of Martyrs, Published in
English with Her Majesty's Re^al Privilege. Price, 20 s.

The Tigurine Liturgy, published with the Approbation of six Reverend Bishops

Dr. Burthoggs Essay upon Reason, and the Nature of Spirits, Dedicate^ to ^^.
Lock. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Works of the Right Honorable Henry late Lord Delamere, and Earl of
VVarrington, containing his Lordships Advice to his Children, several Speeches
in Parliament, and c. with many other Occasional Discourses on the Affairs of
the Two last Reig^s, being Original Manuscripts written with his Lordships own
Hand, never before Printed, Price Bound 5 s.

The General History of the Quakers, both Men and Women, from the First Rise
of that sect, down to this present Time. Collected from Manuscripts, and c. A
Work never attempted before in English, being written Originally in Latin, by
the Learned Crosius. Price Bound 5 s.

Malbranches search after the Truth, complete in 2 Vol. Octavo. To the second
Part of this Work is added, the Authors Defense against the Accusations of
Monsieur de la Ville; also the Life of F. Malbranch, of the Oratory at Paris;
with an Account of his Works, and several particulars of his Controversy with
Monsieur Arnaud, Dr. of Sorborn, and Monsieur Regis, Professor in Philosophy at
Paris, writren by Monfieur le Vassor, lately come over from Paris. done out of
French, from the last Edition, by Mr. Sault, Author of the New Treatise of
Algebra. Both Volums 10 s.

Bishop Barlow's Genuine Remains, containing near 100 distinct Subjects,
Theological, Philosophical, Historical, and c. Published from his Lordships
Papers, by Sir Peter Pet, Knight. Advocate General for the Kingdom of Ireland.
Price bound 6 s.

Dr. Becker's Examination of the common Opinions concerning Spirits,
Apparitions, their Nature, Power, Administration, and Operations; as also the
Effects men are able to produce by their Communication.

Books now in the Press, and designed for it. Printed for John Dunton.
A Dissertation concerning the Future Conversion of the Jewish Nation:
Answering the Objections of the Reverend Mr. Baxter, Dr. Lightfoot, and others:
with an Enquiry into the First Resurrection By Increase Mather, President of
Harvard-College, at Cambridge in New England.

A Continuation of the Secret History of White Hall, from the Abdication of the
late King James, down to the Year 1696. Together with the Tragical History of
the Stuarts, from the first Rise of that Family, down to the Death of Her Late
Majesty of Blessed Memory: Published from the Original Papers: by D. Jones,
Gent.

A Compendious History in Folio. of the Lives, and Deaths of all the most
eminent Persons, from the Crucifixion of our Blessed Savior to this time. By a
Learned Hand, who will add a Collect on of several 100 modern Lives omitted in
all other works of this Nature.

The Church History of New England, is now almost finished, including the Lives
of the most eminent Divines of that Country from the first planting of it, down
to this present Year, 1696. It Is written by Mr. Cotton Mather, Pastor of a
Church in Boston, from whom I shall receive the Manuscript Copy as oon as
completed; and being a large Work, 'twill be Printed in Folio, by way of
Subscription.

The third and fourth Volumes of the French Book of Martyrs.

The Lord Faulkland's Works, Secretary of State to King Charles the I. in
Folio.

The second Edition of Right Christianity, by the Reverend Mr. Matthew Barker,

Debates upon several Nice and Curious Points. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Conferences about the ill Practices of some vile Persons.

FINIS.

