TWO SERMONS.

The FIRST preached upon JANUARY the 29th. 1687/8. Upon Occasion of Her
Majesty's HAPPY CONCEPTION. The SECOND, JUNE the 17th. 1688. UPON THE BIRTH OF
THE PRINCE.

By John Turner, Hospitaller of St. Thomas Southwark. Licensed, June the 19th.
1688.

London, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. MDCLXXXVIII.

To the KING.
SIR,
THese Discourses which were uttered in Obedience to Your Majesty's Command,
and out of a Principle of Zeal and Loyalty to Your Sacred Person and Heroic
Line, are now humbly prostrate at Your Royal Feet, as a small, but hearty and
sincere Testimony of the Duty and Gratitude of their Author.

God grant we may have more occasion for Solemnities of this kind, and that
Your Majesty may live to see a numerous Issue, that may establish and assure
the Throne, and carry down the Image of Your Princely Virtues to the latest
Posterity of Times to come,

May it please Your most Sacred and Serene Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble,
Dutiful, and Obedient Subject, and Servant, JOHN TURNER.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Second Sermon, as may be seen by the Close of the First, and by its own
Beginning, was designed only to be a Continuation of the First, in which the
Miseries of Anarchy are displayed, as in the other, the Blessings of Government
are represented; but being with very little Alteration and Addition, applicable
to the Sacred and Auspicious Birth upon which it was delivered, instead of
being preparatory, as it was first designed, it is now humbly dedicated to the
Service and Solemnity of that happy Day that gave us so delightful, and so
sweet a Prospect of the continuance of those Joys and Blessings that are the
glorious Theme and Subject of it.

ERRATA.
IN the first Sermon, Page 30. l. 10. Read Expressly. Second Sermon, p. 2. l.
10. r. so particularly. p. 5. l. 7. for and, r. as. l. 8. for as, r. met.

A SERMON, Preached upon JANUARY the 29th. 1688. Upon Occasion of Her Majesty's
HAPPY CONCEPTION.
JUDGE. 17. 6. In those Days there was no King in Israel, but every Man did that
which was right in his own Eyes.
BEing unhappily prevented by Indisposition, upon the Day appointed for this
City and Suburbs, and the Parts adjacent, to express their Thankfulness to
Almighty God, for the Hopes he has given us of ascertaining the Succession of
the Royal Line, and establishing the Throne for ever in a regular and peaceable
Descent, by a new Prospect of Majestic Issue, from the Loins of our Sovereign
and his Royal Consort; I hope I shall be easily excused, if rather than be
wholly wanting in my Duty upon so great and solemn an Occasion, I have taken
hold of this other Opportunity to offer up my worthless, but sincere Oblation,
at a time when the whole Nation is beleaguering Heaven, and laying siege to the
Divine Goodness, for an happy and succesful End of such fair, auspicious and
promising Beginnings, and the Shout of a King is among them. Besides, when I
consider how unfit I am to bear any part in so glorious a Scene, I ought to
choose rather to appear in such a numerous Multitude of Votaries, as may at once
conceal and drown my Imperfections in a Cloud of Incense, and supply my
Poverty, Infirmity and Weakness, by its united and confederate Strength.

Let us therefore, if you please, that we may take the truer Estimate, and have
the more just and worthy Apprehensions of that Extraordinary Blessing, which
God in his Mercy seems to have designed us, if our Sins or our Ingratitude do
not disappoint it; begin at the Tragedies of Anarchy and Confusion, or at that
wretched and calamitous Condition of a miserable People, which resembles that
of the Israelites after the Death of Sampson, When there was no King in Israel,
but every Man did that which was right in his own Eyes. The Consequence of
which, was First, the Destruction of the National Religion of the Jews, and the
crumbling it into numberless Parties and Distinctions, as appears immediately
by the the Story of Micah, who consecrated and set a part a proper and peculiar
Levite for himself and Family; in the twelfth and thirteenth Verses of this
Chapter. And Micah consecrated the Levite, and the young Man became his Priest,
and was in the House of Micah; then said Micah, now know I that the Lord will
do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. And as he had a Levite, so
also a Religion peculiar to himself, and that Religion was no other than
downright Idolatry, under pretense of Purity and Reformation. For in the
fourteenth Verse of the next Chapter, we find mention of his Ephod and his
Teraphim, his graven and his molten Image; and this is very certain, by a long
Course of Experience, that where there is not a common Band of Unity in the
Civil Government, there can be much less any face of Uniformity in Religious
Worship; but Religion will naturally degenerate for the most part, from the
Particular Fancies and Inclinations of Men left at random to determine for
themselves, either into Idolatry or Superstition on the one hand, or into
Profaneness and Atheism on the other; but more especially into the latter of
these, because where Property is destroyed, as it is in such a State, where
there is no King, no Form of Government, no Law-making Wisdom, no Executing
Power, Necessity makes every thing become just and lawful, and the Judge of
that Necessity is every Man's private Breast; so that Rapine puts on an Heroic
Shape, and Violence, when successful, has the outward Semblance of a noble
Magnanimity and commendable Courage. It is the Law only that first determines
Property, and then secures it when it is determined; and where there is no
Property, there must be endless Confusion, by every Man's raking and scrambling
for himself; so that every Man, in such a State* as this, is in apparent danger
of immediate Ruin, it being impossible that either Strength or Counsel should
be of much avail in such a Lawless and Arbitrary Posture of Affairs; but of all
Men, they that are the most exposed, are First, the Infirm and Helpless,
Secondly, the Rash and Inconsiderate, that apprehend the least of any Calamity
likely to befall them; and Thirdly and lastly, the Virtuous and Innocent, such
as are naturally inclined to Peace, and would fain be upon Terms of mutual
Accommodation, and cannot think of continuing such Hostilities as these,
without Regret from within, as well as Terror from without; till at length it
comes to pass that Barbarity and Cruelty, and Treachery and Injustice growing
epidemical and familiar things, and it seeming by that universal Misery and
Confusion, in which Mankind is so desperately involved, as if all things were
governed by Mis-rule and by Chance, and as if the Divinity took no manner of
Care of the Peace, Welfare and Happiness of Men, this naturally issues in at
least an Indifference for neglected Virtue, when it appears to have so small a
share in the Favor and Patronage of Heaven, that Wickedness it self is of the
two more safe, and it proceeds by very easy and intelligible Steps to a
Disbelief of God's Providence, and a Contempt of his Attributes, till at last
it ends, and sets up its impious and abominable rest, in a bold and barefaced
denial of his Existence.

And this is the second Consequence which I intended to mention, as the
necessary and unavoidable Event of there being no King in Israel, no Supreme
Judge, no Legislative or Executive Power, that by this means Property is
destroyed, infinite Strife and Contention introduced, the Fences of Right and
Justice broken down, and all Claims are decided by the strongest Arm, and by
the longest Sword. From whence it follows likewise, by multiplicity and
frequency of bad Examples that Men are hardened and inured to Mischief, sunk
into Atheism and Infidelity, and carried headlong by a double Torrent of
Precedent and Persuasion, uniting and mingling their confederate Streams into
all manner of Injustice, Impiety and Lewdness.

From hence it was that the Danites, in the very next Chapter, seized upon the
Ephod and Teraphim the graven Image, and the molten Image of Micah, and carried
his Priest along with them to be a Father and a Priest to themselves, after a
most unwarrantable and arbitrary manner, there being no King in Israel, nor any
that might control or contradict their Proceedings, or say unto them with
Authority, What do ye? as Micah said to them, but without it, in the eighteenth
Verse of that Chapter, to which they returned no Answer but a Menace, and the
Cause was not decided by Argument but by Power. For the Children of Dan said
unto him, Let not thy Voice be heard among us, lest angry Fellows run upon
thee, and thou loose thy Life, with the Lives of thy Household; and when Micah
saw that they were too strong for him, he turned back and went back unto his
House. It is true, that all the Israelites had an express Commission to cut
down the Groves of Heathens and Idolaters, to overthrow their Altars, and burn
their graven Images with Fire, as often as they had Power and Opportunity to do
it; but this was not the Case of the Danites at this time, who were as very
Idolaters as the other, only they altered the Property from Micah to
themselves, so that they were guilty of Robbery, Idolatry and Sacrilege
together; the Robbery consisted in the violent Detention of what was not their
own, the Idolatry, in worshipping the Images they had stolen, and the
Sacrilege, in stealing what they account Sacred, and profaning what they
worshipped, by Rapine and Injustice. And not unlike to this it is, what we find
in the seventh Verse of that Chapter, concerning the Men of Laish, to whom the
five Men of the Danites were sent as Spies: The five Men departed, says the
Text, and came to Laish, and saw the People that were therein, how they dwelt
careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet, and secure, and there was
no Magistrate in the Land that might put them to shame in any thing, and they
were far from the Zidonians, and had no business with any Man* Now this Laish
was otherwise called Leshem, as it is in the 19th. of Joshua at the 7th. Verse,
and was a Colony of the Zidonians, as appears very probable from this Place,
and from the 28th. Verse of this Chapter, where, when the Danites made their
Assault upon it; it is said, There was no Deliverer, because they were far from
Zidon, their Confederate City, from whence they were at first descended, and
had not only brought along with them the ill Manners of that Place, which was
to a Proverb infamous for all sorts of Luxury and Vice, but there being no Law
to regulate their Exorbitances, or to chastise and punish notorious Offenders,
mutual Consent added to reciprocal Example, where there was no Magistrate in
the Land that might put them to Shame, and bring them to condign Punishment for
their Offenses, soon filled up the Measure of their crying Sins, and made them
ripe for the Judgment that overtook them, Their City* being burnt, and
themselves smitten by the Danites with the Edge of the Sword.

If by reason of their Impunity, and Want of Government, which is the Cause of
all Mischief and Disorder in a Nation, they did not yet, notwithstanding, fall
out among themselves; this is to be imputed to the smallness of their Number,
for they were conquered by no* more than six hundred Men, compared with the
strange Plenty and Exuberance of their Soil, a Place where there was no Want of
any thing that is on the Earth, and consequently with a very small degree of
Husbanbandry and Tillage, it was capable of affording them a plentiful
Subsistence, without the Temptation of preying upon each other; To which we
must refer likewise what the Text says farther of them, That they were far
from the Zidonians, and had no business with any Man: That is, they had no need
of Traffic and Commerce, but gave themselves up wholly to Pleasure and
Enjoyment, having so bountiful and rich a Soil to furnish them at Home with
whatever they desired, and therefore they were far from the Zidonians, not only
in respect of Distance or of Place, but in this also, that they were not a
Bartering and a Trading People, as the Zidonians were, who were the greatest
Merchants of those Days, and as they increased in Wealth, so also in Luxury and
Intemperance likewise; they imported the Vices* of foreign Nations together
with their Commodities, and united the Impieties of several Climates in one,
and were known to be Merchants, not only by their Ships, and by their Wares,
but by their Sins. Lastly, When it is said, as well of the Men of Laish, as of
Zidon, That they were a are less, a Quiet, and a secure People; this is also to
be ascribed to the Plenty of both Places, to the Natural Plenty of the one, and
besides the Natural, to the Artificial Plenty of the other. For Plenty and
Ease, do naturally soften and debase Men's Minds into a wanton Spirit of
Effeminacy and Lust, into a Listless Habit of Idleness and Sloth, into a Fools
Paradise of Security and Rest; though in the midst of, Dangers round about
them, and the Fumes of Wine that can raise Apparitions of Imaginary Dangers,
have usually no Sense of those that are certain and real. But this was by no
means equally the Case of the Zidonians, and the Men of Laish; for the first
were not only secure by Luxury and Intemperance, a sort of Security to which it
is very ill trusting, but they had a fortified City, a formidable fleet, a
numerous People, and a spacious Territory, and could upon any Occasion furnish
out an Army, that should be much superior to any of their Neighbors, and were,
notwithstanding the Vices they were guilty of, tied together by an
Establishment comparatively firm, under the Command of Magistrates, and the
Obligation of Laws, so that they had reason to be secure and at rest,
considering how easily they sat at Home, and how safe they were from any
Apprehension Abroad.

But with the Men of Laish it was clean otherwise, they had no Magistrate, no
Judge of Controversies, no Reconciler of Differences, no Avenger of Injustice,
no Punisher of Offenses; and besides this, they were but few in Number, they
were situate in a Mid*land* Country, and had no Advantage of Traffic and
Commerce abroad, which begets Leagues and Dependencies among Men, that may be
relied upon in a dangerous Time, they were forsaken and forgotten by their very
Countrymen the Zidonians themselves, and encompassed all about by Enemies and
Strangers, so that their Security was indeed but a lethargick Stupour, which
was owing either to Intemperance and Fullness, or else to a vain Persuasion
which they seem to have had, because their Neighbors for a long time never had
attempted them, that they never would; but the Text inclines rather to the
Zidonian Evil, whose Ease and Security was in part owing to the Steams of
Gluttony, the Excess of Wine, and the Supinity of Dalliance and Enjoyment; and
though the Text mentions no other Effect of that Anarchy that was to be found
at that time among the Lawless Inhabitants of Laish, but only that they were
careless, and quiet, and secure, and having no Magistrate to put them to any
Shame, were grown to a shameless pass of Luxury and Lewdness, yet upon
supposition that they did not fall out and quarrel among themselves, which is
no more than a natural Effect of Anarchy and Mis-rule, where all Men are Lords
and Sovereigns by themselves, and every one disdains the Character of a
Servant, and spurns at the very Thoughts of Obedience and Subjection; yet to be
sunk into Concupiscence, and immerst in Lust, to have no sense of Conscience,
of Honor, or of Shame, and to be given up wholly to the miserable Conduct of
brutal Appetites, and beastly Inclinations, are things, to wise and good Men,
that shall seriously consider them, more loathsome than Stench and Putrefaction
themselves, more intolerable than the most exquisite and ingenious Torments,
more dreadful than the most lingering, or the most shameful Death; they dethrone
our Reason, they debase our Understandings, and rob us of those true and limpid
Pleasures which arise only from Wisdom and from Virtue, they imply an Anarchy
in every private Breast, or which is still worse, if any thing can be worse,
they constitute such a Government within our Souls, as when a Prince is
governed by his Slaves, and they too Fallingout and Clashing with one another,
by the Competition of Passions among themselves, and are a living and a
standing Infamy and Reproach to the noblest Faculties belonging to Humane
Nature.

But if we reflect attentively upon the certain Consequence of Gluttonny and
Intemperance, which in the Experience of all Times and Places, is big with
Animosity in a thousand Shapes, and with a numberless Variety of Mischief and
Disorder, and if to this we add the fewness of their Number, being conquered,
and all of them smitten with the Edge of the Sword, by a small Party of six
hundred Men; it will be highly probable, notwitstanding that Quiet and Security
they enjoyed; by which the Text means no more, than that they had no
Apprehension of any Disturbance or Danger from abroad; that yet at Home, in the
midst of so many, and so great Enormities, without any Magistrate to punish, or
any Law to restrain them, they were seldom or never free from some Domestic and
Intestine Broil, in which, though the whole Nation were not at a time engaged,
yet it is enough if private Persons, by the Rivalship of Love, or by the
Surprise of unexpected Feuds, occasioned by Wine or Lust, or by the Ambition of
Men, that in a lawless Estate, would every one endeavor to be greater than his
Neighbor, did perpetually* from such Causes and Accidents as these, destroy
and ruin one another, and by new Grudges, everlastingly springing and spawning
from the old, hinder the Increase and Propagation of their People.

For it is highly reasonable to believe, that this Nation or Colony of Zidonian
Planters, were actually seated where the Danites found them, even before the
coming of Moses out of Egypt; and it is certain that Joshua found them there
when he made the Partition of Inneritances to the Tribes, at which time, this
very Place was conquered by the Tribe of Dan; but it seems, though the
Inhabitants were beaten by the Israelites, and as many as could not secure
themselves by Flight, or by Concealment, were smitten with the Sword, yet they
were so far from being utterly destroyed, that afterward they made Head again
against their Enemies, and made them quit their new Conquest to the old
Possessors, who enjoyed it for some Ages afterward, without Trouble or
Molestation, and had now less reason to be afraid than ever, considering what
it was not easy for them to be wholly ignorant of, that there was now no King
in Israel, and that they had been formerly too hard for those who were how a
dis-united and dis joynted People, at a Time when their Strength was unanimous
and compact, which was without question one reason of the Quiet and Security
which they now enjoyed, notwithstanding they were so small and inconsiderable a
People.

For to say that they were a numerous and a Powerful Nation, and yet that they
were destroyed and utterly cut off by a poor Handful of six hundred Men, is to
affirm they were destroyed by Miracle, as the Amorites, and the Perizzites and
other Nations were at the first entrance of the Israelites into the Land of
Canaan; but this being only a supernatural Effect of the Divine Vengeance and
Displeasure, for the Incest, Idolatry, Beastiality and other horrid Crimes of
those accursed Wretches, whom God had utterly devoted to Destruction, and
resolved to give their Land for an Inheritance to his chosen People; this
reason will not hold with the Danites at this time, who were as very Idolaters
as those whom they destroyed, and therefore it is very unjust and unreasonable
to expect in such a Case and Circumstance as this, that any miraculous Aids
should be afforded them. Neither is it any more to the purpose, that they asked
Counsel of the Priest of Micah, to know whether God would prosper their
Undertaking, and the Priest said unto them, go in peace before, the Lord is the
Way wherein ye go. So that they seem to have acted by a Divine Commission; for
it is to be considered that this Priest of his was but a Puisne Priest, or
rather indeed he was no Priest at all, so far as that Office is of a
Sacrificial Nature, for he was not of the Sons of Aaron, but only a Common
Levite, and he was consecrated to the Priesthood by Micah, against the Express
Institution of the Law of Moses, as he likewise consecrated one of his own Sons
in the fifth Verse of that Chapter, but had no Right or Authority to do either.
Secondly, It is plain by the Text, that he was an Idolater, and therefore had
no reason to expect any such extraordinary* Assistances from Above, as should
acquaint him with the secret Designs of God's Providence, in the Administration
and Government of the World. Thirdly, The only way of oracular Responses to be
met with among the Jews, was by the Urim and Thummim, which was peculiar to the
High Priest alone, and never in any one Instance communicated or vouchsafed to
any other but him. Fourthly, He might consider the seeming Fairness and Justice
of their Cause, they going only to retreive their own, and to recover again
into their own Possession, what their Ancestors had formerly enjoyed. Fifthly
and lastly, It may very well be supposed that he was afraid to give a
dissatisfactory Answer to so many armed Men, lest they should say to him as
Agamemnon did to Chalcas in Homer,

(...). or as Ahab did concerning the Prophet Micajah, I hate him, for he does
not prophecy Good concerning me, but Evil.

So that I think upon the whole Matter, it is abundantly manifest, that the
Strength of the Men of Laish being very much weakened and impaired by Civil
Broils, for want of good Laws to settle the Bounds and Measures of Obligation,
and Magistrates to punish the Refractory and Disobedient, whatever present
Accommodation there might be patched up among them, by mutual dread of one
another, and mutual Experience of so many Ills, as Lawless and Arbitrary
Courses had occasioned, and whatever Ease and Security they might promise
themselves from abroad, not having heard of any Enemy for so long a time, yet
they became an easy Prey from both of these Causes together, to this
unexpected and surprising Party of the Children of Dan. To all which, it is
still farther to be added, that a dissolute and licentious People, seasoned and
habituated in exorbitant Courses, though they may in time be sensible of the
great and public Detriment that accrues from them, and be persuaded, by that
means, to think of a Regulation for the Redress of such grievous Mischiefs and
Abuses; yet they scarce know how to give Obedience to those Laws, which they
are convinced to be so necessary for them, but find a certain awkwardness and
unaptness in themselves to be confined within any compass of Duty, like
untaught Heifers, that never felt the Yoke, or Colts that never yet were
backed, or Horses not sufficiently inured to their Paces or their Harness. And
as it would be very difficult in this Case, and for a while impracticable to
reduce the People into such a State of Obedience as is necessary to the Peace
and Security of every Commonwealth, so it would be much more so, to find a fit
Governor to preside over them, because Government requires a steady Resolution,
and a consummate Wisdom, neither of which are requisite to Obedience, only the
Subject is in general to understand: First, the Wholsomeness of Obedience, for
the Conservation of Peace, and for the uniting a Nation in one common Band
against all foreign Opposers. And Secondly, The Duty that is incumbent upon
him, upon account of both of these Considerations, to resign up himself
cheerfully to the Supreme Power, for the Common Good of himself and of his
Country. Government requires a Courage that is not to be daunted by every
sturdy Pretender to Liberty of Action, nor every bold Censurer of the Conduct
of Affairs, and the Administration of his Betters at the Helm, let his
Pretenses be as specious as they will, it requires a Wisdom that looks far
backwards into the good and bad Successes of past Times, and into the Reasons
upon which they severally depended, a Wisdom that looks forward, and pries with
Wariness and deep Deliberation, into the natural Issues and Results of Things;
and a Wisdom that is consummate by Experience, in the Management of Affairs, by
which a Facility and Dexterity of Action and of Counsel is acquired, as well as
by reflection upon the Occurrences of former Times, and Speculation into Humane
Nature; without which, no Governor can sufficiently discharge himself of the
great Trust that is reposed in him.

Now in this Case of a dissolute and broken People, whose Necks of a long time
had no felt the Yoke, as it would require much greater Wisdom and Experience to
pilot and conduct a shattered Vessel through Passions and Prejudices not easily
to be conquered or charmed into Obedience, and which like Rocks and Shelves,
not taken notice of by any Sea-chart, like moving Sands, without any Buoys to
discover them, would every moment endanger the Shipwreck of the State, than to
govern an established and orderly Society, that has been inured to Laws, and
sensible of the great Advantages accruing by them; so it would be much harder
to find a Person fit for such a weighty Charge in a Government that needs it
most, then in a settled and well regulated State, where half those Abilities
would serve the turn. Besides that, the Competition of Pretenders to the
Supreme Power, and the several Factions aiding and abetting either the one or
the other, would create new Strife, instead of composing the old, and after
all, a wise Man, though unanimously chosen, would scarce accept so dangerous a
Charge, wherein he would be more likely to make himself a Victim to the
variable Humors of a giddy Multitude, impatient of Subjection, and unaccustomed
to Restraint, and disdaining to be controuled and checked by him that was so
lately their Equal, than to preserve his Country, by his Wisdom and Courage,
from its impending Ruin and Desolation. No wonder therefore, if the Men of
Laish, being without any Government or Laws, and being probably at variance
among themselves, and being surprised of a sudden by an unexpected Assault,
and their Security adding new Horror to the Surprise, and contributing in so
great a Proportion to their Ruin, they were for all and every of these
Reasons, an easy Prey to the Fury of their Enemies, and fell a tame Sacrifice
to the Revenge of the Danites.

But without reasoning so nicely upon an imperfect account, wherein so much is
of necessity to be supplied by conjecture, the next Chapter will afford us a
more express Description of the horrid Calamities to which Anarchy is Exposed,
for there we have first the Story of the Levite and his Concubine, or rather
Wife, for she is accused of being false to his Bed. And his Concubine, says
the Text, played the Whore against him, and went away from him unto her Fathers
House to Bethlehem Judah, and was there four whole Months. Now Adultery was
Death in both Parties, by the Law of Moses; nay, the Guilt of this horrid Crime
was understood to lie at the Door of the Congregation, and was threatened to be
avenged upon the People themselves, if they did not expiate it by the Death of
the Offenders. Deuteronomy. 2^. 22. If a Man be found lying with a Woman, married to
an Husband, then they shall both of them die, both the Man that lay with the
Woman, and the Woman, so shall thou put away Evil from Israel. And this was
still a more criminal sort of Adultery, because it was a Levites Wife, a Person
dedicated and set apart to the Service of God, and to the Ministry of that
Temple in which he had placed his Name, and whether all the Tribes of Israel
were to repair for Sacrifice and Worship. It was much the more heinous Offense
in both of the Delinquent Parties upon this account, and therefore the
Obligation to punish it was so much the stronger, but this not being to be done
without a formal Process, in which the Criminals were to be first convict, and
then adjudged to undergo the legal Sentence in cases of that nature, at a time
when there was no Judge in Israel, no Supreme, nor by consequence any
subordinate Magistrate to hear and determine Causes, there could be no Process,
no Sentence, no Execution. And so it came to pass, not long after, either, by a
Return of Affection on the Husbands Part, or by some advantageous Overtures of
Reconciliation on that of the Wife and her Relations, that the Business, as
foul as it was, was made up, and they associated together again; but this
continued but for a very little while, when leaving Bethlehem Judah, where the
Father of the Woman dwelt, and going homewards through Gibeah of Benjamin, and
lodging there in the House of an hospitable Ephraimite, the Man was first
demanded by the lewd and lawless Inhabitants of the Place, to be used as the
Sodomites would have served the Guests of Lot, and at last, the least thing
that would appease their Belluine and Brutal Lust, was the abusing his Wife to
such a degree, that she died upon the Place, and being divided by her Husband
into twelve Pieces, which were sent severally to so many several Tribes, to be
an horrid Spectacle and Monument of what had happened, and to incite them the
more effectually to a just Revenge of so flagitious and villainous an Action
upon the execrable Authors of it, this occasioned that dreadful Civil War which
followed betwixt the Tribe of Benjamin and the rest of the Tribes, who being
under no legal Tie of Obligation to one another, and being now destitute of a
common Head that might command and influence them all, yet met together by
common Consent at Mizpeh, and from thence demanded satisfaction of the
Benjamites, for the horrid Wickedness committed by the Gibeathites their
Brethren, and for the Scandal that was brought by it, upon the Name and Nation
of Israel, which nothing could wipe off, but the Death of those Miscreants that
were guilty of it; but the Benjamites were so far from delivering up their
Brethren to be punished as they deserved, that they appeared in their Defense,
and were resolved, as bad as they were, to stand up in the Protection of their
Lives, with the Hazard of their own, upon which, immediately ensued that bloody
War, in which forty thousand of the Israelites, and of the Benjamites, the
whole Tribe, without sparing either Age or Sex, bateing only six hundred, were
destroyed; nay, their very Cattle and their Cities were not exempted, but a
deadly Infection ran through all they possessed, and overwhelmed every thing in
the common Ruin. So that in this one Story, though we go no farther, we have a
promiscuous Lust, a brutal Concupiscence, and a destructive War, Crimes not to
be named without confusion and blushing, and Judgments not to be mentioned
without trembling, and all for want of a Judge and a King in Israel, whose
Authority might prevent the Perpetration of such Villainy, or at leastwise
punish the beginnings of it, before it proceeded to such a bloody Consequence,
and tragical Conclusion.

But this is not all neither, for if I am not very much mistaken, there was a
Famine likewise happened upon this occasion, for in the Book of Ruth we read
that in the Days when the Judges ruled, there was a Famine in the Land, upon
which Elimelech and his Wife Naomi, and his two Sons Mahlon and Chilion went
and sojourned in the Country of Moab, where Elimelech and his two Sons died,
and Naomi, after having dwelt there ten years, arose with her Daughters in Law,
that she might return from the Country of Moab, for she had heard in the
Country of Moab, how that the Lord had visited his People in giving them Bread.
Now though it be said that this happened in the Days when the Judges ruled, all
that is meant by it is no more than this, that the inspired Writer who wrote
this Book, wrote it a considerable time afterward, in the time of the Kings,
and by the Days of the Judges, or when the Judges rull'd, all that Period or
Interval of time is understood, which passed between Joshua, or rather between
Moses the first Judge, and Saul the first King of Israel; and the Age of Ruth
falls just upon the Close of this Account, for her Son was Obed, who was the
Father of Jesse, the Father of David; so that the Times of Obed and Jesse must
be coincident with those of Eli and Samuel, the last Judges of Israel, and the
beginning of the Reign of Saul, the first King; and since we have no mention of
any Judge of Israel after Sampson, before Eli, it must needs appear very
likely, that this Famine happened after the Death of Sampson, when there was no
King or Judge in Israel, when the want of Laws made Industry to cease, and
Husbandry to fall to Ruin and Decay, and when the Animosities and Contentions
that happened in those days, were a Discouragement to the Husbandman from
setting his Hand to the Plow, or scattering the Seeds upon the Earth in their
Season, when he had so little security that he should reap the Increase. And
otherwise than this it will seem utterly impossible, without a perpetual
Miracle all that while, that in Moab, a neighboring Country, there should be
so great Plenty for ten years together, and yet so great Scarcity in the Land
of Israel, the Land of Canaan that flowed with Milk and Honey, and was
naturally so rich and plentiful a Spot of Ground, for it is not without a
miraculous Interposition of Divine Providence, that Countries naturally
fruitful, and being of the same Soil and Climate, and very nearly bordering
upon each other, should the one be afflicted with a ten years Famine, while the
other, all that while, was not only able to sustain it self, but to supply the
Necessities of its Neighbors, and we are certainly informed, that when the
seven years Famine was in Egypt, there was the same Scarcity in the Land of
Canaan, and other neighboring Countries in that Part of the World, only the
Wisdom and prophetic Foresight of Joseph, who was then the chief Minister in
Pharaoh's Court, had made a better Provision by Good-husbandry, in the Time of
Plenty, for the Necessities of Egypt, than any of the neighbor Nations had
made for themselves; so that it appears very reasonable to think, that a Famine
was one of those dismal Consequences that attended the Anarchy or want of
Government among the Jews, after the Death of Sampson, and the Expression of
Naomi is remarkable, That the Lord had visited his People in giving them Bread;
he visited them by giving them Bread, and he gave them Bread by visiting them,
that is, by setting a Visitor or Inspector over them, a Judge that might
retrench the Exorbitances, and redress the Abuses under which they groaned, for
as Phacad in Hebrew signifies to visit, so does Phakid, derived from it,
signify a Visitor or Inspector, a Governor, a Judge, a King, or any one that
is invested with a Legislative and Coercive Power, and as Mercy and Justice do
equally belong to the Notion and Character of such a Person, so God himself,
who is the great Sovereign and Potentate of the World, as well when he inflicts
his Judgments, as bestows his Mercy, is said to visit Mankind.

I shall conclude these Observations upon the Text and Context, with observing
how careful the inspired Pen man of this Book of Judges is, to let us know that
all these Enormities and Calamities which he recounts, were the Effects and
Issues of there being no King in Israel, though indeed he does not say so in so
many Words, but he does as plainly imply it as any thing can be. For when he
tells us the Story of Micah, and his Ephod and Priest, he tells us also at the
same time, In those days there was no King in Israel, but every Man did that
which was right in his own Eyes. And the same Words are again repeated in the
next Chapter, where the Danites of their own Heads, without any Order or
Commission, to that purpose, make War upon the Men of Laish, and of the easy
Conquest they obtained the reason is express assigned, because the Men of Laish
dwelt careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, and because there was no
Magistrate in the Land that might put them to shame in any thing; so that they
were a loose and a divided People; and immediately before the Story of the
Levite and his Concubine, which drew such dismal Consequences after it, it is
again inculcated and repeated, And it came to pass in those days, when there
was no King Israel, that there was a certain Levite, etc. And Lastly, In the
Conclusion of the whole Book, where the Children of Israel, after the War with
Benjamin, disband and fall in pieces again, going every Man to his own Tent,
and after his own Imagination, he ends as he began, with the same remarkable
Words, In those days there was no King in Israel, every Man did that which was
right in his own Eyes; and then in probability that Famine followed which I
have now newly described.

But it is in vain to pursue this Argument any farther, the Miseries of Anarchy
are so many and so great, that there is no Tongue sufficient to express them,
nor any Conception large enough to comprehend them; they are as variable as the
Passions and Designs of Men, or the Occasions upon which they happen, and as
Bloody, as Cruelty, Ambition, Injustice and Revenge can make them; and if the
Reins of Discipline were let loose upon our Necks, or the Bridle of Obedience
perfectly taken off, and every Man let alone to abound in his own Sense, and
pursue his own Imaginations as far as he thought fit, it would soon come to
pass that the World, by the interfering Passions, and incompossible Desires and
Appetites of unreasonable Men, would be turned into a Wilderness of Thorns and
Briars, a Den of Thieves, a Forest of wild Beasts, a Chaos of Confusion, a
miserable Spectacle of Destruction and of Death displaying and brandishing its
frightful Terrors in a thousand several ghastly and lamentable Forms, a Theater
filled with desperate Gladiators, perpetually goring and stabbing one another,
a Slaughterhouse for Innocence, an inextricable Snare for Weakness, a Temple,
but not a Sanctuary for Oppression, a Region of Devils in the Shape of Men; so
that the old War betwixt the Giants and the Gods, which the Poets have
represented, as much the most terrible and outrageous thing that even Fancy and
Fable would stretch themselves to conceive, would of a sudden cease to be
Romantic any longer, and instead of being Fabulous, as it now appears, it would
pass for a cold and an imperfect Truth, not worthy the Name of a Poetical
Contrivance, nor fit to be compared with the real Animosities that would
intoxicate and embroil Mankind. It is but fit therefore in the midst of such
horrid and dismal Apparitions, as the Consideration of Anarchy presents us
with, before we enter upon the blessed and the glorious Scene of Establishment
and Order, to let down softly the Curtain of Confusion, that our Thoughts may
be composed and quiet, as the serene, beautiful and peaceful Subject about
which they are to be employed, and that we may relish the better the Happiness
of Government, and pray the more heartily for the Continuance of it, and for
the Birth of a Prince, that may render Empire in an everlasting Succession,
Hereditary to himself and his Descendents, and entail Peace, Righteousness,
Charity and Plenty upon all the Subjects of this Imperial Crown, as long as the
Sun continues to be constant, or the Moon to change.

FINIS.

