TWENTY-ONE Conclusions Further Demonstrating the SCHISM OF THE Church of
England etc.

Formerly Offered in Confutation of Dr. Hammond, and Bishop Bramhall.

To which are added, Some Reasons Tendered to impartial people, Why Dr. H.
Maurice, Chaplain to his Grace of Canterbury, ought not to be Traduced a^ the
Licenser of the Pamphlet, entitled, A Plain Answer to a Popish Priest,
Questioning the Orders of the (...) of England.

(...) Printed by (...) One of His Majesty's (...)

Twenty-One CONCLUSIONS Further Demonstrating the SCHISM of the Church of
England, etc.
I. THat (whatsoever the Extent of the Pope's Authority be, or be not, yet) '
it is clear, that all Roman Catholics, that is, all Communicants with the Church
of Rome, or Papists, hold the substance of the Popes Authority; that is, hold
the Pope to be Supreme Ecclesiastical Governor in God's Church. This is evident
from the very terms, since to acknowledge the Papal Authority is to be a Papist,
o^ Communicant with the Church of Rome.

II. The holding or acknowledging this Authority, is to all that hold it, that
is, to the whole Church of Rome, or to all those particular Church's united
with Rome, a Principle of Unity in Government. This is plain likewise from the
terms; since an Acknowledgment of one Supreme Governor, either in Secular or:
Spiritual affairs, is the Ground which establishes those Acknowledgers in
submission to that one Government; that is, it is to them a Principle of Unity
in Government.

III. ' It Is evident, That all those Churches in Communion with the Church of
Rome hold firmly, that whatsoever the Living Voice of the present Church, i. e.
of Pastors and Fathers of Families directed by those Pastors, shall unanimously
conspire to teach and deliver to Learners and Children to have been received
from their immediate Pastors and Fathers, as taught by Christ and his Apostles,
is to be undoubtedly held as taught by them; i. e. that this delivery from
immediate Forefathers as from theirs, as from Christ, is an infallible and
certain Rule of Faith, that is, a Principle of Unity in Faith. This to be the
Tenet of all particular Churches in Communion with Rome, both sides acknowledge;
and it is hence evident, that the Body made up of such Churches ever cast out
from its Communion all those that did innovate against this Tenet.

IV. It Is manifest, that all the Churches in Communion with Rome equally held
at the time of the Protestant Reformation, in K. Henry's days, these two
Principles as they do now, i. e. 1. The substance of the Pope's Authority, or
that he is Supreme in God's Church; 2. That the Living Voice of the present
Church, delivering as abovesaid, is the infallible Rule of Faith. This is
manifested by our Adversaries impugning those Churches, as holding Tradition
and the Popes Headship; nor was it ever pretended, that either those Churches
held not these Tenets then, or that they have renounced them since.

V. The Church of England, immediately before the Reformation, was one of those
Churches which held Communion with Rome, (as all the world grant) and
consequently held with the rest the two forementioned Tenets, proved to have
been the Principles of Unity both in Faith and Government.

VI. That Body of Christians, or that Christian Commonwealth consisting of the
then-Church of England and other Churches in Communion with Rome, holding
Christ's Law upon the said tenure of immediate Tradition, and submitting to the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of the Pope, was a true and real Church. This is
manifest by our very Adversaries acknowledgment, who grant the now Church of
Rome, even without their Church, to be a true and real one, tho holding the
same Principles of Unity, both in Faith and Government, which she held when the
Reformers revolted from her.

VII. That Body consisting of the then Church of England, and her other
Fellow-communicants with Rome was united or made one by means of these two
Principles of Unity. For the undoubted acknowledgment of one common Rule of
Faith to be certain, is in it is own nature apt to unite those Acknowledgers in
Faith, that is, to unite them as Faithful, and consequently in all other
Actions springing from Faith. And the undoubted acknowledgment of one Supreme
Ecclesiastical Governor gave these Acknowledgers an Ecclesiastical Unity, or
Church Communion under the notion of Governed, or Subjects of an Ecclesiastical
Commonwealth. Now nothing can more nearly concern a Church, than the Rules of
Faith and Government, especially if the Government be of Faith, and received
upon its Rule. Seeing then these two Principles gave them some Unity and
Communion as Faithful, and as belonging to an Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, it
must necessarily be Church-Unity and Communion which these two Principles gave
them.

VIII. The Protestant Reformers renounced both these Principles. This is
undeniably evident, since they left off to hold the Pope's Supreme power to act
in Ecclesiastical affairs, and also to hold diverse points, which the former
Church immediately before the breach, had received from immediate Pastors and
Fathers, as from Christ.

IX. Hence follows, That those Reformers in renouncing these two Principles did
commit the horrid fact of breaking Church Communion, or Schismatizing. This is
demonstrably consequent from the two last Paragraphs, where it is proved, that
those two Principles made Church Communion, that is, caused Unity in that Body
which themselves acknowledge a true Church; as also, that they renounced or
broke those Principles; therefore they broke that which United the Church: And
so broke the Unity of the Church, or Schismatiz'd.

X. This renouncing those two Principles of Ecclesiastical Communion, proved to
have been an actual breach of Church-Unity, was antecedent to the Pope's
Excommunicating the Protestants, and his commanding Catholics to abstain from
their Communion. This is known, and acknowledged by all the world; nor till
they were Protestants by renouncing those Principles, could they be
Excommunicated as Protestants.

XI. This actual breach of Church-Unity in King Henry's, Edward the Sixth's,
and the beginning of Queen Elizabeth' s Reign, could not be imputable to the
subsequent Excommunication, as to its cause. It Is plain, since the Effect
cannot be before the Cause.

XII. Those subsequent Excommunications, caused not the actual Breach, or
Sc^^sm between us For the antecedent renouncing those two points, shown to
have been the Principles of Ecclesiastical Unity, had already caused the
breach, disunion, or division between us: But, those between whom an actual
division is made, are not still divisible; that is, th^^ who are already
divided are not now to be divided. Wherefore however it may be pretended, that
those Excommunications made those Congregations, who were antecedently thus
divided, stand at further distance from one another; yet it is most senseless,
and unworthy a man of reason to affirm, that they divided those who were
already divided e're those Excommunications came. Especially, since the Rule of
Faith, and the substance of the Pope's Authority consist in an indivisible, and
are points of that nature, that the renouncing t^ese, is a Principle of
renouncing all Faith and Government. For, whoever renounces any Rule, may, nay
ought, if he act consequently, renounce all he holds upon that Rule, whether
points of Faith or of Government, nay even the Letter of God's Written Word it
self; that is, all that Christ left us, or that can concern a Church.

XIII. The renouncing those two Principles of the former Church-Unity, as it
evidently disunited men's minds in order to Faith and Government, so, if
reduced into practice, it must necessarily dis-unite or divide them likewise in
External Church-carriage. This is clear, since our Tenets are the Principles of
our Actions; and so contrary Tenets of contrary carriage.

XIV. Those tenets contrary to the two Principles of Church-Unity were de facto
put in practice by the Reforming Party; and consequently they divided the
Church, both internally and externally. This is most undeniably evident; since
they wrote, preached, and acted against the Tradition, or Delivery of the
immediately foregoing Church, as erroneous in many points, which she delivered
to them as from immediate Fathers, and so upwards as from Christ; and proceeded
now to interpret Scripture by another Rule than by the Tenets and Practice of
that immediately foregoing Church. And as for the former Government, they
absolutely renounced its influence in England, preached and wrote against it:
Na^^kept Congregations apart before they had got the power in their hands* and,
after they had the power in their hands, punished and put to Death (and that
upon account of Religion) many of the maintainers of those two Principles of
Church-Unity.

XV. Hence follows, That the Protestant Breach was a perfect and complete Fact
of Schism. For it divided the former Ecclesiastical Body both internally and
externally, and that as it was an Ecclesiastical Body, since it violated those
two Principles which concerned Ecclesiastical Unity.

XVI. The subsequent Excommunication of our Church was therefore due, fitting,
and necessary. Due; for it is as due a carriage toward those who have actually
renounced the Principles of Unity both in Faith and Government, and so broken
Church-Unity, to be Excommunicated by that Body from which those Renouncer's
thus broke, as it is toward Rebels, who have renounced both Supreme Government
and Fundamental Laws of a Commonwealth, and so divided the Temporal Body, to be
denounced and proclaimed Rebels by the same Commonwealth. Fitting, since the
effect of it they most resent, which was to keep the true Faithful apart in
Ecclesiastical actions from them, signified no more than this, that they who
had broken both internally and externally from the former Body should not be
treated with, in Ecclesiastical matters, as still of it, nor be owned for parts
of that Commonwealth of which already they had made themselves no parts.
Lastly, Necessary; All Government and good order going to wrack, if opposite
parties be allowed to treat together commonly in such actions in which their
opposition must necessarily and frequently discover it self; which will
inevitably disgust the more prudent sort, hazard to pervert the weaker, and
breed disquiet on both sides.

Thus far to evidence demonstrably, that the external fact of Schism was truly
theirs; which done, tho it be needless to add any more to prove them formal
Schismatics, themselves confessing that such a fact cannot be justifiable by
any reasons or motives whatsoever [ Sch. c. 1.] Yet I shall not depend upon
their standing to their own words, knowing how easy a thing it is, for men who
talk loosely, and not with strict rigor of Discourse, to shuffle off their own
sayings: I shall therefore prosecute my own method, and alledg, That

XVII. The very doing an external fact, of so heinous a nature as is breaking
Church-Unity, concludes a Guilt in the Actors, unless they render reasons truly
sufficient to excuse their fact. This is evident, a fortiori, by paralleling
this to facts of inferior malice: For, whosoever rises against a long settled
and acknowledged Temporal Power, is concluded by that very fact of rising to be
a Rebel, unless he render sufficient reasons for it: Otherwise, till those
reasons appear, the Good of Peace, Order, and Unity, which he evidently
violates by his rising, concludes him most irrational and sinful.

XVIII. No reasons can be sufficient to excuse such a fact, but such as are
able to convince, that 'twas better to do that fact, than not to do it. This is
most evident.

XIX. In this case, where the point is demonstrable, and of highest concern, no
reason merely probable can convince the Understanding, that the contrary was
better to be done, but only a manifest and rigorous demonstration. For, tho in
the common sort of human actions, an high Probability that the thing is in it
self better, be sufficient for action, yet there are some things of a nature so
manifest to all Mankind to be universally good, that nothing but rigorous
Evidence can be pretended a ground sufficient to oppose them. For example, that
Parents are to be honored, that Government is to be in the World, that Unity
of Government is to be kept up in God's Church, that there ought to be certain
Grounds for Faith, etc. Which, since on the one side they are such as are in
their own nature demonstrable, and indeed self-evident, and on the other so
universally beneficial, and consequently an universal harm, or rather a deluge
of inconveniences and mischief would break in if the Actor against these should
happen to be in the wrong; He is therefore bound in these cases not to act till
he sees the utmost that is to be seen concerning such affairs: But affairs of
this nature are demonstrable, or rather self-evident (as is said) on the one
side, therefore he ought not to act, unless he could see perfect demonstration,
that it is better for him to act otherwise: Wherefore, it having been manifestly
proved, that this Fact of theirs left neither Certain Ground of Faith, nor
Unity of Government in God's Church, nothing but a perfect and rigorous
demonstration could be able to convince the Understanding, that 'twas better to
act.

XX. The Protestants produce no such demonstration, that 'twas better to act in
this case. For, they never closed with severe demonstration, in any of their
Writings I have yet seen, to evidence rigorously either, That the Rule of
immediate Delivery was not certain, or that the Pope had no Supreme Authority
in Ecclesiastical affairs, or lastly, that the Pope's Authority was to be
abolisht for the Abuses sake: Which were necessary to be done, ere they could
demonstrate it better to break Church-Unity. Nor does their manner of writing
bear the slenderest resemblance of rigorous demonstration: Since demonstration
is not a connecting of Air and Words, but of Notions and Sense; and this from
self-evident Principles even to the very intended Conclusion. Whereas their way
of Writing is only to find out the Sense of Words by a kind of
Dictionary-manner; which sort of Discourse is the most fallible, slight, and
subject to Equivocation, that can be imagined. To omit, that rigorous
Demonstration is pretended by our Party for the proof of our Rule of Faith,
viz. immediate Tradition, which they renounced; and consequently for the proof
of whatsoever was received upon it (as was the Pope's Authority) as yet
unanswered by their side. Nay their own side sometimes acknowledge our said Rule
of Faith infallible; even Dr. Hammond himself, who affirms, that Universal
Attestation makes one as certain of a thing, as if he had seen it with his own
eyes.

XI. ' It Is the most absurd and impious folly imaginable, to bring for their
excuse, That they were fully persuaded the thing was to be done, or is to be
continued. For, since a full persuasion may spring from Passion or Vice, as
well as from Reason and Virtue, it signifies nothing, in order to an excuse, to
say one was fully persuaded he was to do such a thing, till he show whence he
became thus persuaded; otherwise his persuasion might be a fault it self, and
the occasion of his other fault in thus acting. It Is not therefore his
Persuasion, but the Ground of his Persuasion, which is to be alleged, and
looked into. Which, if it were Reason, whence he came thus persuaded, and that
he knew how he came to be persuaded (without knowing which, 'twas irrational to
be persuaded at all) then he can render us this reason which persuaded him; and
reason telling us evidently, that no reason less than demonstration is in our
case able to breed full persuasion or conviction, that it was better to act (as
has been proved Conc. 19.) It follows, they must give us a demonstrative
reason, why 'twas better to be done, otherwise they can never justify that
persuasion, much less the fact which issued from it: But the fact being
evidently enormous, and against a present Order of highest concern, and no
truly evident reason appearing, why 'twas better to do that fact, it is from it
self convinced, and concluded irrational, precipitate, and vicious. If they
complain of this doctrine, as too rigorous in leaving no excuse for weak and
ignorant persons, who act out of simplicity: I reply, either their first
Reformers, and themselves the continuers of the Breach, thought themselves
ignorant of those things they went about to reform, or no. If they thought
themselves ignorant, and yet attempted to make themselves Judges, it is a plain
self-condemnation and irrational. If they were ignorant, or in some degree
ignorant, or in some degree less ignorant; then I ask, what made them think
themselves wiser than they were, except their own Pride: So that which way
soever they turn, their fault and guilt pursue them. But, if they were indeed
knowing in those things, then it is apparent there are no truly sufficient,
convincing, or demonstrative reasons to be given why they acted, since they
were never able to produce any such, tho urged and obliged thereunto by the
highest motives imaginable. Whence they remain still criminal as in the former
cases, and indeed much more, leaving it manifest, that neither persuasion, nor
their fact which was originiz'd from it, sprung from Reason in their
Understanding, but from Passion and Affection in their Will.

Therefore the Protestants are Guilty both of Material and Formal Schism; since
it is evident, they have done both a Schismatical Fact, and out of a
Schismatical Affection.

Some Reasons tendered to impartial persons, why Dr. H. Maurice, Chaplain to
his Grace of Canterbury, ought not to be Traduced as the Licenser of the
Pamplet, entitled, A Plain Answer to a Popish Priest, Questioning the Orders
of the Church of England.
1. DR. H. Maurice is not that weak, illiterate Man, as to let pass with his
Imprimatur, such a forged imputation, as I find in the 5th and 6th Line; Our
(Church of England) Ordainers are Schismatics, or Heretics, and so cannot
Ordain. Forged, I say, because the Pamphlet says, this uses to be objected;
whereas it is most notoriously false, That Ordination from a Schismatic or
Heretic is invalid; and equally false, that Papists argue from the Schism or
Heresy of the Ordainer, that the power of Conferring Orders is null: And
consequently, it is not the Papists objection, but a mere fiction, that this
hard forehead presumes to obtrude upon us, as approved by Dr. Maurice.

2. Dr. Maurice knows, that Lambeth-Ordination, as to the matter of fact,
depends on the Veracity of Dr. Parker; and if Dr. Parker was so upright a man,
as never to have forged or corrupted Records, (which I hear the Papists pretend
to prove) the Nags-head-Ordination will require a very strong assurance to
outface Dr. Parker's Record. But that his Ordainers were Three, nay more than
Three true Bishops, is such a great point, that the Papists must eternally be
dumb, if this can be made out; and therefore it would be kindly taken, if an
Authentic Record were produced to prove they were all, or any of them so. And
whereas in the Archives of Canterbury Dr. Maurice cannot find any such Record,
he could not suppose this Pamphleteer responsible for any such.

3. All know, That as to the Succession in Doctrine, the Arians had it not, tho
they pleaded Belief of all Necessaries to Salvation believed so before Nice;
and the Papists say, the Protestants Plea and Belief is no better, whilst they
submit not to the Decisions of Trent. So that Succession in Doctrine is a
Disputable point; and Dr. Maurice has more judgment than to approve what is
boldly said, not proved at all.

4. If then it be uncertain (for Infallibility the Church of England pretends
not to), whether Protestants have that Succession of Doctrine, (the Pamphlet
proves it not, but only says we have), it should have been proved, that at
least they have Succession of Persons to show, who have all along had true
Orders, and conferred them on other Ordainers till these times. The Pamphlet
says so in these words, We have had such a Succession from the very foundation
of our Church. But neither tells us whence he times this foundation of his
Church, nor troubles himself to prove this Succession, otherwise than by saying
it is not necessary to show it. It will not easily be believed, that Dr.
Maurice cannot distinguish betwixt saying and proving, or that he approved the
Paper which does so.

5. If those Western Fathers prove Innovation upon Heretics, because they
wanted true Succession from the Apostles; and by instancing in the Succession
of the Church of Rome, prove evidently they meant Succession of Persons; then
certainly stants must endeavor to answer better than they, lest they seem to
be only Yesterday-men; and if their Plea of Believing all Necessaries to
Salvation, or Succession of Doctrine, excused them not; and if Succession of
Persons not shown, convinced them of Novelty* something more Protestants must
have to say, than that it is not necessary to show any. And since this man does
not, and thence gives occasion to Papists to think it cannot be done, I must
not think Dr. Maurice would concur to expose his Church.

6. He approves not that Aphorism, None can conser that Power on another, which
he has not himself: Because if it were true, an Infidel could not give
Baptism, because not Baptized. Truly I do not see how this follows, tho that
Aphorism be generally true. For, if Baptism be not the power of Baptizing, then
surely one not Baptized may have the power of Baptizing; and if he exercises
this power, he does not confer a power on another which he has not himself. I
fear this man, by this Innuendo would dispose us to believe, that their Bishops
had their Orders as validly from Laymen's, as others may in case of necessity
have Baptism from the hands of Infidels. It is what Savage allows to the
disgrace of his new Church, but I must not believe Dr. Maurice did.

7. He says, That Christ instituted no Form of words; he says so, and that is
his proof. Now to use some of his own terms, I would be glad to meet that man
who could evidently prove to me, 1. That Christ instituted no Form of Words. 2.
Delivered not the holy Vessels to the Apostles. 3. Gave them no power to Offer
Sacrifice for the Quick and the Dead. Proving is more than saying he did not.

8. The Title says He (the Pamphleteer) is a Minister of the Church of England;
and so we should believe him a Divine; and if the consequence were good, No
Divine, no Minister; it would be visible enough that he shamm'd us in the
Title, For here comes Imposition of Hands to be the Form of Orders. Risum
teneatis Theologi. Nay the Roman Church allows it (Imposition of Hands) to be a
sufficient Form, nay the Grecian too, etc. Antiquity, St. Chrysostom, whereas
the Romish Form of touching the Vessels is younger by 800 years than our
Savior's time. Assuredly Dr. Maurice knows how to distinguish Matter and Form,
which this poor man does not. And whilst Papists charge Protestants to have no
true Form, to answer they have a true Form, and then prove they have true
Matter, and miscall it Form, is not to answer them, but betray the Protestants;
and I must not believe Dr. Maurice concerned in it.

9. His Answer to the third Objection is impertinent, because it answers not
any Popish Objection, as you see in the beginning, but only his own fiction.
Indeed I observe the kindness of this man to his Mother Church; he will suppose
her Bishops Schismatical and Heretical, and then defend the validity of her
Ordination by the validity of Laymen's Baptism, and suchlike cases; which is
the second Innuendo, that as Laymen may validly Baptize, so they may validly
Ordain Bishops. Certainly Dr. Maurice would never approve this.

If Ordination of Heretics be valid, as he allows here, then Succession of
Persons, is sufficient without Succession of Doctrine, which he allows not
before. But this man's Truth is like his Logic. Greeks sent from the Seminary
at Rome to be Ordained by Heretical Bishops in the East! I believe he has no
Authentic Record for this neither.

10. I conclude then, That this man's Intention is not to defend, but expose
Protestant-Orders; and what he concludes with concerning the assurance of the
validity of their Orders, because they require not the Intention of the
Ordainer, squints suspitiously toward the Nags-head Tavern, as tho their first
pretended Bishops intending to be merry there, laid their Hands upon one
another, without intending any more, and that any one may do as much for his
Neighbor, and as validly too, when he intends nothing less; and that such only
is the assurance of the validity of their Orders: and that such is the Opinion
too of Dr. H. Maurice, the Respect given to his Learning and his Character will
not allow me to believe.

FINIS.

