AN ESSAY UPON THE WORKS OF Creation and Providence: BEING AN Introductory
Discourse TO THE History of Remarkable Providence, Now preparing for the Press.

To which is added a FURTHER SPECIMEN of the said WORK: AS ALSO Meditations
upon the Beauty of Holiness.

By William Turner M. A. and Vicar of Walberton in Sussex.

The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his Handy
Work.

Psalm 19.1. LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, and
are also sold by Edm. Richardson near the Poultry Church. 1695.

To the Worshipful JAMES BUTLER OF Patcham in Sussex, Esquire AND HIS Virtuous
Consort.
Sir and Madam,
MY Design is not to offer you here any Flattering Encomium, but to acknowledge
a Score that I have run upon in your Books for some time; to make a little
Apology for the seeming negligence and forgetfulness I have been guilty of: And
this I the rather do, because you will guess by these Presents, not only that I
am alive, but the Favors you have sometime showed me are alive in my thoughts
too: Only my self lie half-buried in Cares and Books; so that I want leisure to
pay my Debts and Devoirs in due time and manner; and faculty to do it in due
measure. Be pleased to contemplate a little while with me here the Beauty of
the Outward Parts of Heaven, and thence make conjecture at the Wisdom of Him
that made the World, and the Provision He has made in the Highest Heavens, for
all that Love and Obey Him in Truth. This is but a Harbinger for a more
Complete History of Divine Providence, designed e're long for the Press. It
cannot be improper certainly to Ascend Pisgah by degrees; (we may see the
Outward Skirts of Heaven from the Foot of the Mount. When we can get to the
Top, our desire is to take a prospect of the whole Hemisphere; to leave the
Stars, whilst we make enquiry after all the Invisible Host of the Middle
Region, that are employed about us either as Friends or Enemies. The God of
Heaven make your Graces shine more and more in the mean time, that they may
outshine and outlast the Stars, and you your selves be fixed in their room for
ever; so pray I for you, pray you so for,

Worshipful Sir and Worthy Madam, Your Obliged Servant, W. T.

TO THE READERS.
SIRS,
IT IS the Prerogative of Human Nature, that me have not only a Lofty Figure and
Visage, but Intellectuals too, far superior to all the Brutish kind; And this
Endowment bestowed upon us by Him that made us, for very Wise and Good Ends:
Not to be more ingeniously Wicked and Dishonest; to immerge our selves deeper
in the Concerns and Pleasures of a Material and Sensual World; but to live
Above it. My Design is to climb a Jacob's Ladder, to satisfy a little the
Curiosity of my Nature, to inform my self first of all; and then my Fellows (so
far as soberly and modestly I may) with all the Phenomena of the Etherial
Region: To acquaint my self and others with the Outward Face of Heaven first of
all, and all the Visible Furniture of the Outward Court: Those Glorious
Spangles of Stars and Planets, those Fiery Meteors, and other Strange
Exhalations and Vapors, that occur to our Senses and common Observations.

And this not for Bare Contemplation only; but with a Design to make as
Natural, Genuine and Reasonable Deductions for Practice, as possible. This is
all I aim at in this Treatise; but with a full purpose (if it please God to
spare my Life and Health) to make a New Survey e're long of that Spiritual and
Invisible World, where those Dii Medioxami, Intermediate Agents are employed,
as Reporters and Transporters, Monitors, Couriers, Apparitors, Guardians,
Adversaries, between This and the other World. For certainly it is lawful,
whilst we live here, to peep out of our Prison, and take acquaintance, in what
degree lawfully we can, with Angels and Naked Spirits. Upon the score of our
Kindred and Alliance to them, and Concernment with them, we are obliged so far;
we must do it, or we are not only Disingenuous, but blind to our own Interest.
And why does the Almighty use so frequently and remarkably in the World those
Intelligent and Spiritual Ministers in the Exercise of his Providence, if we
might not enquire after them, and take acquaintance with them. Is He ashamed of
his Spiritual Train and Family? Or are they so mighty strange and foreign to
our Natures, or so very far above us, that we must run away like People
Afrighted out of our Wits, to hide from all such Apparitions in Corners of
Thick Darkness! But why should we be so ungrateful to those Angelical
Creatures, as to suppress all those Occurrences of History, all those
conspicuous Remarks of the Divine Providence, wherein their Footsteps are
plainly visible, not only to their Grief and Dishonor, but to the Great
Encouragement of Atheism and Infidelity in the World. Thus far, I humbly
conceive, we may safely climb Our Scala Coeli; to the Veil that interposeth
between us and the Inner Court; to the Gate of the New Jerusalem; and no
farther. The Lord Guide us, the Angels Guard us in all our ways, till we are
got safe into that place, where we shall be satisfied with Glories, which now
we little know or comprehend, where we shall be sweetly surprised, and bravely
entertained with Joyous Company and Glorious Objects, and Tread not only the
Moon, but all the Starry Globes under our Feet for evermore, Amen.

Your Servant in all Christian Offices, W. T.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the greatness of the Heavens. CHAP. II. Of the Quality of the
Heavens. CHAP. III. Of the Situation of the Heavens. CHAP. IV. Of the Stars
and Planets. CHAP. V. Of Comets, Thunder and Lightning, Air and Winds, Storms
and Tempests, Hail, Rain, Snow and Frosts, Extraordinary Signs and Apparitions.
CHAP. VI. Of the Continuation of the Heavenly Bodies. CHAP. VII. Of the
Extensiveness of the Heavens. CHAP. VIII. Of the Glorious Body of the Sun.
Meditations on the Beauty of Holiness. A Scheme of the History of Providence. A
further Specimen of the said History.

AN ESSAY UPON THE WORKS OF Creation and Providence.
IN my Contemplation of this Subject, my Design is to take measure by the
Sublimity of Our Aspect and the Excellency of the Object; for the Order and
Method of my Thoughts. Both these seem naturally disposed to determine my
Choice of the Heavens and Heavenly Bodies, and the Appurtenances that are more
nearly related to them, and depend upon them, for the Subject of my present
Discourse; leaving this Globe of Earth, the very Sediment of the Creation, and
the most Dreggy Part of the World, for my future Thoughts and Meditations. And
because in all our Disquisitions and Actions, we ought to propound to our
selves, for our main End, the Glory of God, I shall consider, I. The Greatness
of the Heavens. II. The Quality of them. III. Their Situation. IV. The Stars
and Planets. V. Other Inferior Appurtenances, Comets, Thunder and Lightning,
Air and Winds, Storms and Tempests, Hail, Rain, Snow and Frosts, Extraordinary
Signs and Apparitions, etc. VI. The Continuation of them. VII. Their
Extensiveness and Universality.


And Lastly, Because amongst all these the Sun is the most Admirable, most
Conspicuous, most Glorious Body, I shall Assign a particular Meditation upon
This Great and Excellent Luminary by it self.

But so I shall manage my Discourse from the Beginning to the End, as to
intermix it all along with Practical Remarks and Inferences; as accounting it
(beneath a Christian especially) but a poor Exercise to expend our Best
Thoughts upon Barren Speculations.

CHAP. I. Of the Greatness of the Heavens.
1. THen I shall consider the Greatness of the Heavens. By the Heavens, I mean
not the Supreme Emperial Part, not the Seat of the Blessed, which is out of
sight, and the reach of Human Sense, but the outward, lower invisible parts of
the Heavenly Orbs; those parts which may be seen: And how great these are you
cannot expect, that we should be able certainly to tell you; they are very
great, that we all know; so vast, that they comprehend within the cavity of
them the whole Universe, besides all the Earth, Seas, Air, and every thing that
belongs to them. Astronomers say, the Primum Mobile is 1960 times bigger than
the Earth; whatever it is, the magnitude is wonderful, past our fathom, and
enough to fill us with the admiration of Him that made it.

CHAP. II. Of the Quality of the Heavens.
OF such a subtle, diaphinous nature, that it will not terminate our sight, a
man may see through it, if the distance did not hinder; more thin and
perspicuous than the Air it self, clearer than the Crystal, or the finest
Glass, Ezekiel. 1.22. Rev. 21.11. Rev. 4.6. So immutable, that for near upon 6000
years it has not been impaired, or decayed, or altered with continual exercise
and motion. Every thing here below the Moon is subject to change: The outward
and courser Arches of the Heavens suffer no damage; even Stones and Monuments,
in this lower World, die with age: The Posts and Pillars, the outward Scaffold
of the World above, is in its own nature, by the Law of the Supreme Architect,
immortal, I mean so, that no creature can endamage them, till the God that made
them, forbid them to be any more.

The nearer to God and Heaven, the more pure, firm and lasting the Constitution
of the Creature is.

If the Outward Heavens are such, what is the Seat of the Blessed, which (if
terminated in any place) lies beyond them! What are the Angels that tread that
Floor, those Arches under Feet! What is God Himself, that made them, and looks
after them!

The FIGVRE also is very Wonderful: So vastly Great, and yet exactly Round:
Without any Unevennesses, or Angles and Turnings; of a perfect Circular Figure.
Circulus (said the Philosophers) est Divinum quid. And the Egyptians pourtrayed
one of their Divinities (named Kneph) as a Beautiful Man, with Feathers on his
Head, a Girdle, and a Scepter in his Hand, with an Egg, (the Hieroglyphick of
the World) proceeding out of his Mouth. And some of them did adore the Circle
of the Heavens, as an expression of his Power and Perfections. And it is true,
there is no Figure so capacious as the Round One; because (as I said) it admits
no corners, no unevenness, etc. Nor is there any Being so perfect as God,
without any Infirmity or Defect. How great then in Power and Wisdom must this
God be, that stretched out the Heavens like a Round Canopy, and hung it over
this lower World, in so exact and Circular a Figure, that no inequality can be
found in it!

CHAP. III. Of the Situation of the Heavens.
ALL this Great Body, hung with an Innumerable Number of Stars and Planets,
(each Body big enough to make a World of), all this hung upon Nothing; no
Material Arches, no visible Pillars to support it! Nothing but the Power of him
that made it. It surpasses Humane Skill, the Wit of all Men in the World, to
hang a little Ball, or an Egg-shell in the Air, without somewhat material to
support it. God has no only hung the Earth, (but the Heavens also) upon
nothing. What cannot the God of all the World do! Let Him but speak the Word,
and he can make a World stand without Pillars! His World is enough for a World
to stand upon! and shall poor sneaking man be afraid to venture upon his
Promise! He spoke the World, and the World was created; He spoke the Word, and
the Heavens were stretched forth over the Empty Places! He may speak the World
Ten Thousand Times, and Man shall despond and be afraid to venture out any
further than he can stand upon his own Legs! If St. Peter step forth upon the
Sea at the voice of his Savior, he begins to sink: And if the sinner do but
essay to trust upon the Word of the Almighty, when no outward supply is ready
at Hand, his Faith fails him, and he sinks into Despair! So long as we have
money in our pockets, or a Remedy in sight, we can keep our feet, but
inpoverty, distress, and danger, all the promises in the Gospel, sealedwith the
World and Oath of a God, are not ground enough for man to set his foot upon!

CHAP. IV. Of the Stars and Planets.
WHich deserve to be considered, 1 As Many. How many I know not. You have heard
the phrases, as the Stars of Heaven for multitude, and as the Sands upon the
Seashore, used promiscuously, sometimes one, sometimes the other. Astronomers
have long ago reckoned up 1022 of them that are visible; and it is concluded,
those that are invisible are far the greater number; Psalm 17.. He tells the
number of the Stars, and call them all by their Names, If the Stars of Heaven
be so numerous, what are the Inhabitants that dwell beyond! I grant it is a
LittleFlock that goes to Heaven, compared with the many, many Damnel Souls that
go to Hell, but as God to Abraham, Genesis 15.5. Look now toward Heaven and tell,
etc. The nnmber of them them that stand about the Throne, is ten thousand
timesten thousand, and thousands of thousands stand before him! Rev. 5.11. He
keeps mercy for thousand of them that love him, and keep him Commands. And
let not any think, that amongst so many Children God will forget or overlook
any of them, he knows them all, and will lose none of them. He calls his own
Sheep by name, and leads them out, john 10.3. He counts our wanderings, put our
Tears into a Bottle, the very Hairs of our Head are allnumbred: There Is not a
word in our Mouth, nor a thought in our Heart, but he knows it altogether! Such
knowledge is too great for us; it with an awful Reverence of the Divine
Omnipotence and Wisdom. Consider then a little Sinner, how many thy sins are,
how many the Mercies of God bestowed upon thee, how many invitations thou have
had to Repeintance, and how many repusses thou have given to the Messages of
Heaven; and withal how, if they were ten thousand times ten thousand more, God
knows and remembers them all; and then say with Job c. 9.2. how should men be
just with God?

2. Their greatness: Indeed they seem little to us, because they are a great
way off: Distance of place gives disadvantage to the prospect; but lie that
says they are no bigger than they seem, is as wife as that Philosopher that
thought the Sun was no bigger than his head. The Learned and most Skillful
Astronomers do generally conclude it for a demonstrative Truth, that the least
Star in the Firmament is bigger than the Earth we live upon; And yet these so
great Bodies are carried so high, supported only with the hand of the Almighty,
let not the Penitent Sinner then say can God raise me up from the Grave of Sin,
from things below, and set me up on high, and bring me safe to Heaven. Tho thou
lie now among the Potsherds, sunk deep into sin and misery, yet God is able
to lift thee and thousands more, and carry thee as upon Eagles Wings, and set
you as Stars in Heaven, there to shine for ever and ever.

4. Dstance from one another (especially thePlanets) and from the Earth. The
Moon is next to us, Mercury next, Venus in the third place, the Sun fourth,
Mars the fifth, Jupiter the sixth, Saturn highest; the Fixed Stars
abovethemall. Were they all the same Orb, they would move together at the same
time, and make no distinction of Day and Night, of Winter and Summer, or not so
much as would serve for our necessities: And should they be all so low, as the
lowest; or should he that holds them there, let them fall thence by the reverse
of his Decree, or the withdrawing of his constant Providence, they would soon
set this World on fire, and send us off the Stage, and burn the Universe into a
Scrole: Should God draw back the hand of his Omnipotence but one moment, the
Stars would fall upon our Heads, and make this whole World into a Hell in the
twinkling of an Eye! How necessarily do we depend upon the Divine Mercy for our
safety and security every hour we live! more ways than one (than a
thousand)does he keep death and destruction from us! Let us consider a little
this excellent Favor: So many Globes as big as Worlds, and most of them far
greater, hanging over our Heads all the days of our Life, and westill walking
safe under them; how much (methinks) do we owe to the Power and Good Providence
of God forsaving our Lives in such eminent danger, were those excellent Bodies
subject to the like irregularities, as we are; aptto go out of their place,
toleave their Orbs, to disobey the Will of him that made them, as Man generally
is, what a dangerous condition should we be in! Damocles sat down to Table at a
Feast, with a naked Sword hanging over his Head, with a Horse-hair, had no such
rouson of an awful fear upon him, as we have; if he that Governed the Stars
were a Man, and not God.

5. Their Light. Which is so great in all, that if but one of the Stats or
Planets (except the Moon, which has none but borrowed Light) that if they were
not kept at a distance from us, would certainly dazzle our weak Eyes into
absolute blindness; or if removed much farther off, would not serve our
necessities. p. 63.
But of this more hereafter.

6. Motion, Incredibly swift, insomuch that as Lessins says, such Stars as are
near the Equinoctial Line, do move every hour 40 millions ofmiles, every
million being 1000000, and so in one hour move more than comes to 2000 times
the Compass of the Earth. The Sun (says the same Author) in the compass of one
hour goes in its motion 1000000 miles; whereupon it is certain, that in the same
space of time it equals the Compass of the Earth in its course above 50 times.
What an amazing wonder of Omnipotence is this! Let those Atheistical Sinners
think of it, that all daily for a Miracle to prove the Being of a God. Here Is a
Miracle, that presents before us every day! And every man that has Eyes in his
Head (if he has Brains too) may see it, and wonder! Why, what would men have a
God todo, more than this! If he should make a fresh Creations of a World every
hour, men might still wink and disbelieve; and still call for fresh Miracles!
As if the Almighty Jehovah had nothing else to do, than humor the silly
Passions of hard hearted sinners, of pitiful ineredulous worm! Well! it will
not be long, but God will justify himself to these men, before Angels and
Devils; and show in spite of all their spightful insidelity, that he did not
leave himself without witness in the World.

7. Influences, which are diverse, and some of them not known to us, or
discoverable to us. I shall mention some.

1. Warming these Sublunary Bodies, and insusing sueli a heat into them, as is
necessary for Life and Motion; insomuch that without it, there would be no
generaton, no motion, no life in the Creatures of this World. Take away but the
Sun out of the Firmament, and no Spring would appear, Man would be no more, the
Acts of Accretion, Growing, Feeling, Moving, Seeing, Living, would all cease
presently. Sol and Homo generant hominem. Nay, were the Sun removed but as far
from us, as the Fixed Stars, England would be Ireland, and all our year prove a
cold Winter; our very Senses would prove chill, and our Reasons follow hard
after them, for temperamentum animi sequitur temperamentum Corpois: What an
excellent God have we to deal with, who accommodates us so kindly, seasonably,
suitably with Fire and Fuel from Heaven, not only to ferment the Clouds in
order to Rain, to dissolve the Snow and Hail, to warm the Ar that pierces our
Bodies, to foment the Earth and make it fruitful, but also cherish our Human
Bodies, and makes our Souls more pleasant which dwell in such warm Stoves. If
all the Wood and Combustible Matter on the Earth were heaped together, to make
one Pile in order to a great Bonefire for the benefit of the Earth, it would
not do so much good (but would come infinitely short) as the Stars and Planets
of Heaven. Besides, if the warmth of the lower Orbs be so friendly and
beneficial to our natures, what is the Grace of God that comes down from the
Inner Heaven, the Light of his Countenance, to our Inner Souls! If the Sun with
its Pleasant Rays makes the Sublunary World smile, and laugh and sing, shall
not the Special Grace and Favor of the Almighty much more put gladness into
our hearts! and make us cheerful in the Service of our Maker! If the presence
of the Hosts of Heaven, the Sun, Moon and Stars be so comfortable, what is the
presence of the Lord of Hosts, the Blessed God, the Communion of the Holy
Jesus, the Influences of the Spirit of Grace, the Company of Angels, Cherubim
and Seraphim! Let us say as Psalm 4. many say, who will show us any good, --
etc. Besides, if the Outward Court of this World be so comforted with the
warmth of the Outward Parts of Heaven; is there nothing in the Emperial Orbs,
in the Inner Chambers to refresh and comfort the Church of God! Is the Atrium
Gentium so pleasant, and is the Sanctum Sanctorum (the Holy of Holies) devoid
and desolate!

2. The Flux and Reflux, Ebb and Flowing of the Sea; that indeed depends, as
generally concluded, upon the Moon only: But that is such a Wonder in Nature,
that it sufficiently illustrates the Power and Wisdom of God, Psalm 107.21, 22,
23. Oh that men would praise the Lord, etc. Thus God who daily makes the great
and wide Seas to Ebb and Flow, is able also to make the like changes and
visicissiudes in the World, in the Church! he turns mand to destruction;
again be, etc. Psalm. 90.3, 5, 6. Bsal. 107, 31, 32, etc.

3. Other secret Influences and Operations unknown to us, as to Weather,
Health, Plenty, and it may be, Wars and Peace, Prosperity and Afflictions, Life
and Death: For so far Astrologers go; but -- I would be wise unto sokiety, and
not peer too far, lest I should be taxed for Curiosity; in all this the Glory
of God appears.

CHAP. V. Of Comets, Thunder and Lightning, Air and Winds, Storms and Tempests,
Hail, Rain, Snow and Frosts, Extraordinary Signs and Apparitions.
I Shall here speak of the other Insevlour Appurtenances of Heaven, I choose to
range them under that notion, because I intend not so much a Lecture of
Philosophy, as a plain discourse of Divinity. I mean the Comets, Thunder and
Lightning, Wind and Air, Vapors and Exhabations, Storms and Tempests, Hail,
Rain and Snow, strange Apparitions and Phenomena. I hope my time will not be
quite lost, nor I censured for impertinent, in treating on these things; God
himself therefore exhibiting them that we might duly meditare upon them, and
deduce Inferences thence for his Glory.

1. Comets and Blazing Stars, or whatever else of that nature appears in the
Heavens above us. I pass over those Miteors of lesser moment, Falling Stars,
Burning Lances, Flying Dragons, Skipping Goats, Ignes Fatui and licking Fires,
as exhalations of inferior wonder. Comets are the most stupendous. I hope, no
body amongst Christians is so silly as Democritus, who took them for the Souls
of the Saints Trimphing in Glory: Or as others, Fires carried thither by
Spirits, only to astonish the World.

Whatever they are generated of (for I will not meddle here with the Physical
Consideration) their meaning is something; the God of Nature, who is so Wise,
as to make nothing in vain, without all doubt puts them in the Heavens for some
sign or other: Nor dare I be peremptory, to assign the particular
signification. I humbly conceive, the most that we can read in those Celestial
Hierogliphycks is, that God is going to do some great thing in the World; and
that at the hanging out of those Flags, it behooves men to enquire into their
Lives, and search their ways more narrowly, and prepare -- to meet their God,
who is coming to judge the World in equity, and makes these Flames of Fire his
Harbingers to prepare his way, and give notice of his coming. I shall not
trouble you with particular Instances of these kind of Meteors; the Scripture
tells us at the Birth of our Savior a Star appeared, which perhaps was the
Comet spoken of by Heathen Authors in the days of Angustus, of a stupendous
greatness, upon which the Tibertine Sibyl showed the Emperor the Divinity of
our Savior in these words, Hic Puer Major te est, Ipsum adora. Our last great
Comet, I doubt not, was of extraordinary signification, not to us only, but to
whole Europe and farther, so far as it was conspicuous. What a Gracious God
have we, that never scarce goes about any great Commotions or Changes in the
World, but he gives warning beforehand! as if, not willing to take us tardy! He
shows his signs in the Heavens above, when he is about to do any great Work in
the Earth beneath! And therefore as Darius in the case of Daniel, Chap. 6.26,
27. Let men tremble and fear before this God, for he is the Living God and
steadfast for ever, his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed; and his
Dominion shall be even unto the end; he delivers and rescueth, and works
signs and wonders in Heaven and Earth.

2. Thunder and Lightning, called by the Psalmist the Voice of God, and by some
supposed to be that Trumpet that shall sound at the last day to raise the Dead,
and to call to Judgment.

I will not trouble you with declaring the strange and diverse effects of this
kind of Meteor, its hurting of things Inward, when the Outward are safe;
shattering the Bones, when the Flesh is left sound; melting the Blade of the
Sword, when the Scabbard is free; breaking the Vessel, when the Wine flows not
away; exempting poisonous Creatures from their Venom, and infusing it into
those who are not so; striking men dead, and leaving them in the same posture
it found them, as if still alive, etc. It is enough to say, that it is a
stupendous Meteor, and may well be called the Voice of the Divine Excellency
-- Job 37.2, 3, 4, etc. Job 26.6, -- 14. It is said of Nero, that a Thunderbolt
fell upon his Table, and struck the Cup out of the Emperors Hand. And we have
known in our Age some strong Towers and high buildings demolished to the very
gound with Lightning. Some Men struck dead, some lamed, some blinded; Trees
clove asunder. A Learned Divine of our Nation tells of a profane Person,
walking abroad with another upon the Lord's Day, when it thundered; to his
Companion telling him of it, made answer -- it is nothing but a Knave Cooper
beating of his Tubs; but he had not gone much farther, but himself was struck
dead. This may teach us to put on a Reverential awe of the Divine Majesty at
such seasons! That Emperor ( Caligula) who used to brave it out, as if he meant
to vye with the Almighty, and cry -- (...), was an instance of the Divine
Patience, but no safe example for imitation! The Psalmist is more ingenuous,
Psalm. 29. -- etc. Give unto the Lord (O ye Mighty) etc. and Psalm. 97.1, 2, 3,
4. To see all the lower World covered with thick Clouds, and the Cracks of
Thunder shake the very Pillars of the Earth, and terrible Flashes and
Corruscations of Ligtning, with a speedy pace fly from one end of the Heavens
to the other; is so like the Voice of God, and a Type or Shadow of that Black
Gloomy Day, which shall put a period to the World, that it may well be a
Memento of our Duty and Reverence we owe to the Divine Majesty; and may well
put that Question into our Mouths -- Who shall be able to stand, when God
appears! When this Great and Terrible God shall by the sound of this Trumpet,
or the Voice of an Archangel, summon the World to Judgment, who shall dare to
appear before him! If the giving of the Law, and the enacting, or rather
promulgation of our Religion upon Mount Sinai was so dreadful -- as Exodus
19.16. -- Chap. 20.18, 19. -- What will the Great Assizes be, when all the men
that ever lived in the World shall be called to give up their last Account, and
receive their Final Doom! Then Oh! -- Come ye Mountains and fall upon us, and
ye Rocks cover us, and hide us from the Wrath of the Lamb! Then Oh! Where will
the Heart and Stoutness of the Presumptuous Sinner show it self! How will he
that braved it here with the Almighty, be able then to stand his Ground, and
maintain his Cause! Psalm. 50.1, 2, 3, 4.

3. Air and Winds, which what to make of, we know not; it is such an invisible,
and yet real Meteor, that it will puzzle the Natural Reason of the most subtle
Philosopher to tell the Nature of it. The Air is so like the Nature of the
Souls in our Bodies, or a (...) in general, that we know little (...) of either
one or other, than what we know by the sensible effects, John 3.8. The Wind,
etc. If Man be so dim in Naturals, with what face can he boast his knowledge of
Spiritual Objects! We neither know the Air that surrounds us every where, nor
the Wind that whistles in our Ears, nor the Souls that lodge in our own Bodies!
We are so blind, so near home! And it is enough to make us blush at our own
weakness; and such ignorance should make us humble; and such humility should
make us learn! and till we are thus qualified, we are not fit to learn.

What a pround lump of Clay is foolish Man, that cannot comprehend things so
near him, things merely natural, things so common and ordinary; and yet will
call every Point of his Religion, even the sublimist Mysteries to the Tribunal
of Mear Reason! And edetermine in particular Branches and Punctilio's as
peremptorily and decisively, as if he had been Privy Counselor to the
Almighty! and judge others censoriously, unkindly, for differing from him but
in the lesser, doubtful, difficult Points of Religion! and prosecute severely
for not knowing and believing with equal clearness as himself.

But besides, -- We are often wondering at the Nature of God himself; and cannot
tell how to frame a Notion of a Being every where present: Is not the Air and
Wind a fit Emblem to shadow-forth this Attribute of the Divinity to us! Is not
the Air in every Creviss of our Houses! in our Nostrils! in our very Bowels!
Does it not fill the World! and enter into the smallest pores of our Bodies!
and yet it is but a Creature, and we see it not! Why should we think it such an
impossible thing for the God of Heaven to fill all places with his Presence,
and yet be limited to no bounds! nor visible to any Eyes! The same word that we
use to signify Air, is used also to express the Spirit of God by, in almost
all the Languages, viz. Spiritus, Latin; (...), Greek; (...), etc. And we find
the Spirit of God choosing sometimes to come down and show himself under this
representation, as 1 Kings 19.11, 12. to Elijah in a still small Voice, qu.
only the whistling noise of a Calm Air: But Acts 2.2. to the apprehension, in
the sound of a rushing mighty Wind.

I have one thing more to remark upon this Meteor, as tending very much to set
forth the Glory of God; and that is, its diverse Uses and Effects. It Is a wonder
that such a thin, tenuious, invisible Body as that is, should serve for such
diverse and excellent purposes. Consider them and wonder. It carries all the
Fowls of the Air, (which would no more be able to fly without it, than the
Fishes of the Sea to swim without Water;) it bears up the heavy Clouds, and
fans, purges and transports them from place to place; so that we say truly, as
Psalm. 18.10. that the Divine Glory does ride upon the Cherubs, and flies upon
the Wings of the Wind: -- it is a Faithful Messenger in the Hand of the
Almighty to bring Tokens of Kindness, or Judgments to a People: One while Flies
and Caterpillars innumerable, Frogs and Lice; Plagues and pestilential
infections; another while Quails and Manna, Flesh and Feathered Fowl, Rain,
Plenty and Prosperity: In short, it fans our Lungs, and walks to and fro
through our Nostrils every moment, and we are not able to breath without it:
And yet this so useful, so necessary, so common a Creature we cannot see, we
cannot comprehend! In God we live, move and have our being, he is within us and
without us, and we know him not! and no absurdity in all this!

4. I might add to these, Storms and Tempests, not as specifically different
from them, but yet such as may require a consideration by themselves. I mean
those more violent eruptions of Wind and Vapors, or other watery Exhalations
commixed, as either by their suddainness or violence, or surprising and
contrary motion seem prodigious, or prove hurtful to us. These are sometimes so
dreadful, that they overturn Trees, Houses, Cities; overrun whole Countries
with a deluge of Waters! drowning or swallowing up the Inhabitants! rending
sometimes Rocks asunder, and carrying them into the midst of the Sea; sometimes
dividing parcels of Land from the Continent, and carring them into the Ocean,
for Islands; of which Histories are full of Examples. All that I shall remark
upon this Particular is, that as the Storms are of God's sending, so they are
subject to his Government, Nah. 1.3, 4. The Lord has his way in the Whirlwind,
etc. vide Psalm. 107.25, 26, 27, -- 29. and Psalm. 148.8. The stormy wind
fulfilling his word. You know the story Mat. 8.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. But that
which I drive at in these quotations is this, that he who rules the raging of
the Sea, and stilleth the violent Storms of the Wind, and Waters, is able also
to appease the madness of a People; to hush the noise and tumult of the World
into a deep silence; to turn our Spears into Pruning Hooks, and our Swords into
Plough-shears; to give us instead of a Storm a Calm; in our own Breasts, in our
Houses and Families, in our Churches and Nations! Had not we best then in such
cases, arise from our sleep every one and call upon his God -- as Jonah 1.4, 5,
6. and if our Lord seem to sleep too, let us go and awaken him, in good
earnest, and say, Lord save us, or we perish. And then he that keeps Israel,
and never slumbers nor sleeps, will arise and scatter our Enemies, and show
himself mighty in our Salvation; upon the ungodly he will rain down Snares,
Fire and Brimstone and an horrible Tempest; This shall be the portion of their
Cup, Psalm. 11.6. For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, his Countenance
does behold the upright.

5. Hail, Rain, Snow and Frosts, etc. I will not stay now to show the
particular usefulness of all these in their Kind, Order and Seasons; nor if I
cared to spend time upon it, have I skill to do it perfectly. Something might
be said, which perhaps every one is not well sensible of, concerning the
Wisdom, as well as the Power and Goodness of God in using such a diverse method
in manuring of the Earth, and nursing of Sublunary Bodies. I shall conclude
this with only that emphatical exhortation of the Psalmist, 147.12. ad finem.

6. To pass over Eclipses, Conjunctions and Rain-bows, etc. I shall instance
only in Extraordinary Signs and Apparitions; as that of Angels appearing to
Abraham, to Lot, to Jacob, to Manaoh, to David, to diverse others; the
extraordinary chasms of Light in the Heavens at our Saviors Baptism, his
Transfiguration, his Ascension; the Cloud and Pillar of Fire to the Israelites;
the Darkness at our Saviors Passion; the Holy Ghost in the likeness of a Dove;
the Apparition exhibited to Saul, to St. Stephen, the Revelations of St. John;
the Prodigies before the Destruction of Jerusalem; Armies conflicting in the
Air; with a thousand more such wonders, which I list not to relate
particularly. I confess they are often mixed with false incredible relations;
yet not therefore all to be rejected. Our Savior has given us warning to
expect some such, Mat. 24. and Act. 2.20.19, and every Age almost is witness of
some Miracle or other of this nature; tho not so many as many would believe.
Even Heathen and Mohammedan History, as well as Christian, give suffrage to this.

From the whole -- we have this lesson briskly intimated to us, viz. if the
outward insensate Heavens, that are neither endued with Sense nor Reason, but
are of a brutish nature, declare to the World the Glory of God, what would be
expected from us men, to whom all these Creatures are given but as Servants! If
these mute senseless things preach so expressly the Glory of Him that made them,
what should not man do, who tho he lives in place below them, yet is endowed
with an Excellency far above them! God himself sometimes appeals to them, for
testimony against us, to upbraid our disobedience! Hear O Heavens, and give
Ear, etc. All the Host of the Inferior Heavens keep their place, and observe
the Laws of their Creation, the very Clouds and Winds obey him! Only Man is an
Unruly; Undutiful, Disingenuous Obstinate Thing! that will neither keep his
Orb, nor serve the ends of his Creation, nor attend his Masters Will, nor
pursue diligently his own Happiness. Tho our Feet are upon the Earth, our Heads
reach above the Clouds, and we are near akin to the other World, and have very
great concernments beyond the Stars; and yet that we should let our Affections
sink into the Earth, and our Souls incline so strongly toward Hell! For shame,
Sirs, let us set forth the Glory of God a little better in our Generations,
than commonly we do: Let us vye here upon the Earth by the excellency of our
Conversations with those twinkling Lamps that shine over our Heads; let it
never be said to our disgrace, that these (senseless Creatures) glorify God
better in their place than we! Let our Faces, our Graces outshine the Sun! Let
men look on the Humility, Honesty, Sobriety, Charity, Piety and Patience of our
Lives, and give Glory to Him, that has given such Graces unto Men! and let
these Graces never be darkened with any unworthy unchristian practices; let us
appear Glorious to the World, and no Hypocrisy or Apostasy ever pull down our
Professions, or lay our Glory in the Dust: It Is possible we may meet with
strong, with close Temptations; O let not our shining Stars fall from Heaven,
-- (nor let our Moon be turned into Blood,) and then we shall be shortly
removed from Grace to Glory, and shortly shine like Stars in the highest
Heavens, yea as the Sun in the Firmament for ever. 1 Cor. 15.41. As we shine in
Grace now, -- so in Glory hereafter.

CHAP. VI. Of the Continuation of the Heavenly Bodies.
DAY unto Day utters Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge, (q.d.)
one Day informs another, and one Night gives in fresh evidence to another to
prove the Truth of it: Not a Day nor a Night passes over our Heads, but the
Heavens preach this Sermon to us: We have a Continual Rehearsal of this
Doctrine from Age to Age, from one Year to another, from the beginning of the
World to this present time. This Preacher is never silent; this Exercise never
over.

All that I can think necessary to be said upon this particular, may be
referred to two Heads.

1. The wonderfulness of this Continuation. 2. The practical Lessons we should
learn from it.
1. Wherein the wonder of it lies.

1. In the multitude of the Bodies concerned. We observe of Mechanical
Instruments made by the Hands of Men, that an Engine consisting of very many
wheels, or very many Motions, or other parts, are the most difficult to be kept
in order. An Orchard with many Trees, or Garden with many Herbs and Flowers,
require more Culture and dressing, or some will decay. A Society of many
Members is apt to disorder: It Is a harder task to manage a Nation than a
Family. The Hosts of Heaven are Thousands, and the Appurtenances relating to
them, more; and yet all keep still their appointed Courses. We have lost none
of the Stars out of their Orbs, since their first coming there.

Some People tell us of some new ones; as that in Cassiopea, which was first
discovered in the Heavens, about the beginning of the Reformation; what Salvo
to give for that I know not; it may be it was there before; but not discovered:
But however 'twas a case extraordinary; and no prejudice to the order of the
rest; we have lost none of our Seasons, Day and Night, Summer and Winter have
kept their times: The Sun its Revolutions, the Moon its due Changes; the Stars
their proper Periods and exact motions; the standing still of the Sun in
Joshua's time; and the going back of it on Ahaz Dial, are Miraculous instances,
and not to be paralleled in other Ages.

2. The Greatness of them. Small Bodies are easily managed, and apt to motion;
but Great Ones move slowly, according to the Course of Sublunary Nature. But
they in the Etherial Orbs are of so vast a bigness, that that Consideration
does mightily accumulate and greaten the Wonder. That the Sun, Moon and Stars,
all of them so big, should move continually without disorder, or period, is an
Accent upon the Miracle.

3. The various Qualities they are of, and the different motions they make, do
yet raise the Wonder to a higher Strain, to keep all one motion, especially if
all of one nature, were not so very much: but to move from East to West, from
West to East from North to South, from South to North again, as some of them
do; and this continually, is an augmentation of the wonder.

4. Without Period. Flowers wither: Trees rot: Stones decay: Man dies. The very
Face of things below will shortly cease to be; and another succeed. The Day
dies, and so does the year: And Stones and Castles here decay; every thing here
is weary of Motion. The Apostle tells us -- The whole Creation groans: But here
it Groans and Dies; only what is a kin more nearly to Heaven, and borders upon
that Court, is of a more lasting Constitution, of a more constant Motion, of a
more perpetual Duration. Since the Fathers fell asleep, all things (of that
kind relating to the upper Regions) continue as they were from the beginning of
the Creation, 2 Pet. 3.4, 7. For the Heavens are by the same word of God, by
which they were Created, kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the Day of
Judgment.

5. Without Interruption. No faulter in their Courses, no breach of Continuity
in this long space of time: Nothing has been able to stop these great Bodies
in the progress of their Motion, or intermit the exercise of their Virtues and
Operations.

6. Without Error, or Mistake, or Deviation. Tho great and many and various in
their Qualities, and incredibly swift in their Motions; yet have they committed
no remarkable fault in all this tract of years and revolutions. They have all
kept close to the Path Chalkt out for them by their Creator, and have never
leapt out of their Orbs. Nothing has been able to tempt them from the Faithful
Execution of their Offices and Employments: Who has ever becken'd the Sun out
the Firmament, or pusht the Moon out of its place? or made the Stars wander
into strange courses? Or amidst all their diverse Motions, Mingled them into
confusion or disorder? When was ever Day and Night jumbled together; or the
Seasons of the year reversed; or the Order of the Celestial Bodies turned
backward? Illic justo foeders rerum, veterem servant sidera pacem.

2. Practical Inferences, Learn we then --

1. To hold on from day to day, from night to night, in the excellent Offices
of a Christian Life; let day to day utter speech, and night to night show
knowledge, of our continual goodness. Mankind is born with his Eyes higher set
than all the rest of the Creation besides, his looks are by Nature more sublime
and lofty: Let us look up earnestly toward those lucid Spangles, those
sparkling Globes over our Heads, and use our Eyes to some good purpose: Let us
make thence some Practical Deductions for our imitation, at least emulation;
and scorn to Truant and Loiter here, at that rate, as usually we do. Let no
Temptation sosten our Spirits into an unnecessary repose, nothing provoke us
unduly to depart our Orbs, to run back, or start aside. Let us never be weary
of well doing. Particularly,

1. Let us never be weary of the duty of Prayer. It Is an excellent exercise,
and such as we ought continually to be intent upon: Our Savior spoke a Parable
(Luke 18.1, 2.) unto his Disciples, that men ought always to Pray, and not to
Faint. And the Apostle, Col. 4.2. Continue in Prayer and Watch in the same with
thanksgiving, etc. And 1 These. 5.17. Pray without ceasing. And let this amongst
many others be one Argument to persuade us to assiduity in this kind of
Devotion, viz. That God Almighty is continually from day to day, from night to
night, serving and supplying our necessities, by the Ministry of the lower
Heavens, (all the Hosts of the Etherial Regions are in continual employment for
our Good) why then should we disdain to bestow some few Minutes upon warm and
serious Addresses to the God of Heaven? Let neither the Day or Night go away
without a Testimony of our Devotion. Let not God hereafter ever cite the Sun,
Moon, or Stars, for to bear witness to our Ingratitude. You know the Story of
Daniel, Recorded to the honor of his Memory, That three times every day he
opened his Windows, and set his Face toward Jerusalem, and Prayed to the God
of Heaven, even then, when pinched with the close Temptations of the Court
under a Heathen Emperor.

Let us (at least) twice a day do Obeisance to Heaven, -- Offer (as God
appointed to the Jews) a Morning and Evening Sacrifice continually: Let our
Altars burn with Incense, at least so often; and this shall not only perfume
our Days and Nights, and make our Conversations smell sweeter to our selves and
Neighbors, but be a fragrant Odor in the Nostrils of the Almighty, And please
the Lord better than a Bullock, etc. Job 1.5.

2. Let us Praise God continually, as long as we live let us praise the Lord;
yea, let us sing praises to him, whilst we have any being, Psalm. 34.1. His
Praises continue in my mouth, Psalm. 36.9.

3. Let us be continually employed in doing Good to others. And let us remember
this, that our God causes his Sun to shine, and Rain to Descend on the Just
and Unjust. Let us try what we can to be like him; like our Heavenly Father,
diffusing our Rays to as wide a Circuit as possibly we can; not limiting our
goodness to a few individual Persons, or a Single Party, or a narrow bound, but
(as our faculties will extend) to the Church Catholic, and the wide World in
general. This is to be in truth -- like the God of Heaven. And let our Charity
never be discouraged, never tired. To do good, and to distribute, forget not,
etc. To make it plainer yet; God has given us a Copy of his Infinite Goodness
in General, to the whole World, in the face of the outward Heavens (as of his
special goodness to the Church in the Revelation of the Gospel.) If we
contemplate seriously the structure and Properties and several Virtues of the
Heavenly Bodies, we may read there in legible Characters, not only the
Greatness and Glory, but the infinite Goodness also of him that made them, and
that to the whole Race of Mankind; and that not for a spurt, a short fit of two
or three Ages, but of continual Duration; his Patience is Indefatigable, and
his Beneficence reaches to the end of time. Let us then, if we will aim at
Perfection, and try to tread in our Father's steps, Do good unto all men,
without weariness, and Communicate the Light of our Graces, to a whole Nation,
a whole World if possible, and never grudg to lend our Candles to the
Assistance of those that are about us. And as for those narrow Souls that
confine their goodness to a Canton, or whose Light is like that of a flaming
Meteor, or an Ignis Fatuus, or a Falling Star, they deserve to lie down in
Darkness, and never more rise up again to Light or Glory. Levit 24.2. Cause the
Lamps to burn continually.

2. Let us consider a little the Employment of the Saints and Angels in Heaven.
It Is pretty hard to conceive with our present apprehensions, the business of
Eternity, and reconcile the Notion of a Complete Happiness, to the exercise of
a continual Devotion, and yet this is handsomely represented to us in the Scheme
of the Heavenly Bodies; the Sun, Moon and Stars are never weary, never decay,
never wander out of their place, but still are exercised in a continual Motion,
and keep still their brightness and glory; and yet they are inanimate, senseless
Creatures. Why should we think it strange, or absurd, that the blessed Spirits
in the other World should be still employed in the Offices of Devotion, and yet
still possessed of Ease and Bliss? and (which I drive at) why should we not
strike up, and mend our pace at present? Why do we often mutter and complain,
as if it were a weariness to serve the Lord? And cry out, When will the Sabbath
be over, that we may return to our worldly Cares and Pleasures again? Is there
so much difference indeed between Grace and Glory; between the Apprentice-ship
and the Profession; between the Church here and hereafter? Or is it possible
think ye to make so quick a return from one Extreme to another? To be all Earth
and Flesh, and sin here, and Heaven and Spirit and Holiness there? Or must we
not a little (at least) be Heaven'd in our Minds now; and be in a continual
Motion to the end of our happiness? Having these things always in remembrance,
2 Pet. 1.15. or as Psalm. 119.112. Inclined to perform the Statutes of the Lord
always, or Psalm. 1.2. Exercising our selves in his Law day and night? And when
we can do this, and do it with delight, we are upon the brink of a blessed
Eternity, upon the skirts of the Holy Land! upon the Borders of Heaven! when
our Light shines without darkness (tho it do Twinkle now and then!) and shines
continually; when our Devotion does not Die with the Day, but glimmers through
the darkest Night -- then, and not till then, we are in a fair way to the Life
of Angels, and the Spirits of Just men made perfect.

3. Learn we hence to look for that which is lasting. In this World we have no
continuing City, nothing durable, no lasting motion, unless it be that of
Changes and Vieissitudes, Summer and Winter, Day and Night, Peace and War,
Health and Sickness, Life and Death; even the Earth changes its Face according
to the Seasons; and the Seas tho they flow continually, they are supplied from
the Clouds above, and both Earth and Sea, and every thing here depend upon the
Heavenly Bodies for that motion and continuance which they have. In Heaven only
is to be found the perpetual Motion, Everlasting Life; an House Eternal,
durable Riches and Righteousness, Rivers of Pleasure for evermore; there only
is a continual Day, a Light that suffers no Darkness, a Sun always shining, an
everlasting Summer, along Eternity of Bliss and Happiness. This is easily
demonstrable to any one that knows the present World, and can but see the
Skirts of the Holy Land, the very Borders of Heaven. Were it not Wisdom for us
then to leave off building with so much anxiety here, to take down our
Scaffolds, and get a Jacobs Ladder, and climb up to that place of Angels, to
send our Hearts before us, and cast our Anchor safe within the Veil, and choose
that other world for our portion, and think and speak of it, and provide for
it, and account it as our own, and pack up all our last cares and passions for
it; that whilst we live upon Earth, we may have our Conversations above, and
then we shall be eternally safe from Hell beneath.

But especially at the approach of any unkindly stop or period in our worldly
comforts, whether it be a black Night, or a cloudy stormy Day, or an ill
Winter, or Poverty, or Shame, or Sickness, or Death, -- Let us then take the
advantage of the opportunity, and look up as high as the Firmament and further,
even beyond the Starry Orbs, and say with our selves, -- In those Countries, in
that World is no Night, or Darkness, or Sickness, or Sea or Hell; -- let us
scorn to grovel here as we have done. Let us pack hence our Best Goods and be
gone: Let that be our Home, and the Lord of that Country, our Father, and let
us live heavenly, holily, humbly, as becomes Citizens of that Heavenly
Jerusalem, the Metropolis of both Worlds.

4. Let us live by Rule, as those Celestial Bodies all do; even the Rule
prescribed us by our Maker, and fitted to our Natures, and conducive to the
ends of our being: and this without straggling aside, deviation, or error on the
one hand or the other; without intermission, or passion, or weariness; or any
thing that may disturb our Motion, I know, as our Natures are more excellent
than the Stars, so we are upon greater disadvantages, (upon the score of sin)
that has so enfeebled our Spirits, and emasculated the courage and vigor of
our Piety, that as long as we live, we shall be apt to flag; but then let it be
considered, that our God has offered to accommodate us with all the excellent
helps of the Gospel, and the assistance of his Spirit; and therefore in the
strength of these let us go on from day to day in the exactest course of a
Religious Piety, making no considerable blot or faulter (if possible) in the
whole series of our Life; or if that, through the frailty of Humane Nature, may
not be done, let the blot be presently washed off by the Tears of a sound
Repentance; and then by that means all the crookedness of our former ways being
made straight, let us take care for the time to come to move upright, steady
and straight according to the excellent Rules prescribed us in the Laws of God
and Life of our Savior! Let us try not only to keep pace with the Sun, but to
out-vy all the Stars of the Firmament; and let it be accounted no disgrace to
be thus watchful and curious about the keeping of our Orbs, and observing our
due Postures, and modelling our Actions, but rather our greatest excellency and
glory!

Slight those, who say amidst their sickly Healths,
Thou liv'st by Rule: What does not so but Man!
Houses are built by Rule; and Commonwealths;
Entice the Trusty Sun, if that you can, From his Eccliptick Line; becken the
Sky.
Who lives by Rule then, keeps good Company.
Herb. CHAP. VII. Of the Extensiveness of the Heavens.
The Stars and Firmament, the expanded Sky and all the Hosts of the Etherial
Orbs speak expressly unto all the Nations of the Earth, that there is a God to
be worshipped, and with such a Worship as becomes his Infinite Excellency:
Their words are so loud, they may be heard to all the Ends of the Word. Then
let us consider,

1. WHether the most dark and distant Nations of the Earth have taken notice of
this Rule; -- heard this Voice. 2. What they have understood by it. 3. What
they might understand. 4. What Inferences we may deduce from the whole, for our
own use.
1. Whether the darkest -- Nations -- have heard this Voice!

Answ. Yes, Their sound has gone out to all the ends of the World. And it is
very easily made out. For,

1. They had no other Bible to read in, than that of Nature; and this of the
Heavens was the most legible Page in the whole Book. They were without the
written Law, but they were not without this Natural Light. They had neither
Moses nor the Prophets, nor Evangelists, nor Apostles, and therefore whither
else should they go, but to the word writ upon the Book of the Creation, the
Divine Handy-works in the Make of the World! Romans 1.20. --

2. We find them confessing it, making use of this Book, reading studiously
amongst the Stars, poring with an inquisitive Eye upon the Heavens and
Firmament, to gather some scraps of a Religious Philosophy, and trace the
Principles of a Spiritual Divinity. Seneca when he has placed the Wise Man
walking to and fro, by the contemplation of his mind, amongst the Stars --
Illic demum discit -- (says he) quod diu quaesivit; illic incipit Deum nosse.
And in the beginning of his Book of Natural Questions, having undertaken some
Philosophical Account of the Heavenly Bodies, we find him no where in such a
Rapture of Divinity, as upon that Thesis, Nisi ad haec (the study of Divine
Things, the Contemplations of the Heavenly Bodies, etc.) admitterer, non fuerat
operae -- pretium nasci: -- O quam contempta res est Homo, nisi supra humana se
erexerit!

Nay more than this, they had generally the original of all their Theology from
the Firmament: Their Gods were amongst the Stars, nay -- the Stars were their
only Gods.

(...). Homer.

Even the Egyptians themselves are accounted to have lead the way to this
Superstition. And for this reason it was chiefly, that their several Priests,
Prophets and Magi amongst the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Assyrians, Persians, etc.
were so well-skilled commonly in the Curious Arts of Astrology and Divination;
which have been since derived and diffused from them to us, and the rest of the
World. Their Hermes Tresmegistus, Ptolomy and Haly, being Authors of great
request still with our Astrologers and Prognosticators.

2. What did they learn from hence? Truly a great deal more than some
Christians learn from Nature and Revelation both. I speak not of all the poor
dark Heathen World; but of some who were more serious and contemplative amongst
them. Who took more pains than their Fellows. And I dare safely say, that tho
their Eyes were dim, and the Light they saw by but like the obscure Twilight,
or the first Dawning of the Morning, that they might well School and Catechize
some of our old Professors, Gray-hair'd Christians, for seven years together.
It would be too large a task now to tell you what Lessons they learned from the
Contemplation and Study of these Things. Their Books of Moral Philosophy, writ
by Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, Seneca, Isocrates, etc. were they preached in our
Pulpits, were enough to fill some number of years with Sermons strong enough
for our Auditors of the Lower Form: And convictive enough to shame the major
part of Christians among us into blushing and confusion. Read over but the
Roman Twelve Tables, Plato's Republic. the Laws of the several Heathen Nations
about Religion, Sobriety, Justice, etc. And you will find reason to fear left the
Queen of the South, and the Inhabitants of Tire and Sidon, the Greek, Scythian
and Barbarian will escape better, some of them at the Day of Judgment, than
many of Christendom that have both the Books wide open before them all the days
of their life, Romans 2.14, 15.

3. What might they learn? Answ. All the Articles of our Christian Creed, and
all the Precepts of our Christian Religion, except those which refer to the
Cause and Cure of our Misery; viz. The fall of Adam, and the Intercession of
the Second Adam: That there was a God, one only Supreme Maker of Heaven and
Earth, Infinite in the Attributes of Wisdom, Power, Truth, Justice, Mercy,
worthy to be worshipped with a Holy Life, Prayer, Praise, Obedience, and a pure
Heart and Affection; one that had a Good Will to save us, one that would reward
us with excellent Rewards or Punishments, according to our Actions, in the
other World: All this, and more than this they might have discerned by their
Glimmering Light of Nature in only the Frontispiece of Heaven, if they had but
used their Eyes. And so much many of them did not only learn, but teach, and
make a public and stout profession of it to the World. The Existence of one
Supreme God, the Divine Governance of the World, the Immortality of the Soul, a
Mediation between God and us, and almost all the Moral Duties of the Law in
Substance; the distribution of Rewards and Punishments after this Life,
distinct Places and times of Worship, Priests and Priestly maintenance, and
Attonements, and Purifications, and something like the Dedicating of their
Infants to God by Baptism, with secret Devotions, and Family Worship, as well
as that which was public in the Temples; All these, and much more, were
adopted into the Body of the Heathen Religion: And excepting only some few
Articles of our Creed, referring to the Trinity, and especially the business of
our Redemption, and the True Notion of our two Sacraments, and it may be the
Resurrection of our Bodies, it were not very hard, to make out all the rest of
our Religion demonstrable by the mere Light of Reason. The invisible things of
God from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made.

4. What Practical Deductions may be made from hence?

How great is God? A Contemplation of the Heavenly Fabric will directly lead
us to this point, viz. an admiration of the Divine Eternal Power of the
Godhead. For Romans 1.19. that which may be known of God is manifest to all the
World, for God has showed it to them. He has showed his Face in the Glass of
his Works, and his Features there appear so glorious, that it is a wonder it
does not fill our apprehensions with a pregnant and awful conceit of his
Infinite Majesty and Power. The Splendour of the Divine Attributes gives shine
to all the World, so that now all the Inhabitants of the Round World have scope
enough for Spiritual Contemplation, and the exercise of their Rational
Faculties; and the Turk and Pagan both have a book large and voluminous enough,
lying wide open before them, enough to employ all their studies in, all the
days of their Life. Who that considers a while the Nature of that God that made
the Heavens, how he must stretch his Compass over the whole Universe, how he
must mete out the Heavens with a Span, and comprehend the Dust of the Earth in
a Measure, and weigh the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance, and
take up the Isles as a very little thing, and measure the Waters in the hollow
of his Hand, and make the Clouds his Chariot, and ride upon the Wings of the
Wind; and climb up to the highest Orbs, and extend every Globe with the present
thought; and hang not only the Earth, but the Heavens upon nothing; and this in
the exactest order and perfection, that no remarkable default shall appear in
6000 years in any part of all this Magnificent Building. -- Who that considers
a little the Nature of the Supreme Architect, shall not be ready to cry out
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 8.1, 9. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in
all the Earth! who have set thy Glory above the Heavens. O Lord our Lord, how
excellent is thy Name in all the Earth!

2. What little low worthless Creatures are we? That God who is the Author of
such excellent Handiwork, that dwells in that inaccessible Light, in such a
glorious Palace, who can make Heavens at his pleasure, and garnish them in a
moment, and fill the whole World with the Beams of his Glory, should yet place
his Affections so much on such little silly things as we are! Psalm. 8.3, etc.
Shall I speak my Opinion freely in this matter? I do conceive, that one great
Reason why God has laid out so much of his Excellency, and bestowed so much of
his Infinite Wisdom and Power upon the creation of the Things that are above
us, especially the Heavens over our Heads, -- was on purpose, to astonish proud
man into a Religious Admiration of his, God, and an humble detestation of
himself; for that is the very frame and temper which disposes man for the
impressions of Religion, and the exercise of a devout affection. Isa. 66.1, 2.
Thus says the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne.

3. A due consideration of the Creation of the World, and especially of the
Heavens, belongs unto us all. Os Homini sublime -- etc. if God does preach to
us by these things that are seen, and thereby reveal to the World the invisible
properties of the Divinity, then -- we ought to hearken to this Voice, and make
some good use of their Language. The Curious Spectator looks up to the Heavens,
and examines every particular there, Quidni quaerat? Scit ill ad se pertinere.
Tunc contemnit domicilii prioris angustias. Seneca. And (as he goes on) what is
all the distance from the utmost Coasts of Spain to the Indies? But a Voyage of
a very few days, if thou fail with a good Wind: But that Heavenly Country
above, for many hundreds of years affords space for the swiftest Stars to
travel in, without let or molestation. In short, the very Natural Propensity
of Mankind to enquire into those upper Regions, and peer amongst the Stars, is
some argument of our concernment that way.

4. Let us beware of Idolatry, the fault of the Old Pagan World: Who when they
saw those Lights hung out at the Windows of Heaven, which should have been but
ministerial to help them in the search of him that made them, sell down and
worshipped the Servants instead of their Master, the Candles at the Door
instead of the Lord of the House. Deuteronomy. 4.19. yet the Jews themselves were so
forgetful of this Precept, that we find them often taxed for burning Incense to
the Queen of Heaven; and worshipping the Star Remphan. And it is too well known,
that the Heathens generally worshipped the Sun, Moon and Stars; becoming vain
in their imaginations; and tho they professed themselves Wise, they became
Fools, changing the Glory of the Incorruptible God into the Image of his
Corruptible Creatures.

5. By this Law, they who want a special Revelation, shall be judged, Romans
2.12, 13, 14, 15. Let no man then (whether within or without the Pale of the
Church) think to shroud his guilt under the Cloak of Ignorance. There Is no
Corner of the World so remote, no People so dark, where this Voice has not
been heard; the Music of the Spheres is soft and still, but such as shortly
will make even both the Ears of the guilty sinner tingle! The Language wherein
these Sermons are preached to the World, is temperate and equal, it makes no
great noise at present to them, who are busy digging low in the Bowels of the
Earth, but it has a sharp and heavy accent at the End. Let no man then upbraid
the Almighty, as if he were a Severe Judge for calling all men to the same
Judgment; for damning men that never had the knowledge of his Laws. Fear not,
God will be just; he will vindicate his Righteousness from the foul aspersions
and abuses of a Scandalous World. Have thou sinned without Law? without Law
then thou shall be tried, and a hundred to one but condemned too; and yet God
clear from thy Blood, and just in all this! What a black List of sins does the
Apostle present thee with ( Romans 1.29, etc.) all chargeable upon all Nations of
the World, Jew and Christian, and Turk and Heathen, and damnable by the very
Law of Nature! unrighteousness, fornication, etc. but that which affects us
most in all this, is, that not only the poor Infidel is guilty in this Case,
but a great part of Christendom also! Not only they that have no other Law to
read in, no other Rule to go by, but the Book of the Creation; but they also
who have the Bibles in their hands, and the Creed upon their tongues end, and
have all the advantages of Nature and Revelation both! When these very sins
(and as bad, or worse) walk barefaced within the Confines of the Church, and
men of the best Creed and Profession in the World are not ashamed to commit the
foulest sins, and sometimes account it their glory to boast of such vices which
ought not so much as to be named amongst Christians.

There are several live amongst us, (it may be in this place now) whose
ordinary conversations are stained with such blots, as both the lights (both
that of Positive Religion, and that of mere Natural Reason too) do abhor and
condemn. And yet, which is mighty strange, these very men do please themselves
with the hopes of escaping safely the Sentence of the Judge at the last day!
And upon their Repentance they may; but else I cannot think of any plausible
Argument that will stand their Friend at the day of Judgment. And to drive the
Nail farther yet; -- it will not be enough for men to plead their Interest in a
Church or Party in such cases: Let the Church be never so pure, nor the
Profession never so good, nor the advantages of Knowledge and Information never
so great; if under all these pretensions thou should play the Hypocrite, and
live ill, thy own Mouth would condemn thee, and a whole Cloud of Witnesses
depose evidence against thee! And yet notwithstanding all this, we may take up
the complaint of the Prophet, Jer 18.13. Ask now among the Heathen, who has
heard such things? the Virgins of Israel have done very horrible things. Thy
poor men are tenacious of their Superstitious Vanities; it is hard to make a
Proselyte to Christianity amongst them; they will Dispute, Fight, die for their
mere shadow of Faith: But Christians will barter away their Conscience, their
Creed, their Heaven, their God for mere Vanities! Verse. 14, 15. In short, if it
be true, what some of the poor ignorant Gentiles fancied, that the Sun, Moon
and Stars do all look upon us, and are daily Spectators and witnesses of all we
do, it were well for many -- if the Sun were indeed turned into Darkness, and
the Moon into Blood, and the Stars would leave off their Shining, and the whole
Face of the Heavens were reversed, than thus to stand over our Heads and remark
our Actions, in order to a Solemn Convictive Testimony against us, Jer. 2.9,
10, 11.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Glorious Body of the Sun.
COnsider we next the SUN.

1. In its Motion. 1. Its Terms a quo and ad quem. 2. Its Swiftness. 3.
Continuance.
2. Its Light. 3. -- Heat.
1. Its Motion, concerning which and the rest of its Attributes I shall have
the less to say now, because I have spoken so much of it in the General Notion
of the Heavenly Bodies. Yet for Order-sake -- Consider we,

1. Its Terms, -- or Bounds, -- from Whence, and to Which the Sun moves. From
the one end of the Heavens to the other, i.e. according to our apprehension and
common sense of things. For in Truth, the Heavens have neither Beginning nor
End, but are of a perfect Round Figure. Indeed this Notion was so long hid from
the World, that not many hundred years agone, a German Bishop was
excommunicated for broaching this Doctrine, viz. that there were Antipodes, --
and that the Earth in answer to the Heavens, was inhabited round; whereas now
it is generally agreed upon, with good reason, by all the Learned of late Ages.

2. Its swiftness. I need say little more upon this point, than what I said
before, viz. that the Sun according to the Judgment of some Astronomers, goes
in its motion 1000000 German miles, in the Judgment of others 261905 -- in one
hour. Whether either of them are in the right or no, I am not much concerned to
determine. This is certain, it is of a vast body, 166 times bigger than the
Earth, say Astronomers, who by the Eclipses say, they have found its Diameter,
and by its Diameter, its Compass (periphery) and by that its motson. Indeed its
Course is so swift, so incredibly quick, that out late Philosophers would fain
find a nearer way to solve the Wisdom of Nature, whose Principle it is to
doevery thing the nearest way it can be done; and therefore have rackt their
Brains to discover, if possibly, a mistake in the case, and to prove that the
Earth (which is by many degrees the less Body) does move round, and not the Sun
with so swift and daily a motion: But as yet the Evidence of that Opinion does
not appear; so that we may on this point say, -- it rejoices as a Giant, --
etc.

3. It Is Continuante and Constancy. Intimated in these words -- As a Giant --
running his Race, etc. Psalm. 19.5, 6. his circuit -- c. nor need I say more
upon this particular. It Is demonstrable to every Eye, and agreed upon by all
the World, that the Sun has continued still in motion, from the begmning of
the World to this prefent Age, and shall do to the end of time. Itself being
the Heavenly Clock, the Original Measure of all our Times.

2. Its Light. -- As a Bridegroom coming out, of his Chamber, i.e. trimmed and
decked in splendid and glorious. Apperel, making pleasant the Eyes of all
Beholders: So the Sun, who is Condus and promus. Lueis, the Spring of Light,
(...) a pure Flame (...) an always Burning Torch, a Universal Candle, that
serves the whole World to work and walk by; that makes (with its approach)
smiles in the Face, and cheerfulness in the Heart of every Spectator, that has
Eyes to behold it. Even Infants themselves, incapable yet of making distinction
between other Objects, are pleased with this; and Beasts themselves can hardly
live without it. In a word, it is the Eye of Heaven, and the pleasure of Earth;
and that we can as ill spare, as the Eyes out of our Head: For take away that,
and these are useless, or near upon it.

3. Heat. Nothing hid from the Heat thereof, Psalm. 19.6. Upon this point
likewise I have spoken already, and left my self little more to say. It tempers
the Air, which we suck with our Nostrils, and produces the Aliments we take
with our Mouths, and cherishes our Bodies to help Concoction; and is the
Universal Cause (under God) of all Sublunary Beings. What shall I say -- it
broods the Earth, and moves upon the Waters, and helps to fecundate all things
here below. There is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

I have done with the Natural Consideration. -- Let us now deduce something for
our Spiritual Meditation.

1. The Papists tell us, -- That Images and Pictures are the Laymens Books,
wherein they may Read (without ever a Letter) the Lives of the Saints. -- What
if I should say -- the Sun is a fit Emblem of God, and a Pattern for our
Imitation; Imitation (I say, and Admiration) not Adoration.

1. A fit Emblem or rather Adumbration of God, but with an Infinite
Disproportion. For inter finitum and infinitum -- no proper Comparison. Yet
this I say, is peradventure as fit an Emblem of the Divinity asany we can find
within the ken of our senses, and under the cope of Heaven. And methinks God
himself does not disdain the Resemblance; the Holy Ghost himself setcheth
Metaphors thence to attribute unto God. Psalm. 84.11. The Lord is a Sun -- and
Psalm. 4. Cause the Light of thy Countenance to shine -- etc. and Jam. 1.17. The
Father of Lights. And the Fathers generally make use of this similitude to
pourtray a little, in faint resemblance, the Majesty of God by. -- So
Chrysostom, Gregory, Bernard, Tertullian, Hillary, etc. Having therefore so
good footing for my Inference, I shall pursue it more clearly The Sun is an
Emblem of the Godhead in these respects.

1. Of his Unity. There is one Sun in the Firmament, and one God in Heaven.
Deuteronomy. 4.35. Unto thee, -- etc. Deuteronomy. 6.4. The Lord our God is one Lord. Are
there any more Suns in the World than one? It Is true, there are sometimes
Parelii, or Mock-Suns, two or three or more, which are no other than some
Images or faint resemblancies of the Sun, caused by the refraction of its Beams
in some plain, thick, watery adjacent Cloud; and so there may be some faint
shadow or adumbrations of the Deity in some brave Vertuoso's, some Heroic
Saints in the World; but yet he that shall worship these for Gods, and pray to
them as if they were his Mediators or Saviors, commits Idolatry, and offers
Sacrilege to the God of Heaven, who calls to the Grandees of the World for an
Entire Service, -- Worship him all ye Gods. The Gods of the Heathens are but
mere Parelii, silly Adumbrations, Ciphers compared to this One Johova. An Idol
is nothing, so says the Apostle, i. e. of that which it pretends to represent.
And it is a bold piece of presumption and sacrilegious Impudence, to set up
Rush-Candles or Wax-Tapers to vye with the Savior, to put mear Creatures in
competition with the God of Heaven. Nay the Moon herself is not fit to enter
any comparison (in right Judgment) with the Fountain of Lights, the Sun; for
what Light she has, it is dim and uncertain, and all borrowed; she has none of
her own: So nor all the Church Catholic put together, that in Heaven, and this
on Farth are worthy of the tenth part of that Adoration and Honor we owe to
the God of all theWorld. And yet there have been some so absurd in their
practice, that they have burnt Incense to the Queen of Heaven, (the Moon) when
the Sun must be put off with a bare Sacrifice: And some that say ten Ave Mary's
to one Pater Noster; saying with that Superstitious Monk -- tu spes mea -- Thou
my Hope, my Tower, in whom I have placed the very End of my Salvation. -- if
(which God forbid) I should like a Man mad and rebrobate, forget my God, vere
tui nunquam obliviscar. -- Thy memory is sweeter than Honey and the Honeycomb
in my Mouth, etc. Methinks the Apostle seems, 1 Timothy 6.16. to allude to this
similitude of the Unity of the Sun.

2. Of the Trinity. There are three considerable, distinct affections belonging
to the Sun, all which I mentioned but now, -- Motion, Heat and Light: They are
all of a several different property, and yet inseparable one from the other;
and yet these three all concenter in one Sun. Why may not this be a pretty
Tolerable Representation of the Trinity of Persons, the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost? It Is a hard Mysterious Article to Humane Reason: Mankind has long
complained of the depth and difficulty of this Mystery. I will not say -- that
God meant this consideration of the Sun for a Natural Advantage to our Faith in
the case: But I dare say -- we are allowed to help our Unbelief with all the
Assistances of Nature (as well as Grace) that we can get. And this, if we
please, may be one. Nor am I singular here neither! The Ancient Fathers of the
Church have started the Notion before me! Dr. Day in his Lectures cites Juslin
Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian and Lactantius, making use of this Comparison. I
humbly acknowledge this Article of our Faith is without a bottom! past Humane
Fathom: It Is storyed of St. Augustine that he endeavored to found it. He walked
abroad to that purpose, at last came to a Riverside; musing with himself, and
laboring to conceive it. At length not far off a little Child appeared unto
him very busy on the Bank. He had made forsooth a little hole, and with a
Spoon which he had in his Hand, was lading of the Water into the aforesaid
little hole. St. Augustine draws nearer to him, demands of the Child what he
was a doing! Father (quoth he) my purpose is to unlade this whole River into
this little hole you here see.

Augustne. That Is impossible, -- etc.

Child. No more will you be ever able to bring to pass that which you are
about. And with that the Child vanished. I relate not the Story for a certain
Truth. The thing itself in absolute consideration is true, viz. that it is as
impossible for us to conceive the Blessed Trinity, as with a little Spoon to
unlade a Great River into a little hole. The present Emblem may serve a little
to take off our suspicions of the Impossibility and Absurdity of the Trinity of
Persons in One God: It is not sufficient to expound the thing it self, all the
Three Persons are represented under this Notion.

FATHER. -- The Lord is a Sun, -- Isa. 60.19.

SON. -- Mal. 4.2. and vide Margent Luke 1.78. and Mat. 17.2. -- Rev. 1.16.

HOLY GHOST. -- He shall baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire. -- Lead you
into the way of all Truth.

Multa sunt quae dici possunt, sed suffioiat fidelibus pauca de Mysterio
Trinitatis audivisse. Aug. -- In die judicii non damnor, quia dicam nescivi
Naturam Creatoris mei, si autem aliquid temere dixero, temeritas poenas luit,
ignorantia veniam promeretur. Id.

3. Of the Divine Glory and Vnsearchableness. He that goes about to stare long
upon the Sun, or approach its Light, and dive deep into the Nature of it, may
as Demecritus, -- stare himself Blind, before he can make any near approaches
to it. It Is not easy to bear the insiuence of the Sun for one whole day,
suppose we could possibly be so long under the immediate and direct emission of
its Glorious Beams, tho upon the Earth. It will burn combustible stuff at the
distance of 1000000 miles, should it stand still, and neither remove away, nor
be tempered with other cooling Elements. Consider this a little seriously, and
apply it.

The Glory of God is such an amazing wonder, that as the Father says -- in hac
mortali vita quicquid ad nos usque pertingit, aliud nihil est quam exiguus
quidam rivulus, ac velut parvus magnae Lucis Rivulus. Naz. vide Act. 26.13. 1 Timothy 6.16. -- so that when we go about to search into the Divine Nature, we
must stand off, and know our distance, and assume modestly to our thoughts, and
acknowledge the depth of the Mystery, and cry out with the Apostle Romans 11.33,
etc. O the Depth, -- etc. sure I am, tho we ought, as much as any thing in the
world, to study the Nature and Properties of that God we are concerned with,
and account it one of the first points of True Wisdom to acquaint our selves
with that Almighty Being we have to do with, and to pray for more Light and
Grace, that we may be able in due time to comprehend with all Saints what is
the breadth, and length, and height and depth; and to know the Love of God
which passes knowledge: Yet in our highest seize on this side the veil,
we shall know but in part, and prophecy in part; our utmost skill will not be
sufficient to comprehend the Infinite God in the Embraces of our Finite
Conceptions: And we shall as soon be able to climb the Sun, and stare with open
Eyes upon that great Luminary, and comprize all its excellent Rays and
Influences within the limits of our narrow Bosom, as -- by searching to find
out, and trace out the Almighty to perfection. Est in Deo, quod percipi potest;
est plane si modo, quod potest, velis: Sicut videre est in Sole quod videas, si
hoc velis videre, quod possis; amittas autem quod potes videre, dum quod non
potes niteris; it a ut in rebus Doi habes quod intelligas, si intelligere quod
potes, velis: Caelum si ultra quam potes, speres, id quod potuisti non poteris.
Hilar. Psalm. 145.3. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his
greatness is unsearchable.

I am loath to leave this Abyss of Meditation! Pardon me, Sirs, if I strain
Courtesy a little in the case! This Infinite Being is the Fountain of our
Blessedness, and therefore, notwithstanding his Excellent Majesty, can be
cooped within no bounds, nor scaled by any Humane Apprehensions, to the height,
nor fathomed to the utmost depth by any Line of Humane Reason; yet it is
pleasant to behold him through the Lattices, and spend our deepest thoughts and
admirations upon his Glory! And if we cannot comprehend him, let us stand and
wonder! And cry out with longing and importunate Desire -- Oh! when shall the
Veil be taken off our Eyes? When shall the Apartment that separates us, be
taken away? When shall we come to know as we are known? But Oh -- when shall
our finite Natures be exhaled and drawn up with this Sun? And our Souls drawn
up into his boundless Glory? and we Eternally Blessed in the warm Embraces of
his Divine Love? In those Flames of Pure Affection for ever and ever! To think
now of this unsearchable God, the most Infinitely Good and Glorious Being in
the whole World, whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, whom Angels all
admire and adore, the Nature of whose Glory we cannot now grasp with our most
expanded thoughts: That this God shall first pardon our sins, and then
sanctify our natures, and shortly send his Angels to fetch our Souls up to
that Heavenly Choire, where we shall be clothed indeed with the Sun, and tread
the Moon under our Feet, and look with a holy scorn upon the little silly
trifling comforts of the Sublunary World! This is enough to make our Faces
smile now at every Beam of Light and Mercy darted upon our Souls from that
Divine Countenance, to make our hearts dance within us! To fill us with an
unspeakable Joy upon the hopes of that intuitive fruition in the other World!
Then, and not till then we shall see the Maker of the Worlds, and come to see
and understand the deep and pleasant Mysteries of his Wondrous Works!

4. Of the Divine Omnipresence: That God should be every where present, as our
Religion obliges us to believe that he is, is a pretty hard Article; in
Heaven, on Earth, in Hell: In the one by the especial manifestation of his
Glory, in the other by the continual exercise of his Providence, in the last by
the Execution of his Justice; and yet thus he is, as both Scripture and Reason
oblige us to believe: The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, nor the Earth,
nor Hell: He transcends all the limits of Nature, and surpasses all those
little finite bounds of Man's Conception, Psalm. 139.3, 4, 5, etc. yet even the
difficulty of this Attribute, as insuperable as it seems to be, is plainly
illustrated by this Simile, The Sun is placed in the heavenly Orbs, there it
resides continually, yet disperseth its shining rays to the Firmament above,
to the Air, to the Earth below; yea, it traverseth round the world, and visits
the Antipodes under our Feet; it passes through our Windows, through the
crevises of our Walls, the light breaks in through the Pores of our Curtains,
and its Heat through Stone-walls; it shines upon the nasty Dunghills, and yet
receives no infection or impurity thence. Why should it seem then a thing
impossible, that the God that made it should fill the World with his Presence!
and he confined to no bounds!

5. (Which borders upon it) Of the Divine Omniscience: The Heathens supposed
the Sun could see and hear; (...): Even the Scripture it self sometimes makes
use of this Allusion and Metaphor; The Sun has looked upon me, Cant. 1.6. 2 Samuel 12.11. In the sight of this Sun. And there is so much ground for this
Fancy, that take away the Sun, and our Eyes would serve to very little
purpose; it is that dispels the darkness, and discovers the Truth in all places
of the World, (where it is discovered) and it brings to light the hidden things
of darkness: As I said but now, it visits all parts of the World, Air, Earth,
Sea, all the corners of the Earth, all the rooms of our Houses; nay, our very
Reins and Heart, the most retired parts of our Bodies, are not hid from the
Heat of it: Were it possible to bar the Pores of our Skin, and shut the door of
our Breasts fast against the Beams and warm influence of it, our very
Heart-blood would soon congeal into a dead and putrid Humor! What is this but
a fair Copy of the Divine Omniscience, so far as an insensate Creature can
possibly vie with an intelligent and infinite Creator? Tell me, you now that
are ready to object Blindness to the God of Heaven, and say, Tush, the Lord
does not see, nor the God of Jacob regard; can you hide your selves from the
Sun of the Firmament, and live? If not, shall not he that made the Sun search
further than an insensate finite Creature of his own making? Shall not he that
made the Eye, see? etc. but shall not he that made (...), the Eye of the World,
see more than the Eye it self? Go now ye Hypocrites, and shut the Door, and
draw the Curtain over your secret Debaucheries, and dare to perpetrate the
blodest sins under a Vail, -- but remember, that the Light will break in
through the narrowest chink, and nothing can hide you from the Omniscient Eye,
before whom Hell is naked, and Destruction has no covering, Job 26.6. vid.
Heb. 12.13.

6. Of the Divine Providence: That God should be still in Heaven, and there
safe in the enjoyment of a Complete Happiness, and yet interpose his Power and
Government in the Transactions of this lower World, without any Disturbance to
his rest and quietness, is a Wonder which some People in the World have not
been able to digest: I desire these People but to give themselves leisure to
meditate a little upon the present subject of our Discourse, and take notice
how the Sun is as quiet in his Orb, and excellently glorious from Age to Age,
without any change or diminution, or disturbance from any thing, either in the
Spheres above, or the Orbs below, and yet has still a mighty influence upon
all things here beneath; tempering the Air, fanning the Clouds, dissolving the
Snow, and Hail, and Frost, and Dew, giving light to the Moon, shining round the
Earth; fecundating the very Mines, Trees, Herbs, Grass, Fruits, Flowers;
influencing upon the Constitutions of us Men, our Bodies first, and then our
Minds; giving light, heat, motion, action, generation, sense and life, to all
sublunary living bodies; and then say -- Whether it be not very feasible to
believe, that God Almighty may govern this lower World, and interpose his Hand
in the Concernments of us Men, without any prejudice to the rest of his blessed
Attributes! I am very sorry that Men are so apt to suspect the weakness of the
Almighty Power, as if he were a mere Cipher to the Governance of of all Humane
Affairs! but when they are so insensible of the secret and yet notorious
concurrence of this eminent Planet with the concerns of Nature, the Wonder is
at a stop: And we must say at best, that Men are Fools for want of thinking,
and using their Faculties! Men have got a Trick, ever since sin debauched their
Natures, of looking low, and creeping upon the Earth, and taking Notice only of
things that run directly into their Eyes, fixing upon secundary Causes; and the
immediate Effects and Consequences, (like the Dog that quarrels with the
Staff, but regards not the Hand that holds it; or the Hogg that gathers the
Acorns and Mast, but looks not up to the Tree from whence they fall) --
forgetting that the God of Heaven has an effectual influence upon the Works of
his own Hands. Is there evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it! and is
there any good amongst us which comes not from the Fountain of Blessedness, the
Author of every good and perfect Gift! Let Men learn a little from this Topic
to raise their aspect, and climb the Ladder from Orb to Orb, in the tracing of
causes, 'till they come to the Primum Mobile, the Original Principle of all
Motions; and by accustoming themselves to this Method of consideration,
peradventure they will find reason to run every remarkable Contingent of their
life to the Head, and at last terminate in the Son of Righteousness.

7. Of the Divine Invisibility: It Is true, we may see something of the Sun, but
there is something likewise in it, which we cannot see; who can see its Beams
or glaring light, or heat, or motion, so as to be able to give any competent
account of the nature, substance, color, and properties of them? You may see
the back parts, the Operations, the glimmering and faint representations of the
Almighty -- But there shall no Man see his Face, and live, Exodus 33.20. Can the
Owl see the Sun, or Batts endure the Daylight? no more can we abide the Luster
of the Divine Presence, or see the Essentials of his being, 1 Timothy 6.16.

8. Incorruptibility and Immortality: The Sun is the same now as he was last
Year, last Age, thousands of Years ago; he suffers no decay, infirmity, old
age, or declension, but is as fresh and vigorous now, as in the first Morning
of its Creation. Does not this somewhat resemble the Glory of the incorruptible
God? the King Immortal, Eternal, Invisible, Jam. 1.17. Who is the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever: All things here wax old, as does a Garment, etc.

9. Of his Omnipotence: (For all these Attributes are reckoned to the Almighty,
as in a manner peculiar to him, and therefore I hope you will not quarrel with
the Number of my Particulars.) What cannot (in reason) the Sun do? I have
instanced in many things under the point of Providence; I will add a few more:
The Sun can parch our grounds, exhale our Waters, make the Earth barren,
destroy our Harvests, and bring a Dearth upon the Land. The Sun can invenom the
Air, and shed a Poison into our Constitutions, and destroy us with Plagues and
Mortal Distempers; the Sun can burn our Houses, Towers, Steeples, and make a
Desolation in the Earth; the Sun can make our Heads ach, our Hearts burn, our
Choler domineer, and so dispose to Wars and Bloodshed. Again, the Sun can melt
the Clouds, and send Rain upon the Earth to make it fruitful, and turn our dry
grounds into springs of Water; can heal the Air, and warm our Constitutions,
and preserve our Health, and Wealth, and Peace, and Plenty, but all this under
the Permission of God Almighty: He only is the the Supreme Power, whom no
Creature can resist: He only is Omnipotent -- Our God is a consuming Fire, Heb.
12.29. What a mighty Foundation is this Attribute of the Divine Omnipotence to
build our Faith and Affiance upon! and what strong Reasons we have to believe
it! and yet we shake like a Bulrush, when we lean upon that strong Arm; the
strength of Israel, who will not lie, nor deceive; that mighty God, who is able
to do exceedingly abundantly above all that we (weak Mortals) can wish or think
of: What Conceptions we are able to frame to our selves now of this Attribute,
I know not; this I believe, when once the leaf of this sublunary World is
turned over, and the Gates of Heaven are opened, and that Scene of Infinite
Glory which lies yet before us out of sight, is presented to our eyes, when the
WONDERS of the other World come in view, we shall then cry out, Rev. 19.6. The
Lord God Omnipotent reigns.

10. Purity and Holiness: The Fire is a clean Element, and one of those that we
are wont to purify Metals and Vessels made of them with: It was enjoined
under the Law. The Sun is pure from any Spot, or Blemish, or Wrinckle, or
Cloud, or Earth, or Polution: Yea, though it visits our Dunghills, it is not
defiled with them; no uncleanness can stick to the Sunbeams: Yea, it discovers
the Spots upon our Garments, the Freckles upon our Faces, and puts a shame upon
our Deformities, Eccles. 16.10. What is this, but a lively Emblem of the
infinite purity of that God, with whom we have to do? That Refiners fire and
Fullers soap, whose words are all of them purer than Gold tried in the fire,
and requires us to be pure as he is pure; and really when we consider this
visinity of the Divine Holiness, we may be justly abashed into shame and
confusion, to think what deformities our Souls are disfigured with, and what
insolences we have committed in the sight of this Sun, and withal, we have
reason to cry out, -- as 1 Samuel 6.20. Who is able to stand before this holy
Lord God? if the righteous scarcely be saved, etc. We are apt to please our
selves with the Memoirs of the Divine Goodness and Clemency, the shining light
and warmth of the Sunbeams, but seldom remember, that the same Sun, when it
looks through a burning glass, is apt to set fire upon combustible Stuff; I mean,
that whosoever builds any such light, Tinder, Hay, Straw, Stubble, Wood, false
Doctrines and Errors of Judgment, or ungodly Practices, runs the risk of an
extraordinary hazard, and that these works must be tried by a Jealous God; and
whatever is combustible must be burned up, and if the sinner after that loss
have any substance of Purity and Holiness left, he shall be saved, but so as by
fire; as a piece of impure Gold or Silver thrown into the Furnace, to prove the
Metal and wast the Dross. Our God is a consuming Fire.

11. Bounty: How beneficial the Sun is to the Earth, I need not stay now to
tell you; it is sufficient to say, the benignity and beneficence of it is so
great, and its good offices so many, that we can as ill spare the Sun out of
the firmament, as the Breath almost out of our Nostrils; nor can we live, or
move, as Men, as Christians, without the mercies of God: His Mercies are over
all his Works! and should I go about to exspatiate upon this Theme, I might as
well go wade in the deep and wide Ocean. His mercy is over all his works! He is
a gracious God, merciful, slow to anger, of great kindness, pityful and
compassionate, of tender bowels, and a long patience, and plenteous in
goodness; keeping mercy for thousands of them. In short, the Prophet seems to
make out my Analogy in this point more exactly, when he tells us, Mal. 4.2. The
Son of Righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings.

12. Unchangeableness and Everlastingness: We see nothing visible in the nature
of things to prognosticate the ruin of the Sun, at least till the exspiration
of the whole Elementary World: It neither changes, nor decays, nor dies, it
falters not in its motions or influences; it is still one, continues the same,
and will do so till the end of time -- So long as the Sun endures, Psalm. 72.5,
17. and in this respect likewise it is an adumbration of the Divine Truth, and
Faithfulness, and Unchangeableness, and Eternity. I am the Lord, I change not,
therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed, Mal. 3.6. The Lord shall endure
for ever, Psalm. 9.7.

13. I have one thing more, and I have done: The Sun and Moon represent a
Husband and Wife; so the Heathen Poets fancied, and accordingly gave the names
of Phoebus to one, and Phebe to the other, Psalm. 19.5. And it is very certain, the
Moon depends entirely upon the Sun for all its light, and attends it in its
motions, as becomes an Obsequious Bride; nor am I singular in this conceit;
Holy Scripture gives sufficient countenance to it. The Church is fitly compared
to the Moon, upon the account of its Changes, Eclipses, borrowed Light, and
wanish Complexion. I think, by the seed of David, Psalm. 89.37. compared there
to the Moon, is meant the Church, and as for the Sun, ye have heard already,
that God himself stoops to the Metaphor; the other part is easily made out,
viz. That this Sun and this Moon are related one to the other, as the
Bridegroom and the Bride, Isa. 62.1, 5. You are this Moon, God has set his
Love upon the children of men, with design to marry them to himself; Christ the
Sun of Righteousness, has died to purchase their affections, and present them
to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, etc. As a man loves
his wife, so does Christ the Church; only this, are you willing to accept the
Proposal, or will you disdain the motion? shall this Moon scorn to be married
to this glorious Sun? or are you willing to take Christ for your wedded
Husband, to live together after Gods Ordinance, in the sacred Tie of a
Matrimonial Relation? God himself courts you, Christ has died for you, the
Spirit and the Bridegroom say, Come, and we his Ambassadors and Ministers say,
Come, we beseech you in Christ's stead; the Commission to us is much the same
with Abraham's to his Servant, Genesis 24.38. And our answer may be much the same
with Abraham's Servant to his Master, v. 39. however, our Address to you is the
same with his to Rebecka, v. 49. If you are willing, God is willing, and all
things are ready, and the Match is excellent, and no Dowry on your part is
required, only as the Psalmist, Psalm, 45.10. Hearken, O Daughter, etc. And if
you are thus far willing, heartily willing, the Espousals may be celebrated
now, we will very quickly, God willing, solemnize the Contract, (in the
Sacrament) and shortly the Marriage shall be consummate, and the Feast
prepared, (when the Scaffold of this World is taken down) and the Compeer of
our Bridegroom, the Man of sin is destroyed, and the number of the Guests are
completed, and room is made for that great solemnity; then, I say, the
Marriage-day will come, and the Feast celebrated, and the Nuptials consummate,
and then Rev. 19.7. Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give honor to him; for
the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready.

FINIS.
Meditations UPON THE Beauty of Holiness.

By WILLIAM TURNER, M. A. and Vicar of Walberton in Sussex.

Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness,

Psalm. 29.2. LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for John Dunton, at the Raven in
Jewen-street, and are also to be Sold by Ed. Richardson, near the
Poultrey-Church. 1695.

To my Dear Friends and Acquaintance in Flintshire, Shropshire and Sussex, etc.
SIRS,
HAving broke the Ice already, in daring to appear publicly in the World, I
was willing next to pitch my Thoughts upon the level, for the benefit of my
Friends and Acquaintance: If perhaps I might with a short Discourse, not too
tedious for the Ears of any sober Person, that is at leisure from the Noise of
Importunate Cares and Business, recommend a Subject that is worthy a bigger
Encomium than I am able to give it. I am not ashamed of the Theme, but I am
ashamed of my self, as a Person unworthy to handle it; this made me hesitate a
while, and consider, whether I were not imprudent, to put my self upon such a
Subject as would tempt the Reader to enquire, whether the Author were such a
Glorious and Beautiful Saint as he here recommends to the World? To deal freely
and ingeniously in the Case of such Objections as these are, I will openly avow
it to the World, that I Admire the Rule we are to walk by; I am ashamed every
Night upon my Knees of my own and others Transgressions and Prevarications. God
forgive us! we live as if we were in love with Deformity, and took a Pride in
that which is our shame! Mankind is absolutely the Greatest Blot of all the
Visible Creation; and it is the saddest Lamentation of all, that the World is
growing old, and men no wiser than they were some Thousands of Years ago. We
are sensible of Neatness and Beauty in Clothes, Faces, Houses, every thing but
our Lives and Manners. If this be not an Absurdity, I know not what is: The
Heathens (some of them) laughed at it long ago, as a piece of Nonsense not
reconcilable to Humane Reason, and yet we still go on to Dote at the same
rate, and never Tax our Intellectuals, as if they were to be blamed for the
immorality of our Lives. Men are generally tender of the Reputation of their
Wit, and choose (of the two) rather to be suspected and accounted Knaves than
Fools; but in earnest, in the Account of Religion, it is hard to say whether
they are fitter for, Bridewell or Bedlam. To provoke my self and Reader to
shake off (by degrees at least) this Ungodly Tribe, and to live like Men of
sense, and somewhat that is solid and brave, to love that which is Truly
Lovely, is the sincere Design of

Dear Sirs, Your Real Friend and Servants, W. TURNER.

Meditations UPON THE Beauty of Holiness.
IT IS a laborious Task, to commend unto the sinful World the Love of our
Religion, and requires a more than Humane, an Angel's Skill, the Tongue of
Cherubims, the most strenuous Arguments and sweetest Eloquence in the World:
And when we have done all that we can, unless we can also open blind eyes, and
make them see a Beauty there, where with their natural Eyes and Understandings
they see nothing but Deformity, our labor is still lost, and we must return
without our Errand.

My Design at this time is to treat upon this Subject, and yet when I have set
out the Constitution of our Religion in its Native beauty, and presented the
Figure of it in its most amiable Complexion, I must leave it at your Censures,
and desire you to beg of God the Illumination of your Understandings, the
opening of your Eyes, that you may pass a right Judgment in the Case.

This will be the drift of my following Discourse, viz.

I. To show, that Holiness and the Divine Worship, are in themselves beautiful.
II. To exhort you to keep up, what you can, this Beauty of Divine Worship, and
a Holy Life.
First, That there is a certain Beauty in the Exercise of Religion, and
especially in the Divine Worship; and this may be evinced by the opening of
these particulars.

1. The God whom, 2. The Christ through whom, 3. The Ministers, by the
instrumentality of whom, 4. The Place where, 5. The People who, 6. The Graces
wherewith, 7. The Ordinances wherein, 8. The Glory, for which we worship,
Are all Beautiful.

This I shall show first of all, and afterward the Deformity of the contrary,
Impiety and Irreligion.

1. The God whom we worship is a Beautiful God: If there be any Beauty in the
World, any Comeliness and Excellency in any Creature, any pleasant Figures or
Shaddows of Decency to be found upon any Being within the Circuit of the wide
Universe, they are all but borrowed Beams from this Sun. The Psalmist makes it
his most Cordial request, his (...), his only Petition to Heaven -- to see the
Beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4. Here he could be content to inhabit all his
days, to contemplate the Beauty of the great Jehova, to gaze and spend his
Eyes upon the glorious luster of this Sun; a thousand Mouths, and a thousand
Tongues, though as fluent all of them as those of Angels, would be too little to
praise this Beauty, to describe this Glory; but one Ray of it darted in full
vigor upon us now, would be enough not only to strike our Senses with
blindness and astonishment but even to crack our mortal Tabernacles, and lay us
all flat upon the Dust. Why, the Divine Glory is inaccessible to Creatures
dwelling in corruptible bodies, in Houses of mere Clay, not yet purged from the
rottenness and rust of Sin, and refined for Glory; the God whom we worship is a
God of eminency, of excellent Beauty, of incomprehensible unconceivable Glory!
all the Jewels and Inferior Beauties of this sublunary World, and all the
Spangles of the Starry Spheres, put together, would be nothing, compared to
this excellent amiable Being. Could we but see him a little in his Robes of
Majesty, Glory and Beauty, now, as we shall hereafter, Face to Face, a glimpse
would be a Charm, Face to Face, a glimpse would be a Charm, and a single Glance
a Spell to all the Cares and Pleasures of this poor transitory World: Then we
should dote, as David did, upon the (...) and cry out in the same manner -- One
thing, O Lord -- this one thing, I desire, this I will seek after, that I may
dwell in thy house for ever; that I may spend not only the few Minutes of the
present short Life, but may wear an Eternity in thy house, etc. Then with St.
Paul after his Visions, -- let the World lie all of it under foot, let all the
Charms besides of Wealth or Pleasure, be despised, as Dross and Dung, in
comparison of this Beauty, this Glory!

I would, but cannot, speak somewhat worthy of that God, and his desirableness,
whom we worship; for not only our Tongues, but our Senses faulter, when we soar
aloft, and begin to talk of that Infinite Glory! His own Works speak louder for
him than our words: All his Works praise him. Every Creature has a Tongue to
say somewhat in the Commendation of him that made them! and can we live in the
crowd, in the very midst of his Encomiasts, and hear and see nothing!

I would not, Sirs, that ye should be put into Raptures now, God finds it not
convenient to distribute our Rewards to us 'till we have done our Work; he
hides at present his Beauty from us in retirement, within the Vail -- but I
would not that Men should be stark-blind, and not see something of his
Excellency, whose Glory fills the Heavens, and Mercies extend themselves over
all the World.

2. The Christ through whom we Address our selves to God, and by whose
Intercession we hope for Acceptance in our religious Services. Our Mediator is
sweet and lovely, the most amiable amongst ten thousand, fairer than all the
Children of Men; his Lips are full of Grace and Truth, his Garments smell of
Myrrh, Alloes, and Cassia, out of the Ivory Palaces: His Incarnation, humble
Birth, excellent Doctrine, holy Life, divine Miracles, meritorious Death, and
glorious Resurrection, all are pourtrayed to us in the Lineaments of a perfect
Beauty; here we may see the blessed Cherubims clasping their Wings over the
Propitiatory; Truth and Mercy, Righteousness and Peace issing each other; the
Terrors of the Law, and the Blessings of the Gospel met together in the
sweetest Embraces; and if there be any profane incredulous Souls, that wink and
dazzle at this Prospect, and say as in the Prophet, He has no form or
comeliness, and though we see him, we see nothing in him that we should desire
him; Isa 53.1. If he be despised and rejected of Men, (as it is very true he is
by too too many) if this Jewel be a stone of stumbling, we know the reason,
it is because the God of this World has blinded their Eyes, and drawn such deep
Prejudices over their Understandings, that like Owls of the Desert, they cannot
see the Noon-Sun. Away then with that unholy Generation, that prize not their
Mediator, nor make their Applications to Heaven in his Name, but make a Mock of
that Jesus that dyed in Jerusalem, and resolve all the Mystery of our
Redemption into a mere figure; as if our Jesus were but a shadow, and our
Redemption a vanity; and those also that place so much Perfection in
themselves, as makes the application of Christ's Merits impertinent and
unnecessary; or those either, that patch the Merits of their Savior with their
own Works, and to make him more complete, adjoin other Mediators to him. For
us, we know no other Name under Heaven, so sweet, so salutary, so efficacious
with God the Father, by whom we may expect Salvation, Isa. 4.2. And is it not
so far a decent Worship, to adore such a God, by the Mediation of such a Jesus!
to Pray to God in the Name of Christ! to be ushered into the Audience of the
Father by the Intercession of his only Son! to have access into the Court of
Heaven in the Name of the Son of God, who has loved us, and given himself for
us, Hag. 2.7. The Desire of all Nations.

3. The Ministers, by the Instrumentality of whom, etc. I mean not those
Pseudoes that run before they are sent, those lying Spirits, that under
pretense of Teaching, deceive the People; but those Ministers of the Gospel
which Preach the Word faithfully, and divide it skilfully, and administer all
the Sacred and Sacramental Ordinances impartially, without addition or
diminution; that Preach with zeal, and Pray with fervor, and live well, and
study to approve themselves honest Pastors, that need not be ashamed; they that
endeavor to reduce the straying sheep, to warn the unruly, to rebuke the
gain-sayer, to comfort the weak, commending themselves to the Consciences of
their Hearers in the sight of God; and these, I say, (if we have any such
amongst us, as no doubt but we have, though I wish their number were greater) are
Men of a welcome Presence, of beautiful Feet, of pleasant Countenances, Isa.
52.7. The very Office it self is an Ornament; thoh' the Church never wanted
those Adversaries, that in despite to the Light threw Stones at the Lanthorn.
The Minister is a Terrestrial Angel, (they should be so, and good Ministers are
so) To the Angel of the Church, etc. Rev. 2.1. of Ephesus, Sardis, etc. they
are Stars, and shining Lights in the dark World; and Stars, ye know, enamel
the Hemispheres: They are the Servants of the living God, which show to us the
way to everlasting Salvation.

I would not say these things to puff the Clergy up with Pride and Vainglory;
but I would have the People know those Men that are set over them, and admonish
them, and give double Honor to them that labor faithfully in Word and
Doctrine, and acknowledge the beauty of their feet, which run to them upon
these Evangelical Errands, and pay a due and humble deference to that Sacred
Function, and account them more than the Horsemen of Israel, and the Chariots
thereof.

4. The Place where: Whether it be a 'Tabernacle or a Temple, or other place
consigned to the Holy Service; not that we attribute any inherent Holiness to
such places now especially under the Gospel, but what depends merely upon the
relation it bears to the Work and Employment it is devoted to; and upon this
score the Place ought to be dear to us, and appear amiable in our Eyes; and we
should be so in love with the Place for the Works sake, as to say of it as the
Patriarch of Bethel, How dreadful is this place! this is none other than the
House of God! and lo here the Angels of Heaven ascending and descending as it
were upon a Ladder! or as the Prophet David, Psalm. 84.1, etc. How amiable are
thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! it is the perfection of Beauty, shinning with
the light of the Divine Countenance, Psalm. 50.2. it is that Zion which the Lord
has chosen, and desired for his habitation; saying, this is my rest for ever,
here will I dwell; -- here will I treat my Spouse the Church with the sweetest
Wines, the fattest Delicates, the choicest Ordinances in the World; Manna from
Heaven, Angels Food, the Waters of Life, Nectar and Ambrosia, Nourishment for
Souls to fit them for Eternity! Forgive me, Sirs, if I speak with some spice of
Fondness and Admiration! all the World besides is common ground, compared to
this Sacred Appartment, and all our Employment besides in comparison of this is
nauseous and impertinent! here is the Vineyard of red Wine that the Lord himself
does keep, Isa. 25.6. better far than all the Taverns, than all the Theaters,
than all the Elysian Camps of the wide Universe! Glad then may we be, when they
say unto us, We will go into the house of the Lord, we will worship toward his
holy Temple! we will go and keep holy day in the Courts of the Lord's house, on
the hill of Zion, in the midst of Jerusalem! Hallelujah! -- Here we have better
Company than any where in the World besides, I mean, in a more especial manner;
here more peculiarly than any where else, we have Heaven it self in Emblem,
Mount Zion in Effigy, the Celestial Jerusalem, the City of the living God,
the Coier of Angels, the Court of Saints, a sweet correspondency with the best
of Spirits in both the Churches, in both the Worlds, Militant and Triumphant,
Earth and Heaven, which brings me to

5. The People, who: The Holy Church, the best of Men, and Angels, and Spirits,
separate; the select Company called out from the rest of the World, to adore
their Lord, and communicate of his Grace, and prepare for, and partake of his
Glory! not that all who are called are accepted, the Chaff and Wheat, the Corn
and Tares, the good and bad Fish, the Sheep and Goats; the Sincere and
Hypocrite are both for a while jumbled together in promiscuous Company, but
none are real Communicants in this sweetness but real Believers; the rest feed
upon the shell, these eat the Kernel; the rest look on, these taste the
Comforts; the rest fill up a space, and serve for some purposes, they hew wood,
and draw water for the use of the Tabernacles; these are invested in the
Communities, Privileges and Dignities of the Place! they have all one Coat,
and Creed, and Profession, but these all have one Mind, one Mouth, one Hope,
one Way and one End! they mutually partake and Communicate together in the same
Prayers, Praises, Promises, Privileges, every thing that is sweet and
salutary; and though their Faces differ, their Natures do not; though in Opinions
about some lesser punctillio's they consent not, in their Charity they are all
one: One so entirely, that all the Cunning and Violence in the World shall not
be able to dissolve the Knot! One so entirely, that their Interests, their
Intercessions, their Cares and Crosses are the same; the whole Company espouse
the same Cause, all drive at the same End, all mean the Divine Glory, and the
good of Mankind in general; if one be weak, the other is weak; if one be
offended, the other burns; all the Members of the same Body do sweetly and
amicably sympathize together! Christians as widely distant one from the other
as the two Poles, meet in their Prayers, in their Eucharists! even the Angels
stoop to us, and we aspire to them! we are all carrying on the same Work, we
shall all receive the same Wages, we shall all shortly together be with the
Lord: Though our Brains be different, yet our Hearts are not, [Bishop Hall] nor
our Ends shall not. The Church is lovely, orderly, unanimous, as an Army with
Banners. In short, the Churches are the Glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. and
therefore may well be accounted the Glory of us, the Beauty of the World, the
Jewel of the whole Earth; and though it be burnt with the Sun of Temptation and
Affliction, though it be spotted as the Moon, though it be black and homely, yet
it is orderly and comely, and shall e're long be presented (all the Body of
them) to the Holy Jesus, as a glorious Church, without spot, etc. Psalm. 48.1,
2, 3.

6. The Graces wherewith: And here I have a large Field, a pleasant Garden,
full of sweet odoriferous Herbs, and beautiful fragrant Flowers, to walk in; a
Bed of Spices, a Baal-Hamon, and better than that, the Vineyard, the Eden of
the God of Heaven; for he himself does not disdain to walk in this Paradise, to
gather these Flowers, to divert himself in this Garden, Cant. 5.1. I am come,
etc. If ye ask me, What is the Garden of God? Answ. Isa. 5.7. Surely the
Vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the Men of Juda his
pleasant plant. The Church of the faithful is his Eden, his Habitation, his
Diversion, but the Herbs that grow there, and the Flowers that flourish there,
are the Virtues and Graces of his People. Here upon these gracious qualities,
these holy Habits, I would fain spend some Praises, and set them out in a
beautiful dress to the Eye of the World; but two things hinder: One, that it is
hard to praise sufficiently things excellent; the other, that if I could do it,
yet their Beauty is not to be seen with carnal Eyes. We must wink upon the
Flesh, if we would see Spirits, and we must be blind to carnal Objects, when we
would survey the beauty of spiritual Graces! But really the Graces are the
greatest Embellishments of Humane Nature, Coats of Embroidery, and profitable,
pleasant, glorious, the most decent wear for rational and immortal Spirits, and
durable and fashionable to Eternity. Virtues that make Men's Faces shine,
Converlations glister, and every thing that appertains to them appear
pardonable, lovely, and inviting, Cant. 4.9. Thou have ravished my Heart, etc.
So God himself is pleased to accept the Beauty of our Graces, the
Communications of his Spirit, and so Men too are apt to take a Complacency in
these qualities. Bonus Vir Caius seius, etc. Jewel, I could love thee, were
thou not an Heathen in thy Opinions, but surely thou art an Angel in thy Life
and Conversation. Give me a Man, of a pious, sober, just, humble, peaceable,
charitable Genius; a Man that gives his God, his Prince, his Priest, his
Neighbor, his Enemy, his Family, himself, all their due; that keeps up the
Rules of Religion, Civility, Order, in Church, Country, Neighborhood,
Household; a Man that keeps his Orb, without disorder, without confusion; that
neither flinches for the Sails of Prosperity, nor the frowns of an adverse and
cross Fortune: A Man of a smooth brow, an affable Tongue, a charitable Hand, an
honest and devout Heart, and an unblameable Lise: A Man that does no wrong in
the World, that does all the good he can to Friends, to Enemies, to all: A Man
that is good in all Relations, as a Child, Husband, Brother, Neighbor,
Magestrate, Minister, Subject: This is a Man that gives a Reputation to
Religion, adorns the Gospel, beautifies the Church, and shines to the World,
like Moses coming down from Mount Sinai, or the Disciples of whom they in the
Acts took cognizance, that they had been with Jesus. I am very confident, might
Men be left to their own sober Thoughts and choice, they could not desire a
Husband, Wife, Prince, Subject, Neighbor, Enemy, Family, Kingdom, Parent,
Child, any Society or Relation in the World, better accomplished and fitted to
the uses of a quiet, peaceable, and sweet Life and Conversation, than the
Graces of Christianity will make Men! Why, what are Piety, Charity, Honesty,
Meekness, Innocence, Zeal, Modesty, Humility, Faith, Hope, Patience, Sobriety,
Justice, Chastity, Liberality, Prudence, with all the rest of the Train of
Spiritual and Evangelical Virtues, but the bravest Qualities that flesh and
blood can be clothed with, the finest wear for immortal Spirits, raiment of
Needlework, Coronets upon the Head, and Chains about the Neck! So Solomon
describes the universal Grace of Wisdom in his Proverbs. Pagans saw this Beauty
in Virtue, and admired it. Holiness carries a Majesty in its presence, to be
adored by Infidels. If the Apostles come into a barbarous Nation, their very
Enemies in calm mood shall make them Garlands, and cry them up for Gods
descended down from Heaven in the shape of Men; one shall be Jupiter, and
another Mercury: He Is worse than an Heathen that sees not an excellency in
Holiness, a modest loftiness in spiritual Wisdom, that deserves both Esteem and
Love: The sweetness of Temper, the Innocence of Deportment, the discreet
Managery of Affairs, the Love, Mercy, and Condescension, that is taught by the
Christian Graces, is the greatest enoblement of Humane Nature, that it is
capable of on this side Heaven.

These Graces shed a Beauty upon our very Breasts and inward Man, as well as
upon the outward Life an Actions; they bring us to the best way of living we
are capable of in this World, both in respect of God, our selves, and all
others; the Graces and Virtues of our Religion are most transparent beams of
Divine Perfection; on; they make up a Complexion in our Humane Nature,
according to what is eternally existing in the Holy Nature of God (so far as we
are capable of a Conformity to it) and that in the Judgment of right Reason is
the highest and noblest account of all good living; for we cannot do better,
than in our measure to correspond to Divine Perfection; what underfiled
Religion, Worship, and Conversation, is here communicated to us, and made
essential to the Christian, by these Graces, without the least mixture of
Idolatry and Superstition! what superlative Piety and Virtue, without any spot
of Vice of Debauchery! what punctual and perpetual Truth, without the taint of
Hypocrisy or Knavery! the outward Cloth is Sheeps Wool, and the inward Temper
is the Innocence of the Dove: Here Is no rebellion or undutifulness to
Superiors, no contempt and scorn offered to Equals, no insulting and revenge
put upon inferiors; but Men are modelled and dressed out in a Habit that
renders them amiable to God, and pleasant to themselves, and comfortable to all
about them. We are enabled by these heavenly qualities not to offend weak ones,
to look upon all men with a kind Eye, to interpret them in the best sense they
are capable of; to love all Men, to forgive, to pray for, to show kindness to
them that wrong us: In short, we are thoroughly furnished to every good work,
brought to the best way of living, the noblest principles of suffering, and the
best way of dying; and is there not a Beauty in these Divine qualifications?

Sure I am, not all the Wit of Man, or Policy of Devils, could reduce the World
to such a Posture, or put Mankind in such a pleasant frame and temper as these
do; could furnish us with such pure and untainted streams of Piety, Virtue and
good Nature, as these Graces well got, and thoroughly attained: And therefore
-- let your light so shine before men, etc. It has been long since observed,
if a Man standing at a great distance see a company Dancing, he wonders at
their antic gestures, and seemingly ridiculous Motions, and thinks them a
company of Mad men, but if he approaches nearer, and comes within the reach of
the harmonious Music and Melody, which guides and measures all these Motions,
and observes how regularly one answers to the other, he than admires them,
approves their decency and order, and desires to Dance with them; So if a Man
takes up the reports of the World concerning serious Christians, or sees them
at a distance busily attending all the Duties of their Calling and holy
Profession, he thinks of them as Festus of Paul and they are beside themselves,
etc.

But come we nearer to an Intimacy and familiar Acquaintance with the Rule of
Holy Living, and Prove. 3.15.17. She is more precious than Rubies, and all the
things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her; her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

7. The Ordinances wherein; whether it be the Preaching of the Word -- When the
Man Preaches with such life and seriousness, Orthodoxy and Authority, Grace and
Eloquence, and such easy Methods, and variety of Matter, that the People are
never weary of Hearing; or Prays with heavenly life and fervor, as may take
the Souls of them that join with him, or Praises with that alacrity and
joyfulness which beseems those that are ready to pass into glory; or
Administers the Holy Sacraments with that veneration and solemnity, that Pathos
and Devotion, as is due to those Sacred Mysteries -- this Decency, this Beauty
in the Divine Worship is enough to embellish the Church, and make it look like
Heaven in Emblem and signification: More particularly,

1. The Preaching and Hearing of the Word: To speak familiarly, it is very
becoming the Constitution of our Religion, or any Religion in the World, for an
Ezra the Priest to bring the Law before the Congregation, and to read therein
from the morning till midday; and the Tribe of Levi, to cause the People to
understand the Law, to read distinctly, and give the sense, and cause them to
understand the reading, Neh. 8.12. to have a Testimony established in Jacob,
and a Law appointed in Israel, which the Fathers are commanded to make known to
their Children, Psalm. 78.5, 6. to go into the Synagogue on the Sabbath days,
and read and expound there the Will of God concerning our Salvation. It Is a
pleasant thing for the Sons of Aaron to dispense the Manna of the Word with a
good Conscience, and in due season, and to try what they can by the foolishness
of Preaching to save them that believe; to fill the Pulpit with Orthodoxy, the
Sentiments of the Divine Oracles, the Authority of Heaven, with wholesome
Admonitions, and suitable Reproofs, and cordial Promises, and the Ministry of
Reconciliation; to throw Coals from the Sacred Altar, to warm the Hearts of all
them that come Auditors out of the cold World, and to stir them up to the
Offices of Piety, by putting them in remembrance of what God has left upon
record to that purpose in his Gospel.

And it is a comely thing for the People to sit down in humble posture at the
feet of Gamaliel, to watch daily at the gates, and wait at the Posts of
Wisdom's doors, to search for Knowledge, for spiritual Knowledge, with as much
pains and diligence as Men are wont to search for Gold or Silver, or hid
Treasures; when Men are glad to go to the house of the Lord, and every
Neighbor joggs his Brother, and calls friendly upon him to go in society with
him; when the Tribes of Israel go up together, with unanimous Consent, with one
Heart, in one body, as an Army with banners, to gather Manna, and eat Angels
Food; when they come with reverence to the House of God, and take heed to their
Feet, and be more ready to hear, believe, and mediate, than to offer the
Sacrifice of Fools; when the People are more willing to learn and practice,
than dispute and censure, and contradict and disobey; when Humility opens the
Church door, and Veneration attends their seats, and Faith waits upon their
Ears, and Devotion has taken possession of their Hearts: When the Fields are
ripe for Harvest, and the Auditors as willing to learn as the Pastor to teach;
when the Lambs cry and bleat with importunity for the Udder, and the Milk of
the Word is taken greedily in, and turns not into noxious Humors, but into
good Blood and Nourishment, and makes the Conversation shine with good works
and Evangelical Graces, the fruits of a Holy Life; when these things accord
together, as they should do, then there is a beauty and comeliness of aspect in
the Divine Worship.

2. When they join in Prayers, with that Unanimity and Concord, that Faith and
Sincerity, that Devotion and Zeal, as if all the Congregation had a mind to
climb Heaven in a fiery Chariot, to attach the Heavenly Jerusalem with a Volley
of Prayers; to take the Holy City with a sacred Violence, to Pray the Gates
open to that Celestial Paradise, in spite of all the Powers of Earth and Hell;
when our Prayers are well grounded, and our Hearts well qualified, and the Holy
Jesus is the Fore man, the Intercessor, our High Priest, to carry our Petitions
within the Veil, and to offer them there incensed with the Presenee of his own
Merits and Mediation; and we are resolved not to rise off our Knees without our
Errand, 'till we find sin bleeding upon the ground, our Hearts melting in a
gentle thaw under the benign influence of the Divine Clemency, and we our
selves clasping fast into the Embraces of the Almighty; when the Breast pours
out; Prayers, the Eye tears, the Body kneels down, the Soul lies in Paraphrase,
and the Man considers that Eternity depends upon the grant, and is resolved to
wrestle it out with the Angel of the Covenant 'till the dawning of the day, the
dayspring from on high does visit him.

3. When they join in Praises and Thanksgivings to the God of Heaven, with that
cheerfulness and alacrity as if they would send their Hearts also in their
Eucharists, and praise God, not with the Calves of their Lips, but the best
Instrument they have, their very Hearts and Souls: When there are no Mutes in
the Alphabet, no jarring string in the whole Assembly, no particular Member out
of Tune, but every individual Soul contributes to a Psalm, and strives to make
up an Harmonious Melody to that God that made their Tongues, and calls for
Hallelujahs, Psalm. 66.1. Psalm. 76.11. Psalm. 81.1, 2. Psalm. 92.1. 95.1. Psalm.
96.1.

4. When they all join in a serious and solemn Commemoration of the Death
Passion, Love and Merits of our dying Lord; when like Brethren of the same
Society, and of the same Family, they symbolize together in Celebration of the
Holy Eucharist, eating at the same Table, of the same Bread, drinking of the
same Wine, in memory of that blessed Body and Blood which were both given for
the Nourishment of us to Eternal Life, when we commemorate his Cross with a
Crowd of Passions, and crucisie our Lusts with a warm Devotion, and look upon
our Savior's immense Love with weeping Eyes and wondering Hearts, Faith,
Gladness, and great Delight; and with one Consent enter our selves afresh under
his Banner, to engage all the sinful Powers of the World, and promise
faithfully to be all for the time to come better Servants, and more faithful in
the precedure of our Lives. When we solemnize the Memory of our dearest
Savior, and his Love, like loving Disciples, with an ingenuous return of
hearty Love to him again, and with a mutual Love to one another. When Humility,
Faith, Obedience, and Charity, all meet at the Passover together, and we are in
quarrel with nothing but what God himself quarrels at, Sin and Hell, Psalm. 96.6.

8. The Glory for which we worship, is exceeding beautiful: If we consider,

1. The Description given of it in Sacred Scripture, under the Mosaic Economy,
it was represented by Types and Emblems, and figurative Expressions; for in
truth the Intellectuals of Mankind were then so gross and cloudy, that they had
need of Pictures and sensible Ideas to make things spiritual, invisible, and
future, intelligible; and it is not much better with Mankind now, though the World
be grown older, yet not much wiser: We have still need of Material Instruments
and Optics to help us forward in Quest of the World to come. The Land of
Canaan, the Milk, Oil, Honey, and exceeding fruitfulness of the place, were a
lively Figure of the promised Inheritance. They stuck then so deep in the Mud,
and adhered so close to the present World, that it was hard to draw them over
to abstracted and lofty speculations, and therefore God Almighty indulged their
Infancy of Reason and Judgment so far, as to give them a Prospect of Heaven in
a fine spot of ground here on Earth, A sight of Life everlasting and the World
to come, in a piece of clear Landscape in this World: But a Brighter discovery
was reserved to these last times of the World, when Men were come to some
maturity of Age and Judgment, and able to lay aside their Fescues, and throw
away their Pictures and ruder Elements they had been accustomed to, and
exercised in; so that now we have as full a Discovery and Description of the
future Glory revealed to us, as we are capable at present of receiving. And
here I must confess, the Beauty is so dazzling, the Apprehension so amazing,
that a deep Meditation upon it would go near to strike our Thoughts into a
perfect stupor and incuriousness about the things of this World. Life and
Immortality are brought to light through the Gospel; but such a light as we are
able to receive, and no more.

2. The Nature of it, collected from the chief Topics of Consideration: 1. God
himself, the Object and Author. 2. The Design and Intention.


(1.) God himself, the Object and Author: Of which I shall say but little; for
when we stare long upon such Transcendent Objects, our Senses fail us, and we
commonly find our selves at our Wits end. We may indeed discourse modestly
about them, and think at present so far as to make our Thoughts quick, and
Devotion lively; but whatsoever is more than this, is more than meet. Can we
think, that that God who made the World, and made us with so much Wisdom, and
exercised a continual Providence over us for so many thousands of Years, did
not mean some excellent admirable End at the last, for the Reward of that
Creature which was made the top of all the visible Creation! For my part, I
expect to see, and I think upon excellent Reason too (the God of Mercy admit me
in favor to that Enjoyment!) the most ravishing sight that ever was, or will
be in the Universe. There and then I hope to see, what will be the product and
effect of that Infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness, that first made and now
maintains this World: Then the Glory of all his Attributes will be made known,
and exposed to open view! and Oh! the Beauty of that Prospect! and therefore,

2. The Design and Intention of it, being to set forth the Divine Glory, and
Man's Happiness, it must needs be full of Beauty: As the Case stands with us
now, a little, a lighter kind of Happiness would serve our turns: Our Bodies
are very frail, our Intellectuals very infirm, our Natures so bemired with sin
and vicious Inclinations, that a Mahomet's Paradise, or an Elysian Field, or a
good Constitution of Body, and a pleasant Soul, and some cheerful Company, and
a full Purse or Barn, would go a great way with us -- But when the Body is
raised incorruptible, and all the Man's Faculties renewed and repaired, we
shall not be content with that Draff we feed on now, but call for Manna, Angels
food, more glorious Objects and refined Notions, and a clearer Medium for the
Conveyance of Idea's, and Communion with Spirits; and then every thing will be
and appear in its due place and order; God, Angels, Men, every sense and
faculty suited and filled with its meet Object. All things full of beauty and
Glory, without any intermixture of Deformity, Defect, or Disorder: The supreme
Being in his Throne of Majesty, and all his Creatures in their proper places of
Subjection and Glory, reciprocating the Acts of a Holy, Sweet, and blessed
Communion one with another: To which Blessed Estate the Lord grant that both he
that writes, and he that reads these Lines, may be admitted, for the sake of
our dear Redeemer, the Holy Jesus.

We shall now in the next place come to consider,

First, The Deformity of an unholy life -- opposita juxta se, etc.

1. Sin is full of Deformity of its own nature: It Is all of it an Ireegularity,
a divaricating from the Rule, a trangression of the Holy Law of God; a
disobedience to the Divine Precept, a going aside into Bypath and Errors.

2. It renders us uncomely and deformed in the sight of God, Good Angels, and
Good Men: They look not upon us with that loving eye, that liking and
approbation, that pleasure and delight, as upon the righteous, and him that
fears God. As for the former -- it is called by God in Scripture, Abomination,
and that which his soul abhors; so is all injustice, diverse weights and
measures, proud looks, and hypocritical prayers, and in a word, all the kinds
of sin; nay, the Prophet tells us, His Eyes cannot endure to look upon
iniquity; and besides he hates them so, that he will never suffer these
qualities to come into his immediate presence, into the Court of Heaven,
nothing that has any spot, or blemish, or wrinkle, must come into that Holy
Quire. All the dogs, and all the impenitent, unpurified sinners, are banished
thence, all those unclean beasts are shut out of the Celestial Ark, No unclean
thing shall enter there, etc.

Good Angels are disobliged by the impurity of our lives, and good Men are
ready to say -- David, Psalm. 101. 3. Depart from me, etc. It leaves a blot of
deformity upon our Reputation. Sin is a dishonorable thing, it brings shame to
us for its real effect, it brings shame to us for its real effect, and puts our
Names into a dark Eclipse; Whose glory is their shame, Phil. 3. 19. What fruit
had ye in these things, etc. The Name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10. 7.

In short, almost all the sins that men are guilty of, renders their Actions
deformed, their Lives unlovely, their reputation noisome, their Memories putrid
in the eyes of God and all good Men; and to make this more evident, suppose a
Scheme of our own Societies, our present age exposed to open view in the
presence of the Gravest Catoes, the Wisest Senators, the Holy Angels, the
Blessed Jesus, the Almighty God, the Searcher of Hearts, and the Book of all
Men's Actions unclasped, and laid open to the eye of the whole World (as they
will shortly be, without any hopes or possibility of Dissimulation or
Hypocrisy) how eager then and solicitous do ye think, would all impenitent
sinners be, to sew leaves together, to fain Excuses, to hide in rocks, to cover
their shame, to veil over their deformity! -- In the mean time, what makes the
profane Rabble abscond so industriously from the searching eyes of wise and
good men? what makes them that are drunken, drunk in the night? and they that
commit fornication, do it within the Confines of the close Curtains? and every
sinner desire the Twilight, yea, the thickest darkness? and most Men put on
Cloak to hide their Wickedness! were it not that sin in its own nature is
deformity, at least is so esteemed in the eyes of them that judge according to
right reason and the light of Truth! Where Is the Man, that dares avow
wickedness in its own Colors, and will plead for vice, and profess Debauchery?
even Atheists themselves, the grossest sinners of all others, would fain prove
Truth and Virtue on their side; and they dare hardly speak with their mouths
what they would willingly entertain in their hearts, -- That there is no God,
nor Heaven, nor Hell, nor Virtue, nor Vice, in the whole World: The fool has
said in his heart there is no God.

Secondly, I would persuade, -- to worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness.

1. Beauty is an amiable thing: It Is lovely and inviting, and as the Orator
says, if we desire to observe a Decorum in those things that relate to our
Bodies, to our Garments, to our Gestures, we should be much more so, to keep up
a Decency and Beauty in all our Actions; especially when we are conscious that
an Omniscient Eye sees all we do, and Angels do still attend us, and all our
secret things shall sortly be broughtly into Cognizance before the whole World,
Turpe quid -- etc.

2. All things that are true, wise, and good, are beautiful: Indeed there is
nothing of Decency in any thing else, but what is conform to a holy rule, and
what dares abide the examen of the Light, and the Trial of a searching eye.
Ignorance, Error, and Vice, are apt to sneak, and the guilty sinner hates the
light, because his deeds are evil. Only Truth and Goodness, as being conscious
of their own Beauty, Order, Loveliness, and Excellency, are bold to appear
before the Noon sun: And therefore, Sirs, if there be such excellent qualities
as these in the world, be exhorted to pursue after them; if Religion be
lauidble, Christinaity excellent, a sincere Devotion, a fervent Zeal, a warm
Charity, and an Honest Life, have any thing of Beauty and Commendation
belonging to them, if it be a pleasant thing to pour out the Soul in Prayer, to
offer Eucharists and Hallelujahs to the God of your Mercies, to pay Devoirs to
the King of Heaven, to fing his Praises upon the Harp and Heart, to live
humbly, holily, and righteously, in the sight of Men: Do, Sirs, dare to take
some pains to pursue carefully after these things, Phil. 4. 4, 8.

3. This Beauty of Religion commends it to the Approbation of the World, and
makes the Church shine to those that are without: It represents it lovely and
inviting to all Beholders, and therefore for the sake of those incredulous
souls that yet lie under prejudices, and the disadvantages of an ill prospect,
we should do what we can to make our light shine before men, and our Graces
give a luster to our Principles, that if it be possible, and as much as lies in
us, we may charm Proselytes, court the Love and Embraces of the incredulous
world, stop the mouths of contradicting sinners, make Proselytes of all that
know us, and are acquainted with our Conversations; let our Words be true, our
Speech savory, our Tables sober, our Port grave, our Actions honest, and our
Worship Evangelical, and every instance of our lives impressed with a tincture
of Grace, Holiness, and Heaven, and then our faces will shine, and our light
extend it self round about us, to the Reputation of our Religion, and the
inviting or silencing of very Enemies: It Is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun,
but it is much more so to behold the Son of Righteousness, in his full glory
shining in the Church, and communicating his graces in plentiful manner to them
that dwell on Mount Zion; to see the Priests clothed with righteousness, and
the Saints shouting aloud for joy, Psalm. 132. 9, 16. To see the Disciples of
the Holy Jesus in their Wedding Garments, clothed with such Raiment as may
qualify them for the Espousals of the King of Heaven, the Ring on their hand,
and a Crown of Glory upon their head, and the best Robes in the whole World,
the best manners, the most amiable Graces, for their common wear, and their
heads anointed with Oil, the most costly Ointments, the Consolations of the
Holy Ghost, the peace of Conscience, inward and spiritual joy, their feet shod
with the preparations of the Gospel of Peace! to see all Orders and Ranks of
Men among us, keep up Order, and Decency, and Love in their full strength and
vigor, to see the Husband loving the Wife, and Wife reverencing the Husband,
the Parents providing carefully for, and instructing their Children, and the
Children dutiful, and loving, and faithful to their Parents; Servants obedient
to their Masters with fear and trembling, in the singleness of their heart,
with good will doing service as to the Lord, and not as to Men, and Masters
again doing the same things unto them, forbearing threatening, knowing that they
also have a Master in Heaven; the Prince ruling in justice, as a faithful
Minister of God, and the People leading under his Government godly and
peaceable lives, in quietness and subjection; the Pastor and his flock
reciprocating to one another the duties of love and faithfulness. In a word,
all the Christian World living soberly, righteously and godly in their proper
Orbs, all the Wheels of the same work performing office mutually to one
another, and all of them conspiring to set forth the praise of him that made
them; this is Beauty, and this is inviting even to the Enemies of our Religion.

Let us not be ashamed then of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, but Glory in our
Profession, and make our Lives glorify our Professions, let our Actions give a
Reputation to our Creed, let nothing proceed from us ugly and unhandsome, or
unbecoming that excellent Gospel we lay claim to; let all turpitude be banished
far from us into the outer Court, into the Pagan World, let all the deformities
of humane nature, all the ugly, scandalous, and black sins, all the scabs of
our Lives and Words, all rotten communication, and all prohaneness, and
hypocrisy, all rioting and drunkenness, chambering, etc. Covetuousness,
Adultery, Idolatry, Pride, and Vainglory, Malice and Revenge, and all
Incharitableness -- Let them not be once named amongst us, as becomes Saints.

APPLICATION.
1. See we then what actions become Religion: Every thing that is unbeautiful,
unseemly, is to be suspected as no part of Christianity.

Whether it be the Scabs and Leprosy of a vicious Life, or the Rottenness of
Hypocrisy, or the Dawb and Paint of Superstition and Idolatry, the ascilitious
and counterfeit Beauty of humane Inventions, (so far as they are made parts of
Religion, and are looked upon as of Virtue to commend us unto God) or the
Moroseness and Unmannerliness of men in civil Conversation, or odd Gestures and
unseemly Actions, or slovenly Addresses in the Divine Worship, or whatever else
is of that kind in the matters of Religion, are certainly foreign,
heterogeneous, and spurious to the Gospel of our Savior, which requires
nothing from us but what is holy, just, and good, i. e. In our Language comely,
decorous, and beautiful, and apt to set all Mankind in a handsome and pleasant
dress: Perhaps it is not convenient to name the particulars expressly which come
under this Head. I leave it to the judgments of those who are discreet,
impartial, and unprejudiced, to make Observations this way, and judge according
to the Analogy of Faith; but this I am sure of, that many, even well-meaning
persons, forget themselves, and adopt such Principles and Practices into their
Religion, as are in the judgment of any impartial and judicious Eye, of a
Bastard kind, perfectly Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, and have no
affinity at all with the Gospel of our Savior; and besides these, even the
best of us all sometimes through the imperfection of our holiness, the weakness
of our Graces, the strength and predominacy of of the Old Man, do act such
things as shed an Ignominy and Disgrace upon our Profession, and represent it
unlovely and untaking with the World: And as for those Artificial
Embellishments which the superstitious Votary makes use of to curl his Religion
with, let us remember how we take upon us to add with our Inventions to the
naked purity of Divine Institution, and let us be asraid of being shortly asked
by the Dreadful and Jealous God, that Question -- Who has required these
things, etc.

2. This may seem to reprove those, who are so far from aiming at any Beauty in
Religion, that they are in good earnest the fo, etc. The Scum and Sweepings,
the Botches and Leprosy of the Churches of God; which make, as the Patriarch
said of his Sons, -- the very Name of Religion stink in the Nostrils of the
Inhabitants of the land; that lie like Mountains and Affirghtments in the way
of coming Proselytes, to terrify and deterr men from coming into the Church,
and espousing Holiness, and falling in love with our Religion; and I will not
stick to say, that almost all the Schisms amongst us are owing to these ill
Men, these Judas's, that betray their Savior; these Spots in our Feasts, in
our Feasts of Charity; these Scandals and Stumbling blocks, deformed and
disfigured Christians that are among us! Sirs, what do ye mean, neither to
glorify God, nor his Gospel, nor your selves! to strike at the Reputation of
Holiness, and make a blot upon your Creed with the Carelessness of your Lives!
to defile your own Souls, and make your Names rot, and (more than that) to
expunge them quite out of the Book of Life! and which is a yet greater
aggravation to your sin, to do what ye can to render Religion odious and
disgraceful to others; to pourtray it in hateful Colors and a Monstrous
shape, and so neither go to Heaven your selves, nor suffer them that would to
enter in.

3. Let us be exhorted, if we have contracted any blemish or desilement upon
our Souls by sin, if we have in any respect marred the Beauty of our Religion,
let us make have to wash in the Blood of that Immaculate Lamb that takes away
the sins of the World, etc. to purge our Consciences, and rinse our Souls, and
put on the Robe of Christ's Righeousness to hide our shame and nakedness, that
it may no more appear either to the eyes of God, or the World, or our own
Consciences; let us wash and be clean, and being once sanctified, let us
henceforth endeavor to keep our Garments unspotted.

Directions to this purpose:

1. Let us often look our Faces in the Glass of God's Law, James 1. 23. else we
may be deformed, and not know it: St. Paul -- I had not known sin, but by the
Law, etc. Let us search our Beauties with a curious Eye, and take heed least we
take Spots, black Patches, Moles, and Morphew, for any parts of our Beauty: Let
us beware of being Wise, and Holy, only in our own conceits. Selfdeceit is a
common imposture in this case, and how often do we see Men defending the
grossest Errors and greatest Vices with the strongest vigor and greatest Zeal,
and all this through Ignorance, and want of consulting the Glass sufficiently:
Ye do err, not knowing the Scripture. This is the only Rule to judge aright of
Beauties by.

2. Let us often go into the Company of those that excel in Spiritual Beauty:
Let the Excellent of the Earth be our Companions, and the best of Men our
dearest Associates: Let us say with the Blessed, Psalm. 101. 3, 4, etc. and if
we do so, by keeping Company with wise Men we shall learn Wisdom, and by often
conversing with Holy Men we shall understand mor eof Holiness and Sanctity than
we did before; we shall learn by their dress how to dress our selves better,
and by their defects be admonished to beware.

3. Let us beware of any thing that may soil our beauty: Let not the Sun look
upon us, the Sun of Temptation, Sin, the World, and Vanity, which have too much
influence upon us; and of Affliction also, for that likewise is apt to shade
our Beauty, and make our Services deformed, and our Graces uncomely to the Eyes
of the World, and to our selves also.

4. Let us acknowledge with thankfulness whence all our Beauty is derived,
Psalm. 149. 4. It Is He that gives us all our fine Robes, that decks our Souls
out with the Graces of his Spirit, that pours his Goodness and Mercy upon us,
and makes us shine with the Beauty of his own Countenance; and therefore let us
be still humble, and give him the Praise of all that little good that appears
in us -- Not unto us -- but to his Name give Glory, etc. let us Pray still for
more Grace to be poured out upon us, that our Light may shine every day clearer
and brighter, 'till it come to a perfect day; 'till we arrive at that blessed
state where our Faces shall shine as the Sun in the Firmament, and all our
Graces, which be now but in the bud, veiled over with the Infirmity of Humane
Nature, and clouded with the remainders of our old Man, be ripened into a
Complete Glory, an accomplished and unfading Beauty: And then shall that Song
be sung in good earnest, Isa. 59. 1. Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion,
put on thy beautfiul Garments, O Jerusalem, the Holy City, for henceforth there
shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.

FINIS.
A SCHEME OF THE HISTORY OF Remarkable Providence, Now preparing for the
Press, viz.

1. APPedrances of God considered. 2. Apparition of Angels Good, 3. -- of
Angels Bad. 4. -- of Separate Souls. 5. Revelation of future things, or
declaring secret things, 1. By Voice, 2. By Signs and Tokens, 1. Prodiges, 2.
Noises, Earthquakes, etc.
3. By Dreams, 4. By Prophets, 5. By Vrim and Thummim, 6. By Oracles, 7. By
Divination, Southsaying, etc. 8. By Impulse.
6. Premonitions of Death. 7. -- of other particular Changes and Accidents of
man's life. 8. -- of public Calamities or Revolutions. 9. Accomplishment of
Prophecies, fulfilling of Promises, etc. 10. Strange ways of 1. Converting
People. 2. Hindering Sin. 3. Promoting Virtue and Grace by Education, Company,
etc. 4. Resolving the Doubtful. 5. Confirming the Wavering. 6. Clearing the
Innocent. 7. Discovering the Guilty. 8. Supplying of wants. 9. Present
Retribution to the 1. Faithful, 2. Meek, 3. Charitable, etc.

12. Earnests of a Future Retribution. 13. Provision for the posterity of good
people. 14. Protection of the Good in dangers. 15. Guidance and Guardianship
through Difficulties. 16. Restriction of Satan in the Afflictions of good people.
17. Men fitted strangely for great Works. 18. Miraculous Cures of Diseases. 19.
Remarkable Graces and excellencies. Faith, Courage, Patience, Devotion, etc.
20. Prayers answered in kind. 21. Satan and ill Spirits permitted, 1. To Heart
the Good, 2. To punish the Bad.
22. Satan Hurting by 1. Interposing with melancholic Diseases. 2.
Temptations, Injections, Dreams. 3. Storms, earthquakes, diseases. 4.
Witchcraft. 5. Obsession. 6. Appuritions, etc. 7. Accomodating with worldly
Wealth, Power, etc. 8. Death.
23. Divine Judgments, Upon 1. Pride. Upon 2. Atheism, etc. Upon 3. Blasphemy,
etc. Swearing. Upon 4. Lying, Perjury. Upon 5. Disobedient Children. Upon 6.
Revengeful persons, etc. Upon 7. Theft. Upon 8. Hypocrisy. Upon 9. Idolatry.
Upon 10. Covetousness, Incharitableness. Upon 11. Drunkenness. Upon 12.
Gluttony. Upon 13. Uncleanness. Upon 14. Persecution. Upon 15.
Sabbath Breakers. Upon 16. Curious. Upon 17. Apostates. Upon 18. Witches,
Conjurers. Upon 19. Simonical, Sacrilegious, etc Upon 20. Murderers.

This foregoing Scheme (of the History of Remarkable Providence.) is only a
Scheme of the first part of that work the Reverend Mr. Turner is engaged in and
is the first draught of the said Scheme so that the Reader may expect it much
larger and more correct when the work is finished. -- As the First Part of this
work will contain all the Remarkable Providence which have happened in this
present age, etc. So the Second and Third Parts will comprehend all that is
curious in the Words of Nature and Art, -- of which second and third part the
Reverend Author is now drawing up two distinct Schemes that so the Reader may
have at one View a clear Idea of the whole undertaking.

A FURTHER SPECIMEN OF THE HISTORY OF Remarkable Providence: WITH PROPOSALS At
Large, For Printing the said WORK By way of SUBSCRIPTION.

A Work of this Nature was set on foot about 30 years ago, by the Learned Mr.
Pool, Author of the Synopsis Criticorum; but, for what Reasons we know not, it
was laid aside, and nothing has since appeared on that Subject but a small
Essay, to invite some others to go on with the Work. The Reverend Mr. TVRNER
(whose late History of all Religions has met with good acceptance) having
made Collections proper for such an Undertaking, during the Course of his
Reading, and Ministry, for near 30 years, and finding that it is not attempted
by any other Hand, is resolved to go on with it, as being fully satisfied, that
a Work of this kind, must needs be of Great Use; especially to such pious minds
as delight to observe the manifestations which God does give of himself, both
in his Works of CREATION and PROVIDENCE; the former are sufficient to render
those who have no other Instructors inexcusable, as we are taught by the
Apostle, Romans 1.20. and the excellency of the latter consists in this, that
they are the Real accomplishments of his written word, so that to Record
Providence, seems to be one of the best methods that can be pursued against
the abounding ATHEISM of this Age, for by works of Providence, the Confession
of a God, and the truth of his word have been extorted from those very persons
who have boldly denied it; MEMORABLE is that passage of Aeschyles the Persian
in Tragedy, who relating his Countreymens discomfiture by the Greeks, gives us
this observation, that when the Grecians pursued them furiously over the great
River Strymon, which was then frozen, but began to thaw, he did with his own
Eyes see many of those Gallants whom he had heard before maintain so boldly
that there was no God, every one upon their knees, with eyes and hands lifted
up, begging for mercy; and that the Ice might not break till they got over.

The Scepticks of this age, may possibly call such a passage in Question, but
what can the most Obdurate Atheist say to those Providence about the Jews,
which were so clearly foretold in the Scriptures, and part of 'em are visible
to their own Eyes. Is not this sufficient to convince them of the being of an
Omniscient God, that the sacred Scriptures are his Revealed Will; and that
Christianity is the only true Religion. We doubt not but those men who are able
to hold out against such a convincing demonstration, will flout at this
undertaking, and expose all they can, but they may remember the Conquest which
Truth made over their great Champions, Mr. Hobbs, My Lord Rochester, and Sir
Alan Broderick, providence which merit their thoughts, and may serve to stop
their Mouths. But to come to the design in hand: It being certainly an
incumbent duty according to the Psalmist, for one Generation to praise the
Works of the Lord to another, and to declare his mighty Acts, Psalm. 145.4.

I. We have consulted many, and design to peruse all Authors that we can meet
with, Ancient and Modern, who have writ on this subject (as The Treasury of
Ancient and Modern Times, Camerarius, Beard, Clark, Wanly, etc. and others
lately published;) and make a Collection of the Choicest Passages, in order to
the PARALLEL betwixt ancient and modern instances, which cannot but be very
serviceable, considering that many of those Authors are now become scarce, who
recorded the providence of former ages; and that there are multitudes of
remarkable passages, relating to the present age, scattered in so many Books,
which its hardly possible for any one man to have all of 'em by him.

II. We our selves have already collected, and received from Credible Hands,
many remarkable Passages, which were never yet printed; and design to collect
as many more as we can relating to this Present Age.

III. We do hereby invite all men, especially DIVINES, to impart unto us any
such Remarkable Providence as they have recorded, or remember to have befallen
themselves, or others, either in Mercy or Judgment.

IV. We desire, for the Improvement of the Collections which we have already
made, that such as have any by them, would send to us their Observations -- of
Extraordinary Deliverances by Sea or Land, -- Earthquakes, unusual Thunders,
etc. Inundations, -- strange Apparitions, (but let these be well attested) --
Witchcrafts, -- Diabolical Possessions, -- Appearances in the Regions of the
Air, -- remarkable Meteors, -- Exhalations issuing out of the Earth, or
Prodigies of any sort, -- Strange Beasts, Sheep, Horse, -- of any unusual
Quality, or mixed Generation, or wonderful Bigness, or any other Animal
attended with any unusual Circumstances -- You are also desired to send us
accounts of any strange accidents that have befallen men or women, --
remarkable Discoveries of Murder, -- any prodigious Births, -- Numerous
Offsprings, -- Persons of extraordinary stature, remarkable either for Excess
or Defect, -- of prodigious Memories, -- any that have strange Antipathies to
Meats, Drinks, Animals, parts of Animals, -- of unusual Sleep or Watchings, --
Night-Walkers (in their sleep, we mean) -- Predictions that have strangely come
to pass, -- of men of extreme age, -- of sudden Deaths (extraordinarily
Circumstantiated) -- of any reputed dead that have strangely come to life
again, -- any thing remarkable that attends a Family, or single person, in
their Lives or Deaths, as Lights or Noises, etc. -- Dwarfs, with their age, and
place of abode, -- any Improvement in any of the Liberal or Mechanic Arts, --
any valuable Manuscripts, -- or what else you have remarkable of any kind, the
publishing whereof may be either a Service to the public, or to particular
persons; which if sent, shall not fail to be inserted in its proper place.

These are the HEADS we desire the ingenious Reader, wherever they may come
maturely to consider, and to send us accounts of as many of them as fall under
his own proper Experience and Knowledge, directed to John Dunton, at the Raven
in Jewen-street; whence, with all convenient speed, they shall be transmitted
to the Press, in the manner already described, with such Improvements on the
different Heads, as the Reverend Author (who is to compile this work) can make,
either from his own Experience, or the best Writers. But always remember, that
what you send be circumstantiated with the Name of the County, Town, and Place,
you send it from, and of the particular persons concerned, when the case
requires it, (for we shall not take notice of any thing that is trifling, or
uncertain) and that you pay the Postage of all Letters (relating to this Work)
that so the Undertaker may not be imposed upon, nor discouraged in this useful
attempt, which we have now a fair opportunity to accomplish, having received
promises of assistance from persons of Great Learning and Curiosity; (We have
also the promise of a Folio Manuscript, written by the Famous Mr. Seldom,
containing the most Memorable Things which have happened in this last Age) and we
assure all others that will be so kind as to impart their Observations to us,
that they shall be received with all Candor and Gratitude imaginable, and the
Names of the Authors published, if permitted, that the public may know to whom
they are indebted for the promoting of such an useful Work.

As the MERCIES and JVDGMENTS of God are not confined to any particular party,
therefore as we have already collected, we design also to embrace all well
attested Relations, from Christians of what Denomination soever, provided they
have not a Tendency to reflect upon any subdivisions of Protestants; for we
will not insert any thing that favors of Faction or Animosity amongst
Brethren, but will endeavor to make the Work as unexceptionable as may be, to
al moderate and pious men.

Seeing it has pleased God to manifest much of his Glory in the Works of
Creation, and much of his Goodness to men by inspiring them with useful and
delightful Inventions, we desire, that such as have made any Choice
Collections, or Observations, relating either to NATVRE or ART, (Upon which TWO
GENERAL HEADS, we have the Promise of a Large Collection made by an Honorable
Person, who has been a MEMBER OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY many years,) would be
pleased to send them to us, and particularly any thing that may contribute to
the Natural History of the Three Kingdoms, or advance the Reputation of their
Inhabitants, by publishing what useful Arts or Things they have either invented
or improved (as any rare or curious Engine, etc.) By means whereof the World
will be made acquainted with the Persons eminently curious in any Handicraft,
and wherein their Excellency lies.

We do also invite all Divines and others, to communicate to us any Remarkable
EPITAPHS in Churchyards, etc. because many of them contain a short History of
the Persons upon whom they are made; which is not to be found elsewhere, as we
are fully satisfied by such Collections of that sort as we have made already.

Moreover, That nothing might be wanting to render our Work perfect, we have
been at the charges to purchase what we found for our purpose in Mr. WILLIAM
MILLER's Catalogue lately published, (which being a curious Collection of
Papers and Pamphlets of all sorts, from the year 1600 down to this day) we have
been there accommodated with several Relations from diverse parts of the Three
Kingdoms, as well as from Foreign Parts, (from whence we have lately received
promises of great assistance) as also with Modern Instances upon Atheism,
Murder, Adultery, Theft, Drunkenness, and other Subjects, no where else to be
found, which will be no small Entertainment to the Reader to find them here
collected into One Volume, under proper Heads.

We design also to consult the Prerogative Office in London, etc. for the WILLS
of such Atheistical Wits as Hobbs and others, who being at last overcome by the
Truth, were forced to give Solemn Attestations thereunto.

The Method proposed to be followed, is to rank every thing under its proper
Head, with some little Introduction to each, and to cite our Authorities in the
Margin, as in the following Specimen; only we shall be more particular in our
Collections than any that have preceeded us, as to the FEMALE SEX, who are
generally too much flighted in Works of this Nature, though there have been as
remarkable Instances of the Virtues and Vices of that Sex as of our own, as
well as of some curious Pieces of Art performed by them, of which the Queens
Now to be seen in Green-Court in the Old Jury.
Effigies, and other Curiosities lately done in Wax by Mrs. Goldsmith, is an
undeniable argument. -- So that this HISTORY of PROVIDENCE, etc. will not only
be of singular use to Ministers, in furnishing Topics of Reproof and
Exhortation, but may serve as a Monitor to Persons of all Ranks and Qualities,
in their Closets and Families. And this particular advantage may be reapt by
this Undertaking, that those who have observed any remarkable Providence,
either as to themselves or others, or have by 'em in Writing, the DYING WORDS
of their Friends, -- or the account of their Conversions, (if very remarkable)
may have them recorded in this Work: So that their own Posterity, and
succeeding Generations may have the advantage of them; whereas they would have
otherwise been utterly lost.

In the LAST PLACE, we think fit to acquaint the public, that in order to the
preventing of all Cavils and Exceptions, and avoiding all Causes of Offense, we
design that the whole Work shall be perused by some Eminent Divines before it
be put to the Press, whose Sentiments thereof under their Hands, shall be
published at the Beginning of the Work.

That the public may be able to form the better Idea of our Design, we have
thought sit to subjoyn the following Specimen.

Proposals and Specimens are to be had of the Undertaker, JOHN DVNTON, at the
Raven in Jewen-street, as also of EDM. RICHARDSON, near the Poultrey Church,
and of most Booksellers in London and the Country.

PROPOSALS.
I. THAT this Work, as near as we can judge, will contain about Three Hundred
Sheets, Printed in large Folio and upon a fair Letter, and on Paper of the same
goodness with the Folio Proposals lately published by the Undertaker.

II. For the Encourgement of those that Subscribe, it is proposed at 30 s. a
Book in Quires, 15 s. to be paid in hand, and 15 s. at Delivery; and if it
happens to make above Three Hundred Sheets, the Subscribers shall have it,
paying only one Penny for every such additional sheet.

III. For a further Encouragement to those that Promote it, any Gentleman who
will subscribe for six Books shall have a seventh Gratis, which will reduce the
Three Hundred Sheets to 1 l. 5 s. 8 d. per Book in Quires, which, considering
the vast Expense for Materials requisite for carrying on, and completing so
great a Work, and the extraordinary fineness of the Paper, cannot but be
thought very reasonable.

IV. To those that do not subscribe by the first of September next, the said
300 sheets shall not be sold under 35 s. in Quires.

V. All Gentlemen who subscribe shall have their Names and Titles, etc. (if
permitted) annexed, when the whole is completed.

VI. The first Volume shall be ready to be delivered to Subscribers next
Hillary Term, and the Second with all possible Expedition.

VII. Those that desire the Publication of this useful Work, and expect the
benefit of these Proposals, are requested to send their first payment with what
speed they can to the Undertaker, (who will give a receipt for the same) for
nothing but the backwardness of the Subscribers can hinder the completing of
it at the time prefixed.

The Specimen, Attestations to the Truth of the Christian Religion, from
Atheistical Wits, who had formerly denied the Being of God, and disputed with
the greatest strength of their Carnal Reason against all Religion. -- To which
is added the penitential Letter written by Sir Duncomb Colchester lately
deceased, with another Remarkable Instance of that nature never yet in Print.
THE Concessions of Adversaries is always reckoned a good Argument for the
Confirmation of a Controverted Truth, nor does Omnipotence ever manifest it
self with greater Majesty, then when it extorts a Confession of Gods
overruling providence from Wicked Men and Devils; what Emphasis is there in
Nebuchadhezzar's acknowledgement that the most high does according to his will
in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can
stay his hand; or say unto him what do thou? Dan. 6.35. And though our blessed
Savior disdained such a Testimony, yet the power and Majesty of God was
mightily seen in that Confesssion, which we find so often extorted from the
Devils in the Gospel, that he was the Holy one of God, and the Son of the most
High, and when we consider those passages, and that Divine Air, which sounds in
the declaration of the false prophet Balaam, Number. 24. I shall see him, but not
now, I shall behold him but not nigh, there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and
a Scepter shall rise out of Israel. We have no reason to doubt but that the
Lofty Rapture of the Oracle of Delphos may be true.

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Which I find thus Ingeniously translated into Latin and English.

Me puer Hebraeus, Divos Deus ipse Gubernans,
Cedere sede jubet tristemque redire sub orcum
Aris ergo dehinc tacitis abscedito nostris.
An Hebrew Child whom the blessed Gods adore,
Had bid me leave these shrines and pack to Hell,
So that of Oracles, I can no more:
In silence leave our Altar, and farewell.
Upon the return of which Answer from that Oracle, the Emperor Augustus caused
an Altar to be erected in the Capitol with this Inscription, Julian the
Apostate dies, acknowledging the Truth of the Christian Religion.
haec est ara primogeniti Dei. And the famous Acknowledment of Julian the
Apostate when mortally wounded by an Arrow, Vicisti tandem Galilee, is another
remarkable Instance of the power of God in extorting a confession of the Truth
of Christianity from one of its most implacable Enemies.

This we think sufficient as a Taste of what may be produced, as to Confessions
of God and Christ, which have been extorted by Remarkable Providence in
preceding Ages; and we have reason to bless his Holy Name, that he has not
lest us without Observable Attestations of the same Nature in this present Age.

The first we shall mention are the Earl of Marlbourgh's Letters from on Board
the Fleet, April 24. 1665.

The Earl of Marlbourgh, whose two most Devout and Penitential Letters are
herewith Published, was a person of great Understanding and Wit: The Scene of
his Life lay chiefly in Voyages and Expeditions by Sea, whereby he made many
laborious Attempts to repair the Collapsed Estate of his Ancestors; but it
pleased not God to give him the Success he hoped for therein.

It is wholly unfit for any Writer to touch upon any irreligious Principles or
Practices, that were as stains in his Life, since he has, by his own Noble Pen
in the following Letters, acknowledged them, and by his most exemplary
Repentance washed them off.

Mr. Roger Coke in the second Volume of his Detection, p. 142, mentions, That
the Fight wherein the Duke of York beat the Dutch, and Opdam was blown up, was
the 3d. of June, 1665. and that in this Fight the English lost the Renowned
Earl of Marlbourgh, who though Admiral in K. Charles the firsts time, died here a
private Captain.

But it pleased God, in that Naval Expedition, to work in him such a sense of
his Sins, as did infinitely make amends for the former disappointments he met
with by Sea or Land.

The Date of his first Letter being the 24th. of April, and that of the Second,
the 23d of May following, will satisfy any Candid Reader, that the New Birth
in him was accompanied with many pangs and efforts of great Consideration
during the firmness of his bodily Health, and much transcending the low Nature
of poor Deathbed Repentances, which are so justly suspected by our Practical
Divines of all persuasions.

And here it is necessary to acquaint the Reader that these two Letters of
distant Dates were sent by his Lordship from the Royal Navy, enclosed in other
Letters to Mr Tredewy, his Lordship's Agent in London; with a particular
Instruction, both as to that to Sir Hugh Pollard, and that to Mr. Glascok, that
each of them was to be delivered when Mr. Tredewy was credibly informed of his
Lordships Death. His design being, that his Pen should Preach Repentance to the
World, in case he lived not to be a personal Adviser thereof himself.

The Publisher hereof assures the Reader, that both the Letters had a happy
influence on the lives of the two persons, to whom they were directed, and that
Sir Hugh Pollard having lent the Original Letter which was sent to him, to Sir
W. Davenant, to show it to whom he pleased, Sir William showed it to the
Publisher among many others: And that Mr. Glascock permitted the Publisher to
take a Copy of that Letter directed to him. The Reader may then awaken his most
serious Thoughts to consider the two following Letters.

A Letter from the right Honorable James Earl of Marlbourgh, a little before
his Death, in the Battle at Sea on the Coast of Holland, 1665. -- To the right
Honorable Sir Hugh Pollard, Comptroller of His Majesty's Household.
Sir,
I Believe the goodness of your Nature, See Dr. Loyd's fair warning to a
careless world for a Copy of this Letter of the Earl of Marlbourgh to Sir Hugh
Pollard.
and the Friendship you have always born me, will receive with kindness this
last Office of your Friend: I am in Health enough of Body, and through the
mercy of God in Jesus Christ, well disposed in mind: This I premise that you
may be satisfied, that what I write proceeds not from any Fantastic Terror of
mind, but from a sober Resolution of what concerns my self, and earnest desire
to do you more good after my death, than mine Example (God of his mercy pardon
the badness of it) in my Lifetime, may have done you harm. I will not speak
ought of the Vanity of this World; your own Age and Experience will save that
labor; but there is a certain thing that goes up and down in the World, called
Religion, Dressed and Presented Phantastically, and to purposes bad enough, which
yet by such evil Dealing, loses not its Being. The great and good God has not
lest it without a Witness more or less, sooner or later in every man's bosom, to
direct us in the pursuit of it; and for the avoiding of those Inextricable
difficulties and intanglements our own frail Reason would perplex us withal;
God in his infinite mercy has given us his Holy Word, in which, as there are
many things hard to be Understood, so there is enough plain and easy to be
understood, to quiet our minds, and direct us concerning our future being: I
confess to God and you, I have been a great neglecter, and I fear, despiser of
it. God of his infinite mercy pardon me that dreadful Fault; but when I retired
my self from the noise and deceitful Vanities of the world, I found no true
comfort in any other Resolution, than what I had from thence: I commend the
same from the bottom of my Heart, to your (I hope happy) use. Dear, Sir Hugh,
let us be more generous than to believe we die like Beasts that perish, but
with a Christian, Manly, brave Ambition, let us look to what is Eternal. I will
not trouble you farther, the only Great and Holy God, Father Son and Holy
Ghost, direct you to an happy end of your Life, and send us a joyful
Resurrection.

So prays your dear Friend, Marlbourgh
Old James, near the Coast of Holland, 24th. of April, 1665. I beseech you
commend my love to all my Acquaintance: Particularly, I pray you that my Cozen
Glascock may have a sight of this Letter, and as many of my Friends beside, as
you will, or any else that desires it. I pray grant this my Request.




To William Glascock Esquire
May the 23. 1665 Dear Cozen,
IN case I be called away by God in this present Employment, This Letter to Mr.
Glascock was never printed before, but is attested to be genuine in the
following Specimen.
I have recommended these few Lines to you, first earnestly begging God
Almighty his most merciful Pardon, and yours, for the very bad example, and
many provocations to sin I have given you. Next, I do most heartily desire you
to make use of your Remaining Time, in bestowing it upon his Service, who only
can be your Comfort at your latter end, when all the former Pleasures of your
Life shall only leave Anguish and Remorse. If God had spared me Life instead of
this Paper, I would through his Grace have endeavored to have been as
assistful to you in minding you of true Piety, as the care of my own life could
have enabled me; do not think that Melancholy Vapors cause this; it is Gods
great mercy that by this Employment has made me know my self, for which his
Name be for ever Praised.

Lastly, I Pray show these few Lines to my Lord of Portland, by which I in like
manner, and for the same cause crave his pardon, wishing you both the blessed
peace and content of a good Conscience toward God, and a happy end of your
Lives.

Your truly Loving Cozen, Marlbourgh.


My Lord Marlbourgh's Letter to Sir Hugh Pollard having been dispersed
throughout the Kingdom, this Remarkable Penetence of his Lordship was the
Subject of general Discourse for a long time after, and it is not doubted but
that his Lordship's Letter to Mr. Glascock (which was never printed but in this
Specimen) will be as well received; and it is hoped, may have the same good
Effect as the former had.

The Gentleman who has communicated to us these Letters sent by the Earl of
Marlbourgh to Sir Hugh Pollard and Mr. Glascock, is a Person of Quality, now
living in London, and if any one has the curiosity to be satisfied from his
own mouth, about perfect certainty of the matters therein Related, if he
repairs to Mr. Darker in Bullhead-Court, near Cripple-gate, he will be always
ready to bring any Gentleman to speak with him for further confirmation.

It must needs be obvious to every considering Reader, that the same holy
spirit who breathed from the mouth of Solomon, the wisest of men, That all
things in this World are Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, did make this Great Man
sensible of the Truth thereof by his own Experience, and to express it
accordingly; and how observable is it, that that very Truth which he so
ingeniously confesses himself to have neglected and despised, did at last make
an entire Conquest over him, and force him to submit, as if God would thereby
let us see, that though not many Noble, and not many Wise are called, yet he
does not leave the Gospel without a Testimony, even from such, but obliges them
to confess, That the Wisdom of this World is mere Foolishness with God, which
will appear yet more by the following Instances.

It Is taken notice of that Sir In Sir Alan Brodericks Funeral Sermon by Nathan
Resbury Minister of Wandsworth, December. 3. 1680.
Alan Broderick, who was a Gentleman of Extraordinary Learning and
Accomplishments, did own with much Contrition, that a Long Scene of his Life
had been acted in the Sports and Follies of Sin, that he had sometime pursued a
Pagan and abandoned way, Skepticism it self not excepted, wherein the poinancy
of his Wit, and the strength of his Reasoning, even in that very Argument, the
using of which proclaims a man in the Language of the Holy Scriptures, a Fool,
may have been the occasion of a great deal of mischief toward some that are
already gone to their Accounts.

Yet some years before his Death, the bent and tendency of his Life and Actions
was Devout and Religious, and in his Private Conversation with his Minister, he
would always be Discoursing some Cases of Conscience about Retired
Closet-prayer, or the Nature and Necessity of True Religion -- and in his last
Sickness he thought himself under a mighty Incumbency to Pray, but was much
harassed and anxious what to do, because of his fear of not performing it, with
all becoming Reverence and Seriousness.

For look you, says he, my Conscience is now as tender as wet Paper, torn upon
every apprehension of the least guilt before God -- And as he had much studied
the Nature of Repentance, he would frequently complain, That he had a great
jealousy upon himself, least he had not yet conceived an horror answerable to
his past Exorbitancies of Life, and had not made those smart and pungent
Reflections upon himself, that might become one that had so long, and in such
Exalted Degrees violated the Laws of his Maker, and made himself so Obnoxious
to the Vengeance of his Judgment, and that if the cutting off one of his Hands
with the other, were but a proper or likely way through the anguish of such a
wound to give him a just horror for his sins, he would do that as willingly as
he ever did any one Action that had given him the greatest pleasure of Life. --
He also said that by the grace of God, he had such a sense of the Conviction,
and folly, and unreasonableness of Sin, that no Argument, no Tentation should
prevail upon him to do the like again. -- Having taken notice that all my Lord
Rochesters Religious breathings were accounted by some, the Raves and
Delirancies of a sick Brain, he did resolve to have given the World a public
Account of the sentiments he had of Religion, both as to the Faith and Practice
of it, but was prevented.

But the next instance of the E. of Rochester, is still more convincing, who as
it appears by his Funeral Sermon, did with very much abhorrence exclaim against
that absurd and foolish Philosophy, which the World so much admired, and was
propagated by the late Mr. Hobbs, and others, which had undone him and many
more of the best parts of the Nation. See my Lord Rochester's Funeral Sermon
preached by Mr. Parsons Aug. 9. 1680.


My Lord Rochester being awaked from his spiritual Slumber by a pungent
Sickness, as appears by his Funeral Sermon Preached by Mr. Parsons, Augufl 9.
1680.

Upon the Preachers first visit to him, May 26. My Lord thanked God who had in
Mercy and good Providence sent him to him, who so much needed his Prayers and
Counsels, acknowledging how unworthily heretofore he had treated that Order of
men, reproaching them that they were proud, and Prophesied only for rewards;
but now he had learnt how to value them, that he esteemed them the Servants of
the most High God, who were to show to him the way to everlasting Life.

At the same time, (continues our Author,) I found him laboring under strange
trouble and conflicts of Mind, his Spirit wounded, and his Conscience full of
terrors. Upon his Journey he told me, that he had been arguing with greater
vigor against God and Religion than ever he had done in his Life time before,
and that he was resolved to run them down with all the Arguments and Spite in
the World; but, like the great Convert, St. Paul, he found it hard to kick
against the Pricks, for God at that time, had so struck his heart by his
immediate hand, that presently he argued as strongly for God and Virtue as
before he had done against it; that God strangely opened his heart, creating in
his mind most awful and tremendous Thoughts and Ideas of the Divine Majesty,
with a delightful Contemplation of the Divine Nature and Attributes, and of the
Loveliness of Religion and Virtue. I never, said he, was advanced thus far
toward happiness in my Life before, though upon the commissions of some Sins
extraordinary, I have had some checks and warnings considerable from within,
but still struggled with them, and so wore them off again. The most observable
that I remember, was this: One day at an Atheistical meeting, at a Person of
Qualities, I undertook to manage the Cause, and was the principal Disputant
against God and Piety; and for my performances, received the Applause of the
whole Company, upon which my Mind was terribly struck, and I immediately
replied thus to my self, Good God! That a man that walks upright, that sees the
wonderful Works of God, and has the uses of his Sense and Reason, should use
them to the defying of his Creator! But though this was a good beginning to my
Conversion, to find my Conscience touched for my sins, yet it went off again:
Nay, all my Life long, I had a secret value and reverence for an honest man,
and loved morality in others. But I had formed an odd Scheme of Religion to my
self, which would solve all that God or Conscience might force upon me; yet I
was not over-well reconciled to the business of Christianity; nor had that
Reverence for the Gospel of Christ as I ought to have, which estate of Mind
continued till the 53d. Chapter of Isaiah was read to him, and some other
portions of Scripture, by the Power and Efficacy of which Word, assisted by his
Holy Spirit, God so wrought upon his heart, that he declared that the mysteries
of the Passion appeared so clear and plain to him, as ever any thing did that
was represented in a Glass, so that that joy and admiration which possessed his
Soul upon the reading God's Word to him, was remarkable to all about him; and
he had so much delight in his Testimonies, that, in my absence, he begged his
Mother and Lady to read the same to him frequently, and was unsatisfied
notwithstanding his great pains and weakness, till he had learned the 53d. of
Isaiah without Book.

At the same time discoursing of his Manner of Life from his Youth up, which
all men knew was too much devoted to the service of Sin, and that the Lusts of
the Flesh, the Eye, and the Pride of Life had captivated him, he was very large
and particular in his acknowledgments about it; more ready to accuse himself
than any one else could be, publicly crying out, O blessed God! Can such an
horrit Creature as I am, be accepted by thee, who has denied thy Being and
contemned thy Power; asking often, Can there be mercy and Pardon for me? Will
God own such a Wretch as I? and in the middle of his Sickness said, Shall the
unspeakable joys of Heaven be conferred on me? O mighty Savior, never but
through thine Infinite Love and Satisfaction: O never, but by the purchase of
thy Blood; adding, that with all abhorrency he did reflect upon his former
Life, that sincerely and from his heart he did repent of all that folly and
madness which he had committed. He had a true and lively sense of God's great
Mency to him in striking his hard heart, saying, If that God who died for great
as well as lesser Sinners, did not speedily apply his infinite Merits to his
poor Soul, his wound was such as no man could conceive or bear; crying out,
That he was the vilest Wretch and Dog that the Sun shined upon, or the Earth
bore; That now he saw his Error in not living up to that Reason which God
endued him with, and which he unworthily vilified and contemned; wished he had
been a starving Leper crawling in a Ditch; that he had been a Link-Boy or a
Beggar; or for his whole life time confined to a Dungeon, rather than thus to
have sinned against God. How remarkable was his Faith in a hearty embracing and
devout Confession of all the Articles of the Christian Religion, and all the
Divine Mysteries of the Gospel, saying, that that absurd and foolish Philosophy
which the World so much admired, propagated by the late Mr. Hobs, and others,
had undone him and many more of the best Parts of the Nation. He cast himself
entirely upon the mercies of Jesus Christ, and the Free Grace of God, declared
to repenting Sinners through him, with a thankful Remembrance of his Life,
Death and Resurrection, begging God to strengthen his Faith, and often crying
out, Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief.

His mighty love and esteem of the Holy Scriptures, his resolutions to read
them frequently, and meditate upon them if God should spare him, having already
tasted the good Word; for having spoken to his heart, he acknowledged all the
seeming absurdities and contradictions thereof, fancied by men of corrupt and
reprobate Judgments were vanished, and the Excellency and Beauty appeared,
being come to receive the Truth in the love of it.

How terribly did the Tempter assault him by casting upon him wicked and lewd
imaginations, But I thank God, said he, I abhor them all, and by the power of
his grace, which I am sure is sufficient for me, I have overcome them; it is the
malice of the Devil because I am rescued from him; and the goodness of God that
frees me from all my spiritual enemies -- He was greatly rejoiced at his Ladies
Conversion from Popery, which he called, a Faction supported only by Fraud and
Cruelty. He was heartily concerned for the pious education of his Children,
wishing that his Son might never be a Wit, that is, as he explained it, One of
those wretched creatures who pride themselves in abusing God and Religion,
denying his Being or his Providence; but that he might become an honest and a
religious Man, which could only be the support and blessing of his Family. He
gave a strict charge to those persons in whose custody his Papers were to burn
all his profane and lewd Writings, as being only sit to promote Vice and
Immorality, by which he had so highly offended God, and shamed and blasphemed
that holy Religion into which he had been baptized; and all his obscene and
filthy Pictures which were so notoriously scandalous. I must not pass by his
pious and most passionate exclamation to a Gentleman of some Character who came
to visit him upon his Deathbed. O remember that you contemn God no more; he is
on avenging God, and will visit you for your sins; will in mercy, I hope, touch
your Conscience sooner or later, as he has done mine. You and I have been
Friends and Sinners together a great while, therefore I am the more free with
you. We have been all mistaken in our Conceits and Opinions. Our Persuasions
have been false and groundless, therefore God grant you repentance. And seeing
him again next day, said to him, Perhaps you were disobliged by my plainness to
you yesterday, I spoke the words of truth and soberness to you, and striking
his hand upon his Breast said, I hope God will touch your heart.

He commanded me, (continues our Author) to Preach abroad, and let all men
know, if they knew it not already, how severely God had Disciplined him for his
sins, by his afflicting hand; that his Sufferings were most just, though he had
laid ten thousand times more upon him; how he had laid one stripe upon another
because of his grievous provocations, till he had brought him home to himself;
that in his former Visitations he had not that blessed Effect he was now
sensible of. He had formerly some loose thoughts and slight resolutions of
reforming, and designed to be better, because even the present consequences of
sin were still pestering him, and were so troublesome and inconvenient to him,
but now he had other sentiments of things, and acted upon other Principles. He
was willing to die, if it pleased God, resigning himself always to the Divine
Disposal; but if God should spare him yet a longer time here, he hoped to bring
Glory to the Name of God in the whole course of his Life; and particularly, by
his endeavors to convince others, and to assure them of the danger of their
condition if they continued impenitent, and how graciously God had dealt with
him. -- The time of his Sickness and Repentance was just nine Weeks, in all
which time, 30 hours about the middle of it excepted, wherein he was delirous,
he was so much Master of his Reason, and had so clear an understanding, that he
never dictated, or spoke more composed in his Life. Three or four days before
his Death, he had Comfortable Persuasions of God's accepting him to his Mercy,
saying, I shall Die, but Oh, what unspeakable Glories do I see? What Joys
beyond Thought or Expression am I sensible of? I am assured of God's mercy to
me, through Jesus Christ. O! how I long to die, and to be with my Savior.

His Dying Remonstrance.
For the benefit of all those whom I may have drawn into sin by my example and
Encouragement, The Lord Rochester's dying Remonstrance.
I leave to the World this my last Declaration, which I deliver in the presence
of the great God, who knows the Secrets of all Hearts, and before whom I am now
appearing to be Judged.

That from the bottom of my Soul I detest and abhor the whole Course of my
former wicked Life, that I think I can never sufficiently admire the Goodness
of God who has given me a lively sense of my pernicious Opinions and vile
practices by which I have hitherto Lived without hope, and without God in the
World; have been an open Enemy to Jesus Christ, doing the Utmost despite to the
holy Spirit of Grace, and that the greatest Testimony of my Charity to such is
to warn them in the name of God, and as they regard the welfare of their
immortal Souls, no more to deny his being, or his providence, or despise his
Goodness, no more to make a mock of Sin, or contemn the pure and excellent
Religion of my ever Blessed Redemer, through whose Merits alone I, one of the
Greatest of Sinners, do yet hope for Mercy and Forgiveness. Amen.

Declared in the presence of Anne Rochester, Rob. Parsons. J. Rochester.
To this we shall add two Penitential Letters, the one of Sir Duncomb
Colchester, late of Westbury in Gloucestershire, a Gentleman well known to have
been a person of Wit and Parts, whose Repentance and Reformation may deserve a
more particular Relation then is proper for this place and occasion. For the
truth and certainty of it, that is beyond all doubt, there being Copies of it
in many hands both in City and Country long before his Death, and seen and
perused by his acquaintance, and by diverse persons of quality, who visited him
here in Town but little before he dyed, etc. He continued his Repentance and
Resolution to the last, often and very freely declaring upon all occasions the
Horror he had suffered in his Soul, for his sinful life past far exceeding all
that he suffered in his Body, which was very great; his sense of the Wonderful
Mercy of God to him; and that he would die rather than commit the least wilful
Sin. He dyed 25th. May, 1694. in his return from London toward Gloucestershire.

Sir Duncomb Colchester's Penitential Letter.
Gentlemen and Friends,
SInce it has pleased Almighty God of his great and undeserved Mercy and
Goodness to bring me, one of the chiefest of Sinners, Sir Duncomb Colchester's
penitential Letter.
by a long and sharp Visitation, to a sense of my Sins, (for which with all
Humility of Soul I adore and praise him) it is a Duty I know incumbent on me,
as ever I hope for his Pardon and Forgiveness, to do what in me lies to bring
Honor to his Holy Name, to make Reparation for the Mischief I have done by my
former vicious Life, and antidote as far as I can, the Poison which my Example
has shed round about me: In order whereunto, I do hereby Declare, that I am
heartily sorry for all the Sins of my past life, the remembrance whereof,
however pleasant they formerly seemed to be, is now Grief and Bitterness to my
Soul. More particularly, that I may take shame to my self, I do with the
deepest sorrow lament my Rioting and Drunkenness, my Chambering and Wantonness,
those daring and presumptuous Sins which had so long dominion over me: I do
also most heartily lament that great sin which I was so frequently guilty of,
of encouraging and drawing others to Excess, which has made me partaker (O sad
thought!) of other Men's sins, and liable to answer for more than mine own: I am
sensible, that as it has been my Practice, so it is still of too many
Gentlemen; and that they, as I did, reckon excessive Drinking so far from a
Fault, as to be rather one of the best Indications of a hearty Respect and true
Affection to the Persons they entertain: But O false Love! O treacherous
Friendship! to receive their Friends Men, and send them out of their Houses
Beasts. I wish from the bottom of my Soul, that any thing I could say, would
make all those, whose Consciences accuse them of Guilt in this particular, to
loath and abhor this wicked Practice as I do. And I do also heartily lament my
great Neglect of putting the Laws in execution against common Drunkards,
Swearers, and such like scandalous Sinners; and do earnestly beseech all such
as are in Authority, and whose business it is to see the Laws executed, if any
such come to hear this Paper read, that they will be more careful in that
particular, and consider, that as their Power is a Talent entrusted in them,
whereof they must give a strict Account to their heavenly Lord, so by their
being duly conscientious in the discharge of their Duty herein, we may hope for
a Reformation amongst us, and then with confidence expect God's Blessing to
rest upon us. And as I abhor my self for my Neglect in this particular now
mentioned, and all my great sins and Provocations against an Infinite Majesty,
so I do farther hereby deelare my full Purpose and Resolution, if it shall
please Almighty God (with whom all things are possible) to restore me to
Health, or prolong my days, by his special Grace and Assistance (without which
I shall be able to do nothing) to lead a New Life in all Holy Obedience to his
Will and Commands; and desire that this Declaration of mine, if I fail to do
so, may be produced as a Testimony against me, to my Shame and Reproach. But
since my Recovery is very uncertain, and what I have the least reason in the
world to hope for, being heartily desirous to do what good I can in the
Circumstances I am in, I do hereby earnestly warn and beseech all Sinners,
especially those whom my Example has at any time encouraged, (the remembrance
whereof still sills me with shame and sorrow) to repent of all their sins and
provocations, least God's Vengeance overtake them in their Security, and there
be no Remedy. And I beseech them farther to take Notice, that if this Warning
be slighted, the wilful neglect and Refusal thereof will at last be charged
upon them as a heinous Aggravation of all their Sins they shall hereater
commit, will increase their Condemnation, and make their Doom more dreadful and
terrible: But that it may have a contrary effect, and be a means to reduce 'em
from their Sins to a Holy and Religious Life, that so their Souls may be saved
in the great Day of the Lord, is the earnest desire of their

Languishing and sorrowful Friend, Duncomb Colchester. Who desires this may be
read in the Parish Churches of Michel Dean and Westbury, and shown to such
Gentlemen, Friends, and others, as may bring God most Glory.
Nov. 1693. Signed and Delivered in the presence of several of his Friends.

The other Letter is written by a Woman, The remarkable penitence of J. H.
and one of inferior quality in the World, but not at all inferior in her
Repentance. It was that, and the Grace of God in her Heart, which moved her to
do it long before it wasdone; and it was the pure effect of that, when at last
it was done; and all her own composure, we are assured by a credible person who
has most reason to know it, who gave her absolution, approved her purpose in
it, and perused it when she had done it; and has seen other Letters of her
writing, by which he could easily discern the Composure of this, if there had
been any other hand in it, or any reason to suspect it. It is published with
her consent, who is very ready to embrace any Motion tending to the Honor and
Service of God or her own Humiliation. Her Letter was directed to Mr. --
Minister in Portsmouth, and is as follows, viz.

Reverend Sir,
I Have put Pen to Paper, humbly beseeching you to hear me of your Charity a
few Words. The Enemy of my Soul has raised many Objections to hinder my
intended purpose; and I have been almost persuaded to give it over; but now
having the advice of a Pious Holy Minister of God, who says it may be of great
use, I desire to take shame to my self, and to give Glory to the Majesty of
Heaven, who in great Love and Pity has plucked me as a Firebrand out of the
Fire, and I am this day a Living Monument of Mercy. I cannot but be grieved at
the many sad Examples I have given at Portsmouth. My Sins have have increased
the heap of the public Impieties, and made them cry the louder to Heaven for
Vengeance both there and here too. It is very meet, right, and my duty to
confess to the Glory of God and Praise of his Grace, my crying sins committed
in that place, that some of my Companions in evil may hear and fear, and do no
more such wickedness. About 9 or 10 years agone, I came a young Woman (if I
deserve that name) to P --, my Husband Cook of a Ship in that Harbor, a very
ill Husband, (no excuse for me) Almighty God did suffer two sinners to come
together to plague one another; and whilst he acted the part of a Drukard, with
shame and confusion of face be it spoken, I acted the part of a Harlot, giving
my self over to work all uncleanness with greediness; insomuch that my very
Name was a Proverb of Reproach to all Civil Women. Two or three years I lived
openly scandalous, and then it pleased the Almighty to visit me with a sore fit
fit of Sickness, even to the loss of my Limbs for a Season; at which time I did
beg of God to restore me to my Health, and did faithfully promise never more to
defile my Marriage Bed; and the Lord was entreated at that time also; and has
added to my life these remaining years. Some time after, it pleased the
All-wise Providence to make me a Mother, I was very thankful for the Mercy, and
was much reclaimed, and I was in some measure convinced of the great Evil of
sin, and did put pen to paper with intent it should come to the Ministers hand;
but the Enemies of my Soul prevented and hindered that reasonable design, and I
was again lulled to sleep in the Bed of Carnal Security; where I continued
three or four years with little Interruption; in which time I buried my Husband
and two Children. After this I was in danger of being as bad as ever, living at
Service in the very midst of Temptation at Porthridge. I continued there but a
short space, for the good hand of Providence brought me to London, where I had
time and opportunity to reflect upon my ill spent life. O that I might improve
the mercy! O that I could tell you what God has done for my Soul! He has
brought me out of Darkness into his mavelous light: O that I could prevail
with my Companions in evil to seek the Lord while he may be found, and call
upon him while he is near! Some of them are old Sinners, gray hairs are upon
them, and they know it not, I could be content to stand in a white shet in your
Church if I might but prevail with any one Soul to see the heinousness of my
sin: Nay, I could be content to be stoned without the walls of the Garrison, so
I might but be a means of the Conversion of any one Sinner. O that I could
write these Lines with my purest Blood! I am grieved for the Dishonor I have
done to God by my abominable sin, and heartily wish my Head were Waters and
mine Eyss were a Fountain of Tears that I might weep day and night for abusing
mercy. O Sir, you live in a place relating to Sodom, cry aloud, spare not to
tell the Flock over which the Holy Ghost, has made you Overseer, their Sins,
and my Companions in evil their Sins. The Lord is coming to reckon with the
Nations, and with you: God grant you may be found among the Faithful Shepherds
watching them and giving them their meat in due Season. I humbly beg your
Blessing, desiring to be remembered in your Prayers; and I humbly beseech the
Almighty, that this poor paper may have its designed effect, that God may be
glorified, and our Souls saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, Amen and Amen.

J. H.
Jan. 22. 1693/4.

To this SPECIMEM we designed to have added several other Remarkable Instances
of this nature never yet in Print, but for want of room could not insert 'em
here --

But though this Specimen will not allow of instances under every head; (for if
it would, we had added Specimens upon the Works of Nature and Art, as we have
done here upon Providence, having prepared materials for that end); yet b y
what is here exhibited, the ingenious Reader may easily perceive the usefulness
of our design; and as a farther Evidence thereof, we shall only add, That under
the Head of [Attestations given to Religion by dying Princes,] who acknowledged
the same to be preferable to all things else: We shall (from the best
Authorities) Record the last sayings of our never enough Lamented Sovereign,
the late Q. Mary, as a Noble Testimony to Religion, from one whose Parts and
Endowments were as high as her Dignity, as if Providence would not leave the
profane Age room to say that Religion was only pretended to by the mean and
ignorant, but convince them by the dying Breath of a Princess every way so
Glorious and Great.

Under the Head of [Signal Deliverance] we doubt not but the Reader will easily
be convinced that the Relation of the Miraculous Deliverance of the Protestants
in Ireland, from the Cruelties of Q. Mary I. As also the Account of Sir Henry
Wyat's wonderful Preservation in the Tower, will deserve a place; the First
being Attested by Bishop Usher, and delivered to the Publisher by a Person of
Quality, now living in London; (and is wholly omitted by Mr. Fox in his Acts
and Monuments,) and the other being drawn up by a Learned Gentleman, and never
Printed before. -- Of these things we shall treat more at large in the Body of
the Work, but think this sufficient to whet the Readers Curiosity, and to give
him a taste of what Entertainment he is to expect under other Heads, as well as
these mentioned. --

BOOKS lately printed for John Dunton.
AN Essay upon the Works of Creation and Providence, being an introductory
Discourse to the [History of Remarkable Providences] now preparing for the
press: To which is added a SCHEME of the said Undertaking, -- as also a further
SPECIMEN of the Work it self, in which is inserted the Penitential Letter
written by Sir DUNCOMB COLCHESTER (late of Westbury in Glocestershire) with
other remarkable Instances of that Nature. Price bound 2 s.

The History of all Religions in the World, from the Creation down to this
present time, in 2 parts; the first containing their Theory, and the other
relating their Practices, both Written by W. Turner, M. A. and Vicar of
Walberton in Sussex.

Some Remarkable Passages in the Life and Death of her late Majesty not
hitherto made public, as they were delivered in a Funeral Oration, pronounced
by Public Authority, in the Hall of the most Illustrious States, upon the Day
of the Royal Obsequies, March 5. 1695. By Francis Spanheimius, F. F. chief
Professor of the Academy of Leyden, Done into English from the Latin Original.

A Sermon upon the Death of the Queen of England, Preached in the Walloon
Church at the Hague, Feb. 6. 1695. upon these words, Acts. 9.36, 37. There was
at Joppa a certain Disciple whose name was Tabitha, which signifies Dorcas, who
was full of Good Works and the Alms which she did. It happened in those days
that she fell sick and died. By Isaac Claude, Minister of the Walloon-Church.
Done into English from the Second Edition Printed in French.

Lacbrymae Sacerdotis. A Pindarick Poem occasioned by the Death of that most
Excellent Princess, our late Gracious Sovereign Lady, Mary the Second, of
Glorious Memory. By Henry Park Curate of Wentworth in Yorkshire.

The first and second Volumes of the French Book of Martyr. Published in
English with her Majesty's Royal Privilege, price 20 s. -- The Third and
Fourth Volumes, containing all the Persecutions of Lewis the fourteenth, will
be also done into English soon after the said Volumes are published in Holland.

The Tigurine Liturgy, published with the aprobation of Six Reverend Bishops.

Dr. Burthogg's Essay upon Reason and Nature of Spirits dedicated to Mr. Lock.
Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Works of the Right Honorable Henry late L. Delamere, and Earl of
Warrington containing his Lordships advice to his Children, several Speeches in
parliament, etc. with many other occasional Discourses on the Affairs of the
two last Reigns being Original Mannscripts written with his Lordships own hand,
never before printed, price bound 5 s.

Malbranch's Search after Truth, complete, in Two Volumes, in Octavo. -- The
Second Part of this work was lately published, to which is added the Author's
Defense against the Accusations of Monsieur de la Velle; also the Life of
Father Malbranch, of the Oratory at Paris; with an Account of his Works, and
several particulars of his controversy with Monsieur Arnaud, Dr. of Sorbon,
and Monsieur Regis, Professor in Philosophy at Paris. Written by Monsieur Le
Vassor, lately come over from Paris: both Volumes done out of French from the
last Edition by Mr. Sault, Author of the New Treatise of Algebra, both Volumes
10 s.

Bishop Barlow's Genuine Remains, containing near an hundred distinct subjects,
Theological, Philosophical, Historical, etc. Published from his Lordship's
Original Papers, by Sir Peter Pett, knight. Advocate General for the Kingdom of
Ireland. Price bound 6 s.

Dr. Becker's Examination of the common Opinions concerning Spirits,
Apparitions, their Nature, Powers Administration and Operations; as also the
Effects men are able to produce by their Communication.

Casuistical Morning-Excercises, the 4th. Volume; by several Reverend Divines
in and about London, price bound 6 s.

The Tragedies of Sin Contemplated in the Fall of Man, the Ruin of the Angels,
the destruction of the Old World, the Consusion of Babel, and Conflagration of
Sodom; by Stephen Jay, Rector of Chinner in Oxfordshire. price 2 s. 6 d.

A Practical Discourse on These. 4.7. by John Brandon, Rector of Finchamsted.

A Treatise of Fornication, by William Barlow, Rector of Chalgrave.

The Divine Captain Charactariz'd, in a Sermon Preached by Edm. Hickeringal,
Rector of All Saints in Colchester.

The Frailty and Uncertainty of the life of Man, delivered in a Sermon at the
Funeral of a Person that died suddenly, by the Reverend Mr. W. Bush.

A Practical Discourse upon Col. 3.5. by R. Carr, Viccar of Sutton.

Dr. Singleton's Practical Discourses upon 1 John 12.28.

An account of the Conversion of Theodore John, a late Teacher among the Jews.

Heads of Agreement assented to by the United Ministers, price 4 d.

The Countries Concurrence with the London united Ministers, by Mr. Chandler,
price 1 s.

The Lise of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Brand, written by Dr. Annesley, price 1 s.

Practical Discourses on sickness and recovery, in several Sermons, as they
were lately Preached in a Congregation in London, by T. Rogers, M. A. after his
recovery from a sickness of near two years continuance.

Early Religion, or a Discourse of the Duty and Interest of Youth. the second
Edition. Price 1 s.

Fall not out by the way, or a persuasion to a Friendly Correspondece between
the Conformists and Nonconformists, in a Funeral Discourse on Genesis 45.24.
occasioned by the desire of Mr. Anthony Dunwell, in his last Will. All three
written by T. Rogers, M. A. price 1 s.

The Mounners Compaaion, or Funeral Discourses on several Texts, by John
Shower, price 1 s. 6 d.

Mr. Boyses answer to Bp. King.

The Vanity and Impiety of Judicial Astrology. price 3 d.

Mensalia Sacra, or Meditations on the Lord's Supper, both written by the
Reverend Mr. F. Crow, M. A. late Minister at Clare in Suffolk. price 1 s.

A Practical Discourse on the late Earthquakes, by a Reverend Divine. price 6 d.

Triunity, or the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity asserted in a Discourse on 2
Cor. 13.14. by Isaac Mauduit, Minister of the Gospel, price 6 d.

An Earnest Call to Family Chatechising and Reformation, by a Reverend Divine,
price 6 d. or 50 for 20 s.

Comfort for Parents mourning over their HOpeful Children that die young, by T.
Whitaker, Minister at Leeds in York shire.

The 3d Edition of the Life and Death of the Reverend Mr. John Fllot, who was
the first Preacher of the Gospel to the Indians in America, with an Account of
the wonderful success which the Gospel has had amongst the Heathens in that
part of the World. Written by Corten Mather price 1 s.

Gospel Truth stated and Vindicated, the Second Edition. price 1 s.

A Defense of Gospel Truth. price 6 d.

Man made Righteous by Christ's Obedience, being two Sermons at Prinners-Hall,
with Inlargements.

The Vanity of Childhood and Youth, all four written by D. Williams.

The Young-Mans Claim to the Sacrament, by J. Quck. price 6 d.

Mr. Barkers Flores Intellectuales. In two parts.

Some Remarkable Passages in the Life and Death of Mr. John Mason, late
Minister of Water-stratford, drawn up by a Reverend Divine, to which is added
his Christian Letters, printed from the Original Copies.

Proposals for a National Reformation of Manners, to which is added the
Instrument for Reformation, etc. price 6 d.

The Knowledge of the World, or the Art of well educating Youth through the
various Conditions of Life, by way of Letters to a Noble Lord, Vol. 1. to be
continued in that Method till the whole Design is finished. Printed first at
Paris, afterward reprinted at Amsterdam, and now done into English.

A Narrative of the Extraordinary Cure wrought in an instant upon Mrs.
Elizabeth Savage, Lame from her Birth, without the using of any Natural Means;
with the Affidavits which were sworn before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor, and the Certificates of several credible Persous, who knew her both
before and since her Cure. price 6 d.

The Fourth Edition of the Lives and Trials of those Eminent Protestants, who
fell in the West of England, and elsewhere, from the year 1678, to 1689.

COMPLETE SETS of the Athenian Mercury (being sixteen Volumes, etc.) resolving
all themost nice and curious Questions proposed by Ladies and Gentlemen for the
lest FOUR YEARS.

The History, of several Remarkable Penitents -- to which is added a Sermon
preached at Boston in New England, to a condemned Malefactor, by Increase
Mather.

A Narrative of the conversion of Mackerness, late of March, in the Isle of
Ely, by Mr. Buroughs, Minister at Wisbech. price 1 s.

Derections, Prayers, and Ejaculations for such as lead a Military Life. price
2 d. or 100 for 14 s.

A New Book of Trade, entitled Panarithmalogia, by W. Leybourn, Author of
Cursus Mathematicus. proce 4 s. 6 d.

The Trials of several Witchts lately Executed in New England, published by the
special Command of his Excellency the Governor of New England. The third
Editon, Price 1 s,

All these aforesaid Books are sold by John Dunton at the Raven in
Jewen-street, and also by Edm. Richardson near the Poultrey-Church.

Books now in the Press and going to it, Printed for John Dunton.
THE Second Edition of the Court and State of England, By Roger Coke, Esquire; (is
now Printing upon an extraordinary fine Paper,) to which will be added many
Secret Meomirs, never Printed before.

2 The Learned Spanhemius's Funeral Oration, which gives an account of some
remarkable Passages in the LIFE of the QUEEN (not hitherto made Public) having
met with an extraordinary Reception, it has encouraged the Undertaker to a
speedy Publication of -- A Collection of the Funeral Orations made in Holland
upon the Death of the QUEEN of Great Britain, by Dr. James Perizonius,
Professor of History, Eloquence, and the Greek Language. The Learned Grevius of
Utrecht. The Reverend Francius of Amsterdam. And Mr. Ortwinius of Delph. And by
the Learned Author of the Collection of Curious new pieces lately published. To
which which will also be added the Funeral Oration upon the QUEENS Death,
pronounced by George William Kirchmais, at the Invitation of the Chancellor of
the Electoral University of Wittenberg in Saxony. Which SIX Orations are now in
the Press and will be published all together in One Volume. Price 2 s.

Whereas PROPOSALS have been made for Printing by Subscription -- An History of
all the remarkable Providence which have happened in this present Age, etc. --
By William Turner, M. A. and Vicar of Walberton in Sussex; This is to give
Notice, That those that expect any benefit by the said PROPOSALS, are desired
to send in their First Payment ( viz. 15 s.) with all possible expedition the
first of September next, being the longest time allowed for taking in
Subscriptions. -- PROPOSALS and SPCIMENS, giving a full Account of this Work,
may be had of the Undertaker, John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, as
also of Edm. Richardson, near the Poultrey-Church, and of most Pooksellers in
London, and the Country.

If any Ministers Widow, or other person have any Library, or parcel of books
to dispose of, if they will send a Catalogue of them, or notice where they are,
to John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, they shall have ready Money for
them, to the full of what they are Worth.


