A RESOLUTION OF THREE Matrimonial CASES; VIZ.

I. Whether it be Lawful for a Man to Marry his deceased Wife's Sister's
Daughter?

II. Whether the half-blood make Kindred?

III. Whether such a Marriage being made, it ought to be dissolved or no?

By John Turner, late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

(...)

Be ready always to give an answer to every Man that asks you a reason.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills Jun. for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Church Yard. 1684.

THE Preface.
THE Three Queries here resolved were sent to me upon the Thirtieth of Jan.
last, I know not well from whom they came, and it seems he that sent them did
not think it worth his while to call for an answer. However because the
resolution proceeds upon such Principles, as may be applied to any other Case
of this nature, so that every Man may easily discern hereafter for himself,
what is lawful or unlawful in these Cases, therefore I thought it convenient to
make it public. Farewell.

A RESOLUTION OF THREE Matrimonial CASES.
Quest. I. Whether it be a lawful Marriage for a Man to Marry his deceased
Wife's Sister's Daughter, or no?

Quest. II. Whether being but of the half blood do not make Kindred?

Quest. III. If such a Marriage be made already, whether it be better that they
part, or not?

FOR the First of these Queries, it appears by the Third, which is concerning
Divorce in Case of an unlawful Marriage, that it is to be understood of a
Marriage, ex Antecedenti lawful or unlawful, that is to say, whether it be
lawful for a Man to endeavor a Marriage, or to enter into a Matrimonial
Contract in order to it, with one who stands related to him in the degree
mentioned in the said Query. And to this I Answer, That it is not lawful, and I
conceive its unlawfulness to be demonstrable from that prohibition in the
Eighteenth of Leviticus, v. 14. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy
Father's Brother, thou shall not approach to his Wife, she is thine Aunt, which
is again repeated, c. 20. v. 20. If a Man shall lie with his Uncles Wife, he
has uncovered his Uncles nakedness: they shall bear their sin, they shall die
Childless.

For if it be unlawful for a Man to Marry his Aunt, the Wife of his Father's
Brother, then it is likewise unlawful for a Woman to Marry her Uncle, the
Husband of her Mothers Sister, because these two Relations are, as to nearness
of Kin, exactly the same, so that all the Question is, whether in Matrimonial
Cases we are to stick to the letter of the Levitical Law, or whether parity of
reason be of necessity to be admitted? And I do humbly conceive the latter of
these to be true, and I offer these following reasons for my opinion.

First, The fundamental reason of all these Prohibitory Laws is nearness of
Kin. Levit. 18. 6. None of you shall approach to any that is near of Kin to
him, to uncover their nakedness, from whence it follows, that if in two Cases
given, the nearness of Kin be in both exactly the same, the reason of the Law,
and by consequence its Obligation, is in both Cases equally concerned.

Secondly, I appeal to the constant and universally received opinion of the
Jewish Rabbis, and to the practice of that Nation which is founded upon it,
for in the Matrimonial Tables of the Jews, which are much more particular then
that of Moses, the additional Prohibitions that are to be met with in them, are
altogether grounded upon parity of reason, as may be seen in Mr. Seldom in his
Vxor Hebraica, and in his De jure naturali and gentium juxta disciplinam
Hebraeorum, where he has given an account of all those Prohibitions out of
Maimonides, and the Jewish Talmud.

Thirdly, It is to be considered, that these Prohibitions, were not of a purely
Mosaic, that is, a Typical, Umbratick and alterable Nature, but that they were
built upon the reason of things, and the unchangeable Interest of Mankind, for
the propagation of Interests and Dependencies, and for the spreading and
continuance of Friendship among Men, which reason being altogether equal and
the same, equally violated on the one hand, or gratified on the other, in the
Marriage of an Aunt to the Nephew, or of an Uncle to the Niece, it is manifest,
that the Lawgiver proceeding upon this reason, (and there can be no other
tolerable reason of these Prohibitions assigned) did intend equally to prohibit
both, if he have prohibited either of them; otherwise we must suppose one of
these two things: Either that Moses, that is, in effect, God himself did not
sufficiently understand and comprehend the full Extent and Latitude of that
reason upon which the Prohibitions were founded, or else that the reason of
those laws may be violated from time to time, and from age to age, in a
thousand myriads of instances, with the consent of the Lawgiver himself, by
which means it would come to pass, if it were lawful for an Uncle to marry the
Niece, though the Marriage of an Aunt with her Nephew were forbidden, that
whatever the advantage was, which was intended by the prohibition of the latter
to be procured to the World, that advantage by the license of the former would
be but half obtained; and on the other side, whatever the disadvantage or
detriment was, which was designed to be avoided or prevented, that disadvantage
would be but half redressed; now both of these things being equally absurd and
impious to suppose, it follows likewise upon this Third consideration, as well
as the two former, that in the Mosaic Prohibitions a parity of reason, and a
Parallelism or Sympathy of Cases is of necessity to be admitted.

Fourthly, If there had been liberty still allowed, after it was prohibited for
an Aunt and her Nephew to intermarry together, yet notwithstanding for an Uncle
and his Niece to do it, and so in other parallel instances that might be given,
this would have been a very great and a very plausible pretense for
disobedience, it would have been an occasion of frequent murmuring, and
repining in the Parties that were prohibited to Marry, when others, as to
nearness of blood, exactly in the same circumstances with themselves, were to
the scandal of all Law and Justice, and without the least color of Equity
indulged; so that there being not only in both instances the very self same
reason, but it being likewise necessary to the due effect of the Prohibition
expressed, that it should be extended to the Prohibition implied by parity of
reason, it follows that it was actually extended so far, and to say otherwise,
is to accuse the Divine Justice and Wisdom together.

It would be to accuse the Divine Wisdom, as if God wanted foresight, and did
not pry sufficiently into the natural issue and result of things, by making a
Law to a stubborn and refractory people, which even the most obedient might
very justly complain of, and by consequence had a plausible pretense to
disobey, and it would be at the same time to tax him with want of Justice,
which is every whit as essential and congenerous to his nature, for what can be
more unjust, then to make it death for a Man to lie with the Mother of his
Wife, and yet to leave it perfectly at liberty, for a Man to lie with his own
Daughter? And yet this is no where forbidden, unless it be by parity of reason,
except it be Levit. 18. 17. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of a Woman,
and her Daughter, but that is manifestly to be understood of such a Daughter,
as was born to that Woman by another Husband, and therefore she is called her
Daughter, by which it is employed and supposed that she was not his; and the
same prohibition is expressed in other words, Lev. 20. 12. If a Man lie with his
Daughter in Law, (that is, his Wife's Daughter) both of them shall surely be
put to death, or except it be pretended to be forbidden, Lev. 20. 14. If a Man
take a Wife and her Mother, it is wickedness, they shall be burnt with fire,
both he and they. For in this Case if a Man commit Incest with his own
Daughter, or if he should Marry her, so as to make her his Wife, he must of
necessity have lain both with Mother and Daughter. But this place is also to be
understood of the Mother of that Wife by some other Husband, therefore Moses
calls the Daughter his Wife, that is, his lawful Wife, and the fault was not in
lying with the Daughter, but the Mother, after he had been joined in Marriage
to the Daughter. And this Prohibition is as it were the reverse and counterpart
of that other which has been mentioned out of Levit. 18. 7. and c. 20. 12. For
in the two former places it is forbidden, for a Man to Marry the Mother and lie
with the Daughter, and in the latter it is forbidden, for a Man to Marry the
Daughter and commit Incest with the Mother. And by these two places compared
together, it is still further evident, that the Law of Moses is in these cases
to be explained and interpreted by parity of reason, for this was the reason of
prohibiting, first the enjoyment of the Mother and the Daughter in the
descending line, and then of the Daughter and Mother in the ascending, because
the Relation is exactly the same in both Cases, and by consequence it is in
both Cases equally unlawful, which is to argue by parity of reason, which if it
be admitted as a measure of procedure in one Case, the equity and justice of
proceeding after the same manner is the same in all.

But on the contrary, if we are no where to extend the intention and obligation
of the law of Moses beyond the letter of it, then it will be Levitically lawful
for a Man to Marry his own Daughter, because this is no where expressly
forbidden, but consequentially it is, for if it be unlawful for a Man to lie
with his Daughter in Law, that is, his Wives Daughter, it is much more unlawful
for him to do it with his own. If it be forbidden, as it is, Lev. 18. 10. for a
Man to uncover the nakedness of his Sons Daughter, or his Daughter's Daughter,
that is, of his Grandchild, it is supposed much more that it is by that very
Prohibition intentionally forbidden, for him to uncover the nakedness of his
own. So likewise it is forbidden for a Man to Marry his half-Sister either by
Fathers or Mothers side, Lev. 18. 9. The nakedness of thy Sister, the Daughter
of thy Father, or Daughter of thy Mother, whether she be born at home or born
abroad, even their nakedness thou shall not uncover. But yet it is no where in
express terms forbidden for a Man to Marry his own Sister, born of the same
Father and Mother, which yet notwithstanding has been looked upon by Jews and
Christians, as well the one as the other, and both of them universally, without
any one exception, to be Levitically prohibited and unlawful, because the same
reason, whatsoever it is, which forbids the Marriage of the half-Sister, is
much more strong and powerful against an incestuous conjunction with the whole;
so that it appears plainly not only that it is necessary in it self, that the
argument a pari, or a potiori, should be admitted in these Cases, but that in
some of them it is universally done, and there is the same reason why it should
be so in all.

Which may render my Fifth and Last consideration in a manner useless, which
is, that God being so highly displeased with the Amorites and other Nations, as
utterly to extirpate them from off the face of the Earth, and give their Land
for an Inheritance to Israel his People, and being so displeased at the
Abominations themselves, for which these Nations were extirpated and rooted
out, that the sanction of several of the Levitical Prohibitions was certain and
unavoidable death, in the most public manner, in the face and open view of the
whole Congregation; this ought to teach us not only to admit a parity or
potiority of reason, when they lie so naturally and so fairly in our way, that
we cannot without blushing pretend to shun or avoid them, but rather then
restrain our obligation to the Divine Law, within too narrow bounds, to exceed
on the other hand by a pious mistake, instead of falling short out of a spirit
of presumption, which is an offense to God, when it has not modestly,
dutifully and impartially considered things, though it should happen to
determine rightly as to the matter or the instances of obedience. And this is
my first answer to the Question proposed, concerning the Marriage of an Uncle
with his Niece, which is drawn from the parity or similitude of the Case to the
Marriage of an Aunt with her Nephew.

But Secondly, It is, I presume, agreed on all hands, that it is unlawful for a
Nephew to intermarry with his Fathers or Mothers own Sister, the Amita or
Matertera, the Consanguineous Aunt by the Fathers or Mothers side, and it is, I
think, as universally determined, that it is unlawful for an Uncle to
Intermarry with his Niece, the Daughter of his own Brother or Sister; and this
was certainly the Old Roman Law till Claudius procured it to be abrogated by
the Senate, to excuse and justify an incestuous Passion for his beloved
Agrippina, but yet this was looked upon by all to be so foul and abominable a
thing, that the example was not followed in that age by any more then one, as
Tacitus informs us, or two at the most, as Suetonius would have it, and they
also did it rather out of Complaisance and Flattery to Agrippina, at whose
instance it was done, then out of any natural inclination in the Contracting
parties; and for the same reason, because of its Turpitude and Incestuous
nature, it was repealed by Nerva, and though it were afterward restored by
Adrian, and encouraged after that, by the example of L. Antoninus Caesar, who
Married his Niece Lucilla the Daughter of his Brother M. Aurelius Antoninus the
Philosopher, yet it always remained incestuous, and prohibited by the Laws of
the Empire, for a man to Marry his Sister's Daughter, though he were allowed to
Marry the Daughter of his Brother; the reason of which was, that though in Laws
well constituted, for a bar to concupiscence, and for the spreading of
Friendships, a parity of Cases ought to be allowed, yet the violation of a law
in one Case, ought not by any means to be drawn into Precedent or Example to
the violation of it in another, so that it being naturally or politically
unlawful or inconvenient for a Man to Marry the Daughter of his Brother, it was
still more reasonable to confine the Interpretation of the S. C. Claudianum, by
which it was provided de futuro that such Marriages should be deemed lawful, to
the letter of the law itself, so as the privilege should not be extended to
the Niece descending from the Sister.

Now it is to be noted that both by the Jewish and the Roman Law, Affinities
and Consanguinities were equally forbidden and to the same degrees; as for the
Roman Law, it is so plain, so frequently inculcated, and so universally
acknowledged by all the Ancient Civilians that it is to no purpose to go about
to prove it; and that it was so in the Jewish, I prove by these following
Texts, Lev. 18. v. 8. The nakedness of thy Fathers Wife shall thou not uncover,
it is thy Fathers nakedness; that is, it is same thing in the Interpretation of
Law, as if a Man had uncovered the nakedness of his own Mother, his Father and
his Mother in Law being united, as it were, into the same person, in the same
manner as his own Mother and his Father were. Again, v. 15. Thou shall not
uncover the nakedness of thy Daughter in Law, she is thy Sons Wife; that is,
she is to be reputed as standing in the same nearness of relation to you, with
your Son himself, and by consequence it is, in the eye of the Law, the same
thing, as if you had uncovered the nakedness of your own Daughter, for a Son
and a Daughter are the same as to nearness of blood, or distance from their
common Parent. So also v. 16. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy
Brothers Wife, it is thy Brothers nakedness; that is, it is the same thing as
if you had been guilty of uncleanness with your own Sister, for a Brother and a
Sister are in relation the same. Lastly, v. 14. which I mention last, because I
intend to make the most particular application of it, Thou shall not uncover
the nakedness of thy Fathers Brother, thou shall not approach to his Wife, she
is thine Aunt; that is, by having been joined in Marriage to your Fathers
Brother, it is the same thing as if she had been your Fathers own Sister, so
that the reason why a Man might not approach to his Aunt in Affinity or by
Marriage, was, because the Aunt in consanguinity or by blood was forbidden, and
because of the legal analogy and resemblance of the one to the other; but now
by the same reason that an Aunt by consanguinity may not Marry her Nephew, an
Uncle in the same nature may not Marry his Niece, because the distance in both
Cases is exactly the same, and if Affinities and Consanguinities go hand in
hand, as well by the Mosaic as the Roman Law, and if they are forbidden to the
same degrees, and by reason of their resemblance and analogy to the alliances
by blood, by reason of Man and Wife's being the same Flesh, and legally united
into the same person, then is a Man forbidden by the Levitical Law to Marry his
Niece by Affinity, which is the Case proposed.

The Second Query is, Whether being but of the half-blood do not make kindred?
To which my Answer is affirmative that it does, because though the legal
Nearness of a Sister-in-Law, and a Sister by both Parents be the same, so far
as the Matrimonial Prohibition is concerned, yet the natural Nearness is
greater in an half Sister, then in a Sister by Affinity, and therefore it seems
reasonable if the one be forbidden, that is to say, the Sister by Affinity, the
Sister German, or Vterine, by Father or Mothers side, is much more; and to this
it is to be added, that all along before the giving of the Law, the half
Sister, descended of the same Mother, was always accounted as sacred, and as
indispensably prohibited in Marriage as the whole Sister her self, that is, she
was in the interpretation of Law looked upon as an whole Sister, as Abraham
said concerning Sarah his Wife, in his Apology to Abimelech the King of Gerar,
She is the Daughter of my Father, but not the Daughter of my Mother, implying
thereby, as I conceive, that if she had been his Sister by the Mothers side, it
had not been Lawful for him according to the opinion and usage of those times
to take her to Wife; but without any elaborate canvassing the business, this
query is sufficiently answered by comparing these two places together, Levit
18. 6. it is said, None of you shall approach to any that is near of Kin to
him, to uncover their nakedness, and v. 9. The nakedness of thy Sister, the
Daughter of thy Father, or the Daughter of thy Mother, whether she be born at
home, or born abroad, even their nakedness thou shall not uncover. From whence
it is manifest, from comparing the latter place with the former, that the
half-Sister is near of Kin, and consequently that the half-blood makes Kindred,
therefore a Man's Wife's half-Sister is to be looked upon as his Wife's Sister;
and because Affinities and Consanguinities in the Practice and Interpretation
of Law are the same, therefore his Wife's Sister is to be looked upon as his
Sister, and her Daughter is the same thing as his Niece, the Daughter of his
own Sister, to whom he is in the language of the Civil Law, parentis loco, and
therefore ought not to Marry her, and if a Man's Grandchild be forbidden him in
Marriage by the Levitical Law it self, upon this reason which must be
acknowledged to be employed in the Prohibition, because he cannot Marry his
Daughter, then it seems reasonable in this Case also, that if a Man cannot
Marry the Mother, his Wife's half-Sister, he cannot Marry the Daughter neither,
who is immediately descended from her, and it is certain in the Civil Law, that
in the collateral as well as the direct line the ascendentes and descendentes
are prohibited in infinitum.

It remains now only, that I consider the Third Query, which is this, Whether
the Marriage proposed being made, it be better for them to part, or no?

To which I Answer First, That in some Cases it is necessary according to the
Christian Doctrine, which is very tender of Divorces, and with a great deal of
reason, that a Divorce be made, or a worse punishment inflicted, as is manifest
from the Case of the incestuous Corinthian, who had Married his Fathers Wife.

Secondly, In all ordinary Cases our Savior's rule holds good, and shows
withal how extremely tender the Gospel is of divorces, Matthew. 5. 32. Whosoever
puts away his Wife, saving only for the cause of Fornication, causes her to
commit Adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commits
Adultery. From whence it follows, that if it be a doubtful Case, whether the
Marriage now under consideration be ex post Facto, lawful or no, though it be
granted to be unlawful ex Antecedenti that the doubt ought to be resolved in
favor of the Marriage, and in confirmation of it.

Thirdly, If the Parties concerned in the above written Queries, have not yet
consummated their Marriage by the copula carnalis, I am humbly of opinion that
they ought to separate for the prevention of scandal to themselves, and of
example to others.

Fourthly, That it being but a single instance, in which many Families are not
concerned, this may seem to incline to a divorce, because the public can
receive no prejudice by the separation, though by the evil precedent and
example it may.

But yet Fifthly, If there be any such thing to be admitted as a casus
favorabilis, I am of opinion this is it, because it is placed in confinio
liciti, it being at the farthest distance in which it is practically possible
for a Man to Marry from himself, in his own descending collateral Affinity,
though the Civil Laws to make the matter more sure, have forbidden such
Marriages in infinitum.

Sixthly, That if the Marriage be consummated as aforesaid, it is still more
favorable in the behalf of the Parties, especially if any Issue have been
brought forth or conceived, and in both these Cases, especially the latter, the
scandal and inconvenience is greater if they part then if they continue
together.

Seventhly, If any Issue should follow upon this Marriage, it is certain that
the Act of Parliament has not in express words declared such Issue to be
Spurious or Illegitimate, and it seems somewhat strange for two persons to
separate upon account of an unlawful Marriage, who having consummated the said
Marriage by mutual enjoyment, either have at present, or may have hereafter
lawful Issue descended from them.

Eighthly, Albeit Affinity and Consanguinity be in the Interpretation of the Law
the same, and the half and whole Sister equally Prohibited, yet in truth and
reality the affinis is not so near of Kin as the consanguineus, nor the half
Sister as the whole.

Ninthly, That there has been and ought to be favor shown in Matrimonial
Cases, notwithstanding that the letter of the Law has been sometimes violated
and affronted by them, I will instance in the business of Poligamy, which was
forbidden by the Law of Moses in these words, Lev. 18. 18. Neither shall thou
take a Wife to her Sister to vex her, to uncover her nakedness, besides the
other in her life time, for this cannot be understood of a Sister properly so
called, for it was certainly Prohibited by the Levitical Law, for a Man to
Marry two Sisters, either both together, or one after the other; for by the
same reason that it was unlawful for a Man to Marry his Brothers Wife after the
decease of his Brother, unless when he dyed Childless, to redeem the
Inheritance, by the very same reason it must be unlawful for the Sister to
Marry the Sisters Husband after her decease, because the Relation is exactly
the same in both Cases. But the meaning was, that though the Jews were allowed
to keep Concubines as Abraham did, and from thence the Concubinage among the
Romans was derived, yet it was unlawful to Marry more Wives that should be
aequo jure, with one another, that should have an equal power in the Family,
and should all of them be the Mothers of Heritable Issue, because this would be
the occasion of strife and contention betwixt them, and render the Family
troublesome and uneasy, but yet we know that notwithstanding this, such
Marriages were practiced under the Law, and yet no Divorce ensued. David was
one example of it, and Elkanah the Father of Samuel another; the one a Man
after Gods own Heart, to whose charge nothing is laid but the matter of Vriah,
and the other a just Man, and of a clear reputation. And God foreseeing in his
wisdom, how difficult it would be to wean the Jews of this liberty of taking
more Wives then in strictness of Law it was permitted them to do, did therefore
make an express provision as to the Inheritance, in the Case of Polygamy, Deuteronomy.
21. v. 15, 16, 17. by which it was enacted, that the double portion was always
to fall to the share of the Eldest Son, upon which soever of the Wives he was
begotten, and when the Gospel enjoins that a Bishop and a Deacon should be the
Husband of one Wife, it is not to be understood as the Canon Law interprets it
of Bigamy, that is, of Marrying a second Wife after the death of the first, for
here there is no Question but the rule holds good, it is better to Marry then
to burn, as well after the Death of the first Wife as before it; but the thing
was that whereas several Converts to Christianity were at the same time Married
to more Wives then one, though it was not thought convenient to divorce any
that had been actually Married before their conversion, yet it was designed to
introduce Monogamy or the Marriage of one Wife only at one time, for the
future, and therefore for examples sake none were admitted to Offices in the
Church, who had at the same time been Husbands to more Wives then one, and I do
really believe this Case of being Married to the deceased Wife's half-Sisters
Daughter to be after enjoyment a more favorable Case and less liable to
Divorce then that of Polygamy naturally seems to be, by reason of the great
strifes and jealousies that usually attend it. So that upon the whole matter my
opinion is, that the parties concerned in the Cases that have been mentioned,
upon supposition that the Marriage have received its final Consummation in the
Bed, ought by no means to be separated and divorced from one another, and that
such separation cannot be admitted without great scandal and reproach to them
both, and without dishonor and despite to the Christian Religion, which is so
very favorable and tender, ex post facto, in matters of this nature, and I
desire them both to reflect very seriously upon our Saviors general Rule, that
except it be in very extraodinary Cases, such as that of the Incestuous
Corinthian, or of Herod's Marrying his Brother Philips Wife, nothing but
Fornication can justify a Divorce, or secure the Parties separating from each
other, from the crime or danger of Adultery.

Jan. 31. 1683/4. John Turner.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. Line 25. for Blood read Kin. p. 11. l. 26. for natural r. mutual.

POSTSCRIPT.
FOR the Second Query, the resolution of it seems to lie so plain that I do
almost wonder to find it proposed, for in the Case of an whole Sister, that is,
a Sister by Father and Mothers side, it is certain that both Parents do equally
contribute to the Consanguinity, and therefore in the half-Sister, there must
be an half Consanguinity, that is, an half Kindred, a Kindred as real as the
whole, though not so perfect, and by the same reason that the Consanguinity of
the Wife to the half-Sister, is less perfect, the Affinity of the Husband to
the said half-Sister and the Niece descending from her is proportionally
imperfect also, upon which accounts it is, as I have said, ex post facto, a
favorable Case, especially if both, or either of the Parties were ignorant
when they Married, of its antecedent unlawfulness, and both by reason of the
distance of the Relation and the defect of it, the Marriage after fruition
ought not to be dissolved.

J. T.

FINIS.
Books Written by the same Author, and Printed for Walter Kettilby.
ANimadversions upon the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. A Sermon Preached
before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen. October. 19.
1679.

Two Discourses Introductory to a disquisition, demonstrating the Unlawfulness
of the Marriage of Cousin Germans, from Law, Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity,

A Letter of Resolution to a Friend, concerning the Marriage of Cousin Germans.

A Sermon Preached before Sir Patience Ward, upon the last Sunday of his
Mayoralty, with Additions.

An exercitation concerning the true time of our Savior's Passover or Last
Supper with his Disciples, being part of a Digression in the Additions to the
Sermon before Sir P. W.

A Discourse of the Divine Omnipresence and its consequences; A Sermon before
the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn, upon the First Sunday of last
Michaelmass Term. All Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops'-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard.

The Middle-way betwixt Necessity and Freedom, in Two Parts. Printed for Samuel
Simpson, Bookseller in Cambridg, and to be Sold by Booksellers in London.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere are now just coming out Two exercitations being the remainder of the
Digressions in the Additions to the Sermon before Sir P. W. The First
attempting to demonstrate that the Jews till after the return from the
Captivity of Babylon were never publicly and promiscuously allowed the reading
of the Law of Moses or other Canonical Books of the Old Testament.

The Second concerning the true Reading and Pronunciation of the
Tetragrammaton, or four Lettered name of God in Hebrew, as also concerning the
Pythagorick Tetractys and other Philological matters, that have a connection
with it.


