Twelve Hundred thousand Pounds being Voted to make good the Deficiency of the
late Current Coin of this Kingdom, it is to be understood and taken for Granted,

THAT all such Money now in, and to be henceforward received at the Exchequer,
must be by Tale reckoned as Standard-money of England, and in such to be issued
thence. And

Forasmuch as the Time by the Proclamation given for the Currency of the Clipped
Money is so short, and the Opportunities for parting with it, that are hitherto
given, being only by Taxes and Lones, it may well be imagined that great part
of such Money (notwithstanding the 1200000 l. as aforesaid, voted to supply the
Deficiency) will remain in the Hands of many possessed of it when the Currancy
ends, to their Damage, great Dissatisfaction and Loss; For lessening which
Inconveniences as far as the Matter will bear, it is humbly Proposed,

That as well for the Raising one Million of ready Money for the present Use of
the War, as to give Opportunity to those possessed of Clipped Money to part with
the same to content;

That 225000 l. yearly (which two Thirds of the Additional Duties this next
year expiring may furnish) be settled for five years for the Payment of Forty
shillings yearly for such five years, to such as in Hammered Money shall pay in
nine pounds, for the Receipt of which, in a time to be limited, a Receiver may
be appointed in each Shire-Town in England, and to every Person so paying nine
pounds, may at the same time be provided to give out five Bills, entituling the
Bearer to Forty shillings for each of the five years, on which Bills it should
likewise be printed, what each Bill on a Rebate of 5 per Cent. is every year
worth ready Money, which without any Compulsion would give them such Currancy
they would in all Payments be preferred before Money it self; and as a further
Convenience it may be so contrived, as that the truth of them may not only be
tried here in London, but in other great Towns, and must be particularly so to
be in the Shire-Towns where first given out; and as yet a farther Convenience
in this Contrivance, There being a Tax upon Houses voted, which being to be
Received in the Country, may be yearly paid in those Forty shilling Tickets,
and so keep the Money there, which will be the same thing to the Crown, and
give Satisfaction to the People by so having their Security at home, and leave
the best third of the additional Duties to raise more Money, besides the
Million aforesaid.

Now for taking in the rest of the Hammered Money.
A Receiver may be also appointed in every Shire-Town, provided to give out
such like Bills (but each of 5 l.) as aforesaid, for every 5 l. brought to him,
entitleing the Bearer to 5 l. at the Exchequer at any time in the Year 1697 and
to be at any time taken for any Tax by the King in the mean time; and may be as
aforesaid so contrived, as not only to be tried here in London and other great
Towns, but particularly in the Shire-Town where the same were first given out,
and so cannot be Counterfeit, if brought there only to be tried.

And therefore will in a great measure supply the want of coined Money, till
coined, be a certain Security to those that part with their Money, that they
shall have it again in New Money, the Old and the 1200000 l. given being to be
appropriated for it; and the Receiving these Bills in the mean time for Taxes
by the King, will be no Inconvenience, for there will be always sufficient in
Bullion brought in, as aforesaid, to make them ready Money, it being in such
Case to be Enacted, That for as many of such Bills as shall be taken for Taxes,
the Money appropriated for the paying such Bills in the Year 1697. may
immediately be used by the Crown.


