THE PRAISE OF HUMILITY.

A SERMON PREACHED Upon the 20th. of March 1687.

BEING Palm Sunday, AT The Guild-Hall-Chappel, London.

By JOHN TVRNER Hospitaller of St. Thomas Southwark.

LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1687.

To the Right Honorable, and my singular Good Lord, George Lord Jeffries, Baron
of Wem, Lord High Chancellor of England, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My Lord,
THis Sermon, which for the great seasonableness of the Subject of it, I think
it my Duty to Publish at this time, it being Preached, as it fell out, but just
the day before His Majesty was pleased to signify His Gracious Resolution, to
allow Liberty of Conscience to all his loving Subjects of what Denomination
soever: I do humbly beseech your Lordship to Accept and Patronize, as you do
the Author; and give me leave at once to pay a very small and inconsiderable
Acknowledgment for many the most signal and obliging Favors, and to shelter so
lovel y,so useful, and so excellent a Virtue under the shady Patronage of so
great a Person, whose Name and Authority, will at the same time render it more
Charming to its Friends, and make it appear so formidable to its Enemies, that
it will constrain and force them into its own resemblance, and cause them to
Abase and Humble themselves before it.

But besides the plain suitableness of the Discourse to the Juncture, Humility
and Charity, being the only expedients that can make Liberty safe, or
Toleration a tolerable thing, by preventing those Quarrels and Animosities that
arise from different sentiments in Religious matters. Besides my own particular
and personal Obligations, which I cannot think of without shame, when I
consider how little I deserve them; there is also a Congruity in the Subject of
my Sermon, to your Lordships Person, which seems to me to challenge and single
you out for a Patron, without asking any leave but from the Nature of things, I
mean those Natural effects of this incomparable Virtue which I have
recommended, which flow so easily, so unaffectedly from you, with so much
Beauty and Brightness, with so much Strength and Vigor, and with so constant
and uninterrupted a Stream, in the sweetness and affability of your
Conversation, even among your Inferiors and Dependants, in the easiness of
Access in the midst of so much Greatness, the Quickness, the Justice, the
Sagacity of dispatch in so importunate a crowd of Business, all which would be
certain and infallible Indications at once of a Generous and Composed Mind, a
Great and Lofty, and yet an Humble Spirit, though they were not, as they are,
attended with a peculiar proneness to Forgive the most implacable and mortal
Enemies, of which your Lordship has given such convincing Proofts, that this
alone might be sufficient, with out that universal Merit, which even Envy and
Detraction cannot help allowing you, to recommend you Powerfully to the Favor
of a Prince, in whom Mercy is Hereditary, and Majesty is by Nature tempered
with Pity and Compassion, to render it more easy and familiar to his People:
But there is likewise the Justice and Integrity, the Constancy and Courage, the
Diligence and Assiduity, the Wisdom and the Condu^t of your Actions, that have
concurred and club'd with a kind and obliging Temper, to render you truly
Great, and make you an Object worthy the Esteem of two the most Judicious and
Discerning Kings that ever sat upon the English Throne.

And, my Lord, it is another genuine Effect of that admirable Virtue which is
the Glorious Theme of the ensuing Papers, that it makes its way to Greatness,
as your Lordship has done, not by Popularity and mischievous Intrigues, to the
Danger, if not Ruin of the public Peace, but only by just Actions and
honorable Designs, and like your Great Master, whom Providence had a mind to
show how much it loved, by the Protection of a weakly Bark, when the Royal Oak
was unable to defend Him, you Ventured, Suffered, and Escaped a Shipwreck, and
made a costly Sacrifice of your Hopes and Fortunes to the public Good, before
your entrance upon that Scene of Honor in which you now shine, with so much the
greater Brightness, for having first suffered so Glorious an Eclipse; by this
means showing at once, the difference betwixt your Enemies and you, and
verifying our Saviors never failing Promise to all his Faithful Followers and
Disciples, that whosoever Exalts himself, by Base, Dishonorable, and Unworthy
Means, the same shall be Abased, and he that Humbles himself shall be Exalted.

For Humility, my Lord, is the true way to Greatness; it is not a Poltron and a
sneaking Disposition, as its Name may seem unjustly to Insinuate; but it
implies Magnanimity and Courage at the same time, by looking backward upon God,
and inwards upon it Self, and forwards upon the Hope and Expectation of a
future Life; it acquires an habitual Sense and Sympathy of Human Frailty, a
Pity and Compassion for Human want and necessity, an universal Candor,
Integrity and Ingenuity, in all its Words and Actions, and Designs, a warm
inclination to promote the good of its Country, and the happiness of Mankind,
an admiration of God, and a desire to be like him, and a scorn of every thing
that is unhandsome or unjust. It cannot revenge its own wrongs upon the Public,
it cannot embarrass or embroil the World upon a principle of Private Interest;
it cannot climb to Greatness upon the ruins of Justice, though it would never
so fain, but it still meets with something that pulls it strongly back, and
rewards all Ambition with regret and pain, but what is noble, and useful, and
serviceable to the World, and is an Instinct of the Divinity in Human Nature,
to prompt it, when fair Opportunities present themselves, to great
Achievements and generous Undertakings; it Ascends by the Steps of Chancery
into the Temple of Honor, and from the Pinnacle of that lofty Structure, it
Surveys the whole Extent and Circumference of things; and will not fall down to
Worship a mean design, to Purchase all the Prospect that it Views.

But, my Lord, I grow troublesome with too much length; and therefore if what I
have said, may not be allowed to be Apology sufficient, for the hardiness of
this Address, I shall only beg, that what I cannot Justify, you would please
to Pardon; and with my Prayers to God for your Lordships Health and Happiness,
and increase of Honor. I am, may it it please your Lordship,

Your Lordships most Humble. Grateful, and Obedient Servant. John Turner.

The Collect for Palm Sunday.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, who of thy tender Love toward Mankind, have
sent thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, to take upon him our Flesh, and to
suffer Death upon the Cross, that all Mankind should follow the Example of his
great Humility; Mercifully grant that we may both follow the Example of his
Patience, and also be made partakers of his Resurrection, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Matthew. 5. 3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven.
IN this and the two following Chapters, which contain our Saviors admirable
Sermon upon the Mount, to his Disciples, there is drawn, as it were in little,
the lively Portraiture of a Christian Man in all his Conversation, so that if
we could once prevail upon our selves, frail and disobedient Creatures as we
are, to live up to the height and perfection of those Rules, which are here
prescribed and laid down, there could be nothing wanting to make us absolutely
and completely happy, both in Body and Soul. For if we Survey this whole
Discourse, tho but with a careless and superficial Eye, yet it will be easy to
perceive, at first sight, that it is exactly Calculated, for the happiness of
Mankind, to render us the most pleasant and contented within our selves, the
most secure from any fear and danger from without, and to procure us the mutual
Favor and Assistance of each other, in all our honest designs and undertakings.

To demonstrate this in all the several instances, so plainly, and so
particularly as it might, and as it ought to be done, the more effectually to
show the manifest usefulness and tendency of them all, to ennoble and improve
our Natures, and to make us as Wise, as Healthful, and as Happy, as we are
severally capable of being, is not the business of a single Sermon, but of a
large, Elaborate and Comprehensive Volume, wherein Religion and Philosophy may
have room enough to stretch themselves at length, and appear in their full
Magnitude and Just Proportion; therefore I shall content my self at present,
without launching out into so large a Field, where every new Fruit and Flower
will afford us a plentiful Entertainment by it self; to confine my self within
a much narrower compass, by devoting my whole Discourse to the consideration of
one Subject, and laying the single Charms of Humility before you: Humility,
that Virtue which we so much want, Humility the Queen of Heaven and Earth, the
fair and Majestic Sovereign of all Christian Graces, to which the first
Beatitude was deservedly vouchsafed, to which as being the Cornerstone of
Wisdom, the Bottom and Foundation of all other Virtuous and Goodly dispositions
of Mind, the promise of both Worlds is annex't as it is reward, Blessed are the
Poor in Spirit, says our Savior, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; and
then again, v. 5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth. That
is, Humility is such a disposition of Mind, as is naturally fitted to give us
the truest enjoyment of this Life, and to prepare us the most effectually for
that which is to come. It consists in having a sober and modest Opinion of our
selves, and in this it is opposed to that Arrogant and Swelling Humor which is
a manifest detraction from all those Virtues or Excellencies whatsoever they
be, which it pretends to vaunt it self upon. It is likewise accompanied with
such a kind and charitable Opinion of others, as has a natural tendency to
make all the World our Friends; and it has this peculiar Excellency in it,
that it throws a Veil which no Man will be forward or desirous to uncover, over
all the Frailties, Infirmities, or Imperfections of Men, and to all their
Accomplishments, Endowments, and Perfections, it gives an additional Brightness
and Luster, it makes them appear more Shining, and more Charming, more
Beautiful and Lovely, more Inviteing and Attracting, more worthy of Praise,
because they do not affect it, more apt to be discovered and laid open with
advantage to the public View, and to the light of the World, because they do
not offer and obtrude themselves upon it, with a prostitute Solicitation, but
with a Virgin Modesty and Shame, they strive to withdraw and to conceal
themselves; and thus it is true likewise in the course of Nature, as well as in
that of Providence, that God resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the
Humble, that is, that Pride is a natural Obstruction to it self, but Humility
has natural Charms to recommend it. It does, with respect to our selves, what
Love and Charity are said to do with reference to others, it covers a multitude
of Frailties and Offenses, and if there be any thing Excellent or Praiseworthy
in us, it sets it off with a new accession of Beauty and Advantage.

Humility is such a disposition of Mind, whose very Nature consists in a
certain pleasant Calmness and Serenity of Spirit, which is the best fitted to
enjoy it felf, without which no Moral Virtue or Christian Grace can have it is
perfect work in our Hearts, but it will be ruffled and discomposed by the
disorder of Passions, and the uneasy turbulence of immoderate desires. It is
the proper temper and constitution of a Wise Man, who being still and quiet,
and sedate within himself, is the better enabled to make a true judgment and a
right advantage of all other things and persons round about him. It is such a
Virtue, that as it is the best way to advance us, and to bring us to a
Flourishing and Prosperous condition, so it makes that Prosperity safe and
unenvied, it carries along with it the good Wishes and Prayers of all we
converse with, and all that have any knowledge of us, that it may continue; and
if any affliction or calamity happen to overtake us, it will be sure to supply
us with Pity and Relief from without, and within it will furnish us with
Patience and Submission to the Will of God, which are a comparative Remedy to
the worst of Evils. It is the most certain and unquestionable expedient of the
utmost happiness in this Life; and it is not only a condition of, but also a
necessary preparation to the Enjoyment and Glory of the other.

But on the contrary, if instead of this, instead of enjoying Meekness and
Poverty of Spirit, which is indeed the only true Greatness and Magnanimity of
it; our Savior had taught his Disciples after another manner, be ye Insolent
and Proud, be ye Haughty and Assuming, Arrogant and Overweening, Vaunters of
your selves, and Despisers of others; I need not say what Horrid, what Dismal,
what Deplorable Effects the universal practice of such a Doctrine as this would
have brought upon the World; it would have Unhinged the whole Frame and Order
of things, and turned the World again into a Chaos more confused than that out
of which by the kind and harmonious disposition of the Divine Nature it was at
first produced; and if to so Destructive so Baneful, so Pernicious a Temper, he
had annexed the same promise which he has done to Meekness, for they that are
thus affected shall Inherit the Earth, it would have been a plain sign, he did
not understand the natural consequence of his own Doctrine, which can have no
other possible issue or result where it is universally practiced, but only to
bring the World into confusion, to chafe it with perpetual Strife, Animosity
and Contention, to involve it in Blood, and Misery, and Slaughter, and to make
Mankind a mutual and an eternal Plague and Punishment to each other.

Or if he had made it a condition of obtaining an Inheritance in the World to
come, or had prescribed it, as a preparative to the enjoyment of it, we must
either have concluded him to have been the vilest of Impostors, instead of
being as he is, the Savior of the World, and the Redeemer of Mankind, from
Misery as well as Sin; or we must have looked upon God Almighty, whose
Messenger he was, under the notion of an angry and revengeful Being, that
delighted in nothing more, than in the Misery and Torment of his Creatures; for
Heaven at this rate would have been so far from being worth accepting, being an
Eternal State of mutual Pride, Animosity and Contention, that but to think of
coming thither, would be a degree of Damnation, even in this Life, and a
Torment too great for Humane Nature to bear.

But if we understand any thing of the condition of those Blessed Spirits, that
are made partakers of the Heavenly Kingdom, and of the Life and Glory that
shall be revealed, it is without all question, or else it cannot be an happy
State, a State of mutual Benevolence and Goodwill, it consists in an Eternal
Friendship, which cannot be supposed in so great equality of Happiness and
Glory, and in so great and universal longing after closer and more intimate
Communion with God, such breathing and contention after the enjoyment of him,
without a mutual yielding and condescension; it is founded in an humble and
modest Opinion of themselves, in a kind and charitable disposition toward
their Neighbors, the Partners and fellowpartakers of the same Light and
Immortality with themselves, in a perfect resignation to the Divine Will, and
in a magnificent Esteem and veneration of his Nature; and our Savior by making
such habits and dispositions of Mind, to be the indispensible conditions of
being his Disciples, by placing all the instances of Obedience in such things
as are so manifestly for the comfort and support of Humane Life; and are withal
so necessary and so natural a preparation to the Happiness of the future State,
has given as great, if not a much greater Testimony to the truth of his
Doctrine, the Divinity of his Person, and the unquestionable Authority of his
Mission from above, than any the greatest of his Miracles, without so useful
and so highly reasonable a Doctrine could have afforded.

I said just now that Humility was the very Cornerstone of Wisdom, the Bottom
and Foundation of all manner of Virtue; but upon second Thoughts I recall my
self, it is not so much the Foundation of Virtue as the Complexion of it, it
comprehends all Virtue and Wisdom within it self. For Virtue is nothing else
but practical Wisdom, and Humility is Patience, Humility is Temperance,
Humility is Justice, Humility is Chastity, Humility is Prudence, Humility is
Obedience, Humility is Charity, Humility is Brotherlykindness, putting on
several Appearances and Shapes that have a disagreeing likeness to each other,
like Brothers and Sisters, or the nearest Kindred of the same House and Line,
that have a resemblance and a difference at the same time.

-- Facies non omnibus una;
Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse Sororum.
For all these are founded where they are not practiced by instinct or by
habit, which two are but animal and brutish things, even in those Actions that
have a virtuous Appearance, I say, all these are founded, where ever they are
exercised upon inducements of Reason, which are the only things that constitute
the Essence of Virtue in any particular instance that can happen; they are
founded in a due sense of the infirmity of Human Nature; For all these are
necessary upon no other account, but either that single Persons cannot be
happy, or else that Society cannot subsist without them; the former of which is
manifestly the case of Chastity, Temperance and Patience, the latter more
remotely of Charity, Brotherly-kindness and Prudence, without which a Society
cannot so well subsist; more immediately of Obedience and Justice, without
which it cannot possibly subsist at all; so that all these Virtues have the
consideration of Human Frailty for their Object, and the redressing of it for
their end; and this is no other than what we call Humility, it is a wise and a
just Sense of the frailty and infirmity to which Human Nature is subject, so
that when we speak of Humility, we speak of every thing that is either truly
useful or truly ornamental; it is the Philosophical Elixir that converts every
thing it touches into Gold; it is the natural and the politic Archaeus that
makes and governs the Vital Spirits of Action, that sweetens and pacifies the
disagreeing Humors both of the natural and the civil Body; it is that Universal
Remedy of Human Life, to which, when we mean it of any thing but this, none but
very Empiricks and Mountebanks in Physic are so hardy to pretend; it is Milk
and Honey purchased by sound Wisdom and comprehensive Judgment without Money
and without Price, it is Health to the Navil and Marrow to the Bones, it is
Corn, Wine and Oil, with all their good effects of a strong Body, a shining
Countenance, and a joyful Heart. We have seen thy goings, O God, we have all
seen how thou our God and King go in the Sanctuary, the Singers go before,
the Ministrels follow after, in the midst are the Damsels playing with the
Timbrels: Humility leads up the Dance of Virtue, and Charity concludes it, and
in the midst are Peace and Mercy joining hands together, Righteousness,
Tempeperance, Obedience, Patience, Magnanimity and Prudence, Inviting, Kissing
and Embracing each other.

Humility, thou meek and lowly, and yet at once infinite and exalted Virtue!
thou comprehensive, incomprehensible thing! thou that conquerest by Patience
and subduest by Yielding! whereunto shall I liken thy divine Perfection? or
with what comparison shall I compare thee? Humility how lovely? how amiable art
thou? thou art fairer than the Children of Men, ruddy, fresh and beautiful as
the Morning Sky, All thy Garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia; Full of
Grace are thy Lips, because the Lord has blessed thee for ever.

The source of Humility is not so obscure as that of Nile is said to be, but
yet it is more impervious and inaccessible than the other, not but that it
discovers a great deal of it self, but that it hides much more, for the
Fountain of Humility is God himself.

It is a thing very agreeable to the Reason and restless Curiosity of Mankind,
what we find practiced, even by inquisitive Children, to be taking things in
pieces to see what they are made of, and finding it self surrounded by such a
Magnificent Scene, contrived after so useful and so excellent a manner, adorned
and variegated with such an infinity of beautiful and surprising Objects, to be
enquiring into the contexture of the Work it self, and into the maker of it,
and from it self to ascend higher in the Scale of Causes, to the Original and
Fountain of its Being, which is that which we use to call by the name of God,
in which as being the first, the most eminent and most transcendent Cause, it
discerns so much Excellence, so vast, unbounded and unlimited Perfection, that
though there be enough and to spare of other things, that may be sufficient to
abase and humble wise Men, as the narrowness of our knowledge when it is the
most improved, the dullness and inactivity of our Minds when they are the most
attentive and erect, the scantiness of our Memories when they are the most
comprehensive, the shortness of our Lives at the utmost extremity of that which
we call Old Age, the craziness of those Bodies which we carry about us when
they are at the strongest, the Diseases and casualties to which they are
exposed, the uncertainty of our Fortunes when they are at the highest, the
satiating nature and quality of our Enjoyments when they continue firm and
constant to us, as we before experiment would have wished and prayed they might
be, the fickleness of Friendship, the mutability of Interest, the decays of
Youth and Beauty, the dependency and obnoxiousness of all Earthly Things; yet
these are but small diminutions of our selves, they create but a low degree of
Humility and Abhorrence in us, in comparison of what unavoidably results from
the consideration of God and his infinite Perfection, his immense Power, his
incomprehensible Wisdom, his never failing Goodness, his impartial and
unbiased Justice, his manifest and yet mysterious Omnipresence; then we loath
and abhor our selves in Dust and Ashes, we are filled with a fastidious
Aversion and Dislike, we vanish away in Smoke, we shrink and shrivel into
nothing, we are not so much as a drop to the Atlantique, as an Atome to the
Body of the Sun, or to the whole circumference of liquid ether, in which he
performs his daily and yearly Motion; we are metamorphos'd out of Men to Worms,
and out of Worms we are transformed to Insects, and when we consider the
Heavens, the work of his Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which he has
ordained, it is natural for us to cry out with the Royal Poet, who in this was
not guilty of Poetique License, Lord, what is Man that thou art mindful of him,
or the Son of Man that thou have regard unto him?

We may consider this Universe under the notion of an inverted Pyramid, of
which the humble Man is the terminating Point and the divine Perfections, are
the inverted Basis, and the Lines that are drawn between these two from the
bottom to the top, grow still more wide and distant from each other, as they
ascend higher in their Progress to the top, so that the humble Man's
Contemplations begin at himself, and from himself they ascend upward thorough
all the several Orders of created Beings, till he comes to the great Source and
Original of all things, wherein all their several Beauties and Perfections are
transcendently contained, and still the higher he goes the more humble he is,
because he discerns the more, upon a just comparison, the littleness of
himself; but in the divine Nature he is swallowed up with astonishment and
wonder, there is so vast and infinite a Prospect before him; he is like a small
crany to a vast Circumference, though the one may be seen and observed through
the other, and he discovers the divine Attributes full of excellence and
brightness, and is ravished with the Sense and Contemplation of them, though he
cannot see God as he is in himself, in his true Latitude and just Extent, like
the Image of some large and spacious Object, contracted into Miniature, in
which all the Parts and Lineaments appear, but not in their natural and true
dimensions. And still the more he Contemplates, the Wiser he grows, and the
more he Despises himself in comparison of that Excellence he converses with,
the nigher he approaches in perfection to it.

But with the Proud Man it is clean otherwise; it is true, he begins with
himself as well as the other, but then he ends in himself too, his prospect is
not upwards toward Heaven, but downwards toward the Earth, and he sits at the
top of that short inverted Pyramid of which himself is the Basis, and the
broadest part, so that he converses with nothing but what is either less than
himself, or what he imagins to be so; for no Man certainly can be Proud of the
Comparison, when he thinks himself Conversant with a Nobler Object, so that it
is exactly true of the Proud, Haughty and Assuming Man, what David says in
general of the Wicked, that he has not God in all his thoughts, and that
though Pride and Ignorance be not convertible terms, for a Man may be Ignorant
that is not Proud, yet Pride is certainly nothing else but an effect of
Ignorance, of want of Consideration, want of Skill and Judgment in the true
Rate and Value of things.

Again, It is not only true that this admirable Grace and Virtue of Humility,
has its firmest Root, and it is most powerful Cause in the contemplation of the
Divine Nature, which is the most excellent Object we can converse with, but the
Psalmist tells us expressly, speaking of God himself, that he Humbles himself
to behold the things that are in Heaven and Earth. From the rising of the Sun,
says he, unto the going down of the same, the Lords Name is to be Praised, the
Lord is high above all Nations, and his Glory above the Heavens, who is like
unto the Lord our God, who dwells on High, and yet Humbles himself to behold
the things that are in Heaven and Earth? Not that God who is the First mover
and the only Supreme and Self-existent Nature, can in propriety be said to be
an Humble or an Abject being, but that he is invested in a most eminent manner,
with all those gentle inclinations to Pity and Compassion, which are the
Natural consequents of Humility among Men, he is kind and gracious, slow to
anger and easy to be entreated, and his Mercy is over all his works, his Power
is allayed and tempered by his Goodness, and his Justice is blended by his
Mercy, and his great Mind is thoughtful with the Cares of the Universe, which
is his perpetual Charge, and a Charge which cannot be managed by an Affected
and Proud, which is a disturbance to it self, and would hinder the due
administration of so vast a Government, but by a Sedate, Quiet and Serene Mind,
which is not more requisite to the Government of the World, than to the
happyness of the Governor himself, who in order to his being infinitely
perfect, as he certainly is, as being the cause of all things, and containing
all Created Perfection within himself, must in the First place be supposed to
be necessarily Existent, for Existence is the root of all other Perfections,
and in the next, to be infinitely Happy and perfectly at Ease, for where there
is no Happyness, there is no Enjoyment, and where there is perfect Happyness,
there must be perfect Peace; and if God were not the most perfectly Happy, he
must be the most Miserable and Unhappy Being, because it is true of him, what
the inspired writer to the Hebrews tells us of Melchizedek, that he is, without
Father, without Mother, without Descent or Genealogy, he has neither Beginning
of Days, nor End of Life, but must pass for ever Miserable thorough a lingering
Eternity, and can do all things but die.

But besides this, there are four things that discover the Nature of God in
this sense to be Humble, that it is an Equal, an Impassible thing, and that it
is never disturbed out of it is true Poise and Balance by any event whatsoever.

First, There is the Universe which is not only so regularly Governed, as I
have said before, but so exactly, so admirably contrived, which speaks not only
a very wise and knowing, but a very cool, considerate and quiet Artist.

Secondly, All Pride and Arrogance proceeding out of Ignorance, this cannot be
competible to that perfect Nature which is acknowledged to be infinitely Wise.

Thirdly, If we examine the state of things among Men, they are comparisons upon
the Level that usually make us Proud, for the consideration of things that are
above us is naturally fitted to debase and humble our Minds, and when we
reflect either upon Beasts or Flies, upon Creatures of no understanding, or
Creatures of no moment, we disdain to come into the comparison with them,
neither do we look upon it as any commendation, it makes no manner of change or
alteration in our Visage, or deportment, to be thought by others, or to think
our selves more excellent and valuable than such things as these. But it is
then we begin to think more highly of our selves than we ought to think when we
compare our selves with one another, wherefore God being placed at such an
infinite distance above the Highest and Noblest of his Creatures, and there
being nothing in them which is not in himself, the ^manations of whose Power
and Goodness they are, he cannot certainly be capable of such a passion as
this, upon any account of equality or Emulation, neither can he value himself
upon a Comparison, though with the first born of all the Angels of Light.

Fourthly, Novelty and Vnaccustomedness is another cause of Pride, Men are
commonly Proud of things they are not used to, but they that are born to great
things, or have been long accustomed to them, Greatness sits lightly and easily
upon them, and they have an Air of Complaisance and Humility, in the midst of
that Fortune which an upstart cannot bear without contemning and trampling upon
others, and what becomes easy by Custom in the Gifts of Fortune, does so by
Consideration in those of the Mind, they are not accompanied in considering Men
with a bloty and a puffy* Humor, but with Humility and Affability they
recommend themselves, and shun the two equally dangerous and pernicious Rocks
of Hatred and of Envy; and therefore in God who was infinitely Perfect and
Happy in himself from all Eternity, his Perfection was always so easy and
familiar to him, that as he cannot think too well of himself, so he does it not
with any contempt of his Creatures that are infinitely below him, but only with
a just, wise, and considerate approbation of his own Adorable and Immortal
Being. So that here is another excellence of Humility* that it has not only
its root and spring in God, but that it is also in some sort a breathing after
his Likeness, an imitation of his Perfections, and a participation of his
Nature, which may be the reason why the influences of Divine Grace, do so
willingly descend upon the Humble Man, because there is a congruity between
them, they have a resemblance and likeness to one another, and God delights to
dwell in such a Mind, as is so true an Image of himself, and represents the
candor, equability and constancy, of his unshaken, peaceable and quiet Essence,
and this makes it true in a Spiritual, as well as in a Natural sense, that God
resists the Proud, but gives grace to the Humble: Neither is it any wonder
to find in the Sermon on the Mount, that the Kingdom of Heaven is promised to
the Poor in Spirit, when it appears to be so Godlike, and so Heavenly a
disposition, for that which we call Humility in Men, is almost the same
constitution of Mind, to which the happyness of the Divinity it self is owing,
that is, the Equability, Ingenuity, and Quietness of his Nature.

The Power and Justice of God are only terrible and frightful to consider; we
shrink and tremble at them with horror and amazement, for fear of Thunderbolts,
and Hurricanes, and Earthquakes, for fear the Sea should break it is wonted
Banks, and Heaven descend in Hailstones and Coals of Fire; for fear of Plagues
and Famins, and other Epidemical Evils, knowing, as we do, how much he can
inflict, and being sensible how much we have deserved; but it is his Goodness
only that excites our Love, that enflames and stimulates our Zeal, that
harmonizes and sweetens our Devotion, that takes our Harps design from off the
Willowes in the midst of all these Melancholy thoughts, and makes them join
in consort with Anthems of Praise. And what is true of God the Governor of all
things, is true in its proportion of Kings too, and their Subordinate
Magistrates and Ministers; their Power when it is not tempered with Sweeness
and Benignity, may indeed extort and force Obedience from us, but it creates
Hatred and Aversion at the same time; but when we discover a stroke of
Goodness, a Pity in the midst of Punishment, a sense and sympathy of Humane
Frailty, in the midst of the Severities they inflict upon us, we do not say
then as Jacob did to Simeon and Levi, Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce;
and their Wrath, for it was cruel, but we Kiss and Embrace the kind and
unwilling Rod, and praise it at the same instant, when we are smarting under
it: And as this blessed, this even temper of Mind recommends even God himself,
and his Vicegerents to their Subjects, so it recommends their Subjects back
again to them, and returns with new Charters, new Privileges, new and encreast
influences of Divine Favor, and of Royal Goodness. Therefore let us Pray for
Humility, that Humility may Pray and Intercede for us, both with our God, and
with our King.

There is nothing more certain in experience, than that if two Men be equally
Rich, equally Noble, and in equal Place and Dignity in the State, and if the
temper of the one be Humble, Affable and Kind, that of the other Severe,
Morose, Implacable, Proud and Haughty, that the one of these shall be
Reverenced and Esteemed, the other Despised by some, and Hated by all; and
since Riches are of no other use, after the necessities of Nature are supplied,
than to procure us Power, Interest and Esteem among Men, it is manifest in this
case, though in an equality of Substance, of Land and Money, of Goods and
Chattels, of Birth and Fortune, that still, he that has the greater Authority,
is in truth and reality the Richer Man, so that this Humility, this Poverty of
Spirit, is when all is done, the truest, and the most valuable Riches.

And as in the case of Riches, so also in that of Learning or Knowledge; if we
suppose two Men equally learned, equally knowing, with this diversity of temper
between them, the consequence of this will be, in a mutual excellence on both
sides, that the one shall be admired and praised, respected and loved,
followed, and pointed at, and crowded after, but the other scarce ever taken
notice of, or regarded, to his infinite trouble and vexation; for this is the
fate of Insolence and Pride, that it is sure to be affronted and contemned, and
yet there is nothing that is so uneasy under it, or that bears it with
greatter Impatience and Resentment. Though after all, since the use of Learning
is twofold, First, To instruct and ennoble a Man's self, and Secondly, To make
him capable of instructing others, and of being a public Blessing where he
lives: The Second of these Uses, which is certainly the best and noblest, is
lost in the Arrogant and Assuming Man, for Men had rather be Ignorant, than be
Magisterially taught, or be imposed upon even by Truth it self, commanding a
Reverence, not for it is own sake, by gentle and insinuating persuasion, but
upon account of the Brows and Forehead of its Teacher; so that after all, if we
respect the true use of Learning, though there be an equal extent of knowledge
on both sides, yet the Humble only is the truly, the usefully, the
beneficially knowing Man.

But I speak this only upon supposition, that there can be such a thing as a
very Proud and a very knowing person, at the same time, a thing which I can
very hardly induce my self to believe; for Humility is a temper that naturally
leads to Knowledge by consideration, and Coolness, by industry and patience by
not only enduring, but loving, with reason, to be opposed and contradicted, by
correcting its mistakes and errors every Day, as Astrologers do their
Nativities, by new thoughts, new occurences, and new events. Humility
insinuates it self by slow and gentle, but sure and steady Progressions, into
the deepest Mysteries of Art and Nature; Humility climbes up to Heaven, and
brings Heaven down by Telescopes to it self, and makes the Stars fall down
before it, like the Angels of God, ascending and descending upon Jacobs Ladder,
and that not in a Vision as it was with him, but in some sort of reality and
truth. But Pride is impatient, and makes too great have to be Wise, it takes up
prejudices and will not forsake them, it disdains to be mistaken, and therefore
will not relinquish its Errors, it is impatient of contradiction, and therefore
cannot be instructed; it Vaunts and Magnifies it self as having run through the
whole course of Truth, when it has scarce performed the nearest Stage of that
long, wearisome and laborious Journey, and that too with a very precipitant and
hasty motion, for the Proverb holds good in enquiries after Truth, that the
farthest way about is the nearest way home, and that a cool, humble,
considerate, sober pace, will with the greatest speed, and with the most
certain and assured safety, conduct the Traveller to his Journies end.

Of the truth of this, we have had a notorious instance in experience in this
last Age of ours; in the late Famous and Ingenious Author of the Leviathan, I
mean, who as appears by some of his Performances, was a Person qualified by
Nature for extraordinary things, had they not been unhappily prevented by the
Pride and Haughtiness of his temper, he was got, it should seem, into the
Dogmatical Humor, and was impatient of Contradiction from others, though full
of the Spirit of Contradiction himself, ^e was resolved to be the Founder of a
new Sect that should be called after his Name, as there are but too many of his
Disciples to be met with, and he would needs be the Author and Inventer of new
Notions and of new Hypotheses, whither the Nature of things would bear them or
no; and from hence it came to pass, that he became so blind, that he could not
see the Sun at Noonday; he could not discover, the existence of a God, neither
did he take the consideration of him into the System of his Politics, by which
the main Pillar of Obligation was destroyed; he was used to say, that the Laws
of every Nation, were the only Law and Gospel when all was done, and yet by his
Principles he could at any time dispense not only with Positive Laws, but with
the Natural too, which are of Moral, Unalterable and Eternal Force; so that
according to him, there is no standing Nature of things, no principle of
Conscience, or of Obligation; and what a vast absurdity in Politics this
Doctrine is, what Misery and Confusion it would introduce among Men, wherever
it is heartily Believed and Practiced; a blinder Man then Mr. Hobs himself,
though ^e was blind enough, may easily discern: In his Natural Philosophy he
has been Unanswerably confuted and exposed by several learned Men, and in his
Mathematics too, so effectually taken to task, that it has been demonstrated
plainly, that he never was more mistaken, than when he himself pretended to
Demonstration; and when he wrote his Book Contra Fastum Geometrarum, against
the Pride and Loftyness of the Mathematicians, he discovered his own Pride and
Ignorance together; so necessary is Humility to Knowledge, so dangerous, nay so
destructive to their design is it, for Men that would be Learned, to be Proud.

And if we Translate Humility from Arts and Sciences to matters of Religion;
Humility though it do not Anathematize and Thunder, is almost every whit as
able to determine Controversies, as a General Council, and is as well qualified
to preside in the Divinity Chair, as any University Dictator of them all;
Humility is a sharp, inquisitive and discerning Virtue, and such as persuades
the belief of what she teaches, by very strong Arguments, but by stronger
temper; and Men are willing to give Ear to what she says, because they see
plainly she has no design upon them, but only for their good; they know her to
be a very shrewd and learned Virtue, that she has used great industry in her
inquiries after Truth, and that she speaks her Mind with all imaginable
frankness and sincerity, and with a desire to scatter Knowledge and Happyness
together, which things of themselves without much use of Argument, are a very
fair step to Conviction.

But if she cannot bring all Men to be of a mind, or if her own Subjects, the
Vassals and liege People of the humble Kingdom, which is I am afraid no larger
than the Territory of some Indian Princes; if these themselves cannot all be
united into one common Faith, yet Humility considers Wisely, that all Men have
not, neither indeed can have, the same Capacity, the same Strength and Vivacity
of Wit and Judgment, the same Opportunities, the same Education, the same
Apprehensions, and the same notions of things, and therefore admits a
difference without a disagreement. And this I am sure of, it would be a blessed
change, if Humility could take the place, and do the Office of Ecclesiastical
censures, so as to make them useless and needless for the future, and so put an
end to those severities of Law, which, as all other punishments in other
matters, can be justified by nothing, but only that they are necessary, because
mad men run Opinion into Faction, and Faction into Riot and Rebellion. And I
dread to think how thin and depopulate the Kingdom of Heaven will be, and the
Jerusalem which is above, a City almost without Inhabitants, and a Kingdom
without Subjects, notwithstanding all our pretenses to Salvation, and our
annexing it to this or that Communion, if none but the Poor in Spirit shall
obtain it, if none but the Humble and the Charitable Man shall be Saved.

Humility would not only prove a blessed Instrument of Ecclesiastical peace,
but also of Civil too, if it could but gain Credit and Reputation among us; for
Humility never complains before it is hurt, nay, Humility for the sake, and for
the good of her Country, rather than make a broil and a disturbance in it, can
suffer her self to be hurt without complaining; she neither thinks, nor does,
nor apprehends any ill; she is a Friend to all, and therefore thinks all to be
a Friend to her; she sees no Fantastic and visionary Dangers, she is troubled
with no imaginary Jealousies and Fears, she cannot discern Apparitions in the
Air, nor Monsters in the Earth, nor Whales portending calamities in the Water,
but she puts her first Trust in God, and her next in the King, and she believes
that all things will work together for good to them that walk like her, and do
their duty. She neither pries into the Cabinets of Princes, nor censures the
transactions of State, nor raises false Reports to create an ill Opinion of her
Governors, in the People, neither does she foment or encourage them when they
are raised.

Humility resolves, let what will come to pass, to be quiet and submit, because
she considers that the Hand of the King, is as the Finger of God, who does
whatsoever pleases him both in Heaven and Earth, by whom Kings Reign and
Princes decree Justice. Humility is a peaceable and resigning Virtue, and
wherever she has a Temple in any English Breast, there the King has a
Faithful and Obedient Subject.

But that which makes most of all for the commendation of Humility is, that our
blessed Savaiour who was God incarnate, and who suffered so many indignities
and reproaches from the worst of Men, who humbled himself even to the Death,
the ignominious and painful Death of the Cross, for our sakes, has given us so
great a pattern and example of it, learn of me, says he, for I am meek and
lowly in Heart, and ye shall find rest unto your Souls. And on this very day
when he entered into Jerusalem, with Acclamations and Hosanna's; though the
People mistook him for a Triumphant Prince, and thought their Victorious
Messiah was a coming, yet it was indeed no more then the Triumph of Humility,
over the Scorn and Malice of his Enemies, it was but a Prologue to his
approaching Crucifixion, which was in truth his last and greatest Conquest,
wherein he Triumphed over Death and Hell; and so the Prophet Zachary, and out of
him the Evangelist St. Matthew has described the matter, Rejoice greatly, O
Daughter of Zion; shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King comes unto
thee: he is just, and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon
a Colt, the foal of an Ass; and if so great an Example as this, the Example of
God putting on human Shape, almost on purpose, that he might set a pattern of
Obedience and Humility to us, will not encourage and recommend the Practice of
it, I know not what will, for I have nothing else to say, but that Humility is
Humility, that is, that a Virtue so transcendently excellent and great, can be
compared to nothing but it self.

FINIS.
ERATA.
Page 23. line 2. for design read down.


