THE SPEECHES OF Sir EDWARD TVRNER Knight, BEFORE KING, LORDS and COMMONS ASSEMBLED
IN PARLIAMENT, when he was presented SPEAKER of the Honorable

House of Commons, On Friday the Tenth of May, 1661. TOGETHER With the LORD
CHANCELLORS Speeches in Answer thereunto.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT English royal blazon,surmounted by
a crown and flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn

LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty. 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

The First Speech of Sir Edward Turner Knight before King, Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, when he was presented Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons, on Friday the Tenth of May, 1661.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of PARLIAMENT being
there assembled by virtue of Your Majesty's most gracious Writ, have been
pleased (I dare not say to choose, but) to name me their Speaker.

It is an undoubted privilege of every Member in that House, to be heard
speak, much more when he speaks for, or against himself. But Sir, whether more
out of favor to me, or injury to themselves, I cannot tell, they were not
pleased to hear, at least they would not accept my just Apology and Excuse from
this Service.

Therefore from this their Judgment, if I must call it so, I do most humbly
appeal to Your Sovereign Justice, beseeching Your Majesty for the Errors that
are too visible and apparent in their Proceedings, that You will review and
reverse the same.

My Inexperience in the Customs and Orders of the House, my Inability to
collect their Sense, and state the Questions rising upon long and arduous
Debates, do justly render me unfit; and therefore unworthy of this weighty
employment.

Your Majesty well knows, when a Ship puts forth to Sea, she should be provided
with Mariners of all sorts: In case a Storm does arise, some must trim and lore
the Sails, some must watch aloft the Decks, some must work at the Pump; but he
had need be a very good Seaman that is the Pilot. Sir, I hope I may be useful
to this Your Sovereign Vessel in some of these inferior places, but I dare not
undertake to be their Steersman.

I do most humbly therefore beseech Your Majesty, that You will not take us at
our first word; our second thoughts are best: Pray therefore be pleased to
command the Members of the House of Commons to return into their House, to
recollect themselves, and to present Your Majesty with a better choice.

The Lord Chancellor's Speech in Answer to Mr. Speaker's first Speech.
Mr. SPEAKER,
YOu have not discredited your self enough to persuade the King to dissent from
His House of Commons in the Election they have made, if He had never seen you
before: You have now spoke too well against your self, for His Majesty to
suspect you are no good Speaker. But you have the honor to be well known to the
King, have spoken very often before Him; and His Majesty well knows that you
are not without any of those Parts, of knowing the Orders of the House, where
you have sat long, or collecting, and stating, and putting the Questions
aptly, which must constitute a right good Speaker.

Therefore His Majesty is so far from thinking the House has made an ill
choice, that He believes they could not have made a better; or from admiting
your excuse, that He confirms their Election, and Thanks them very heartily for
making it; and requires you to submit to it, and to betake your self with all
alacrity to the Service.

The Speakers second Speech, after the Lord Chancellor had declarged the KING'S
Approbation of the Choice of the House of Commons.
HE that knows his Masters will, and does it not, is worthy to be beaten with
many stripes. I shall therefore humbly and cheerfully, to the best of my poor
skill and knowledge, apply my self to the performance of my Duty; not doubting
therein to obtain Your Majesty's Gracious Pardon for all involuntary
Transgressions; for it is a Rule in Law, and in Conscience too, Actus non facit
reum, nisi men's sit rea.

And since I have found this Favor in the sight of my Lord the King, pray let
me beg Your Majesty's patience for a while, to make a stand, and from this
place to look about me: Sir, a weak head is soon giddy; but the strongest brain
may here be turned; the Presence of this Glory, and the Glory of this Presence,
do transport me: Whilst I contemplate the incomparable beauty of this Body
Politic, and the goodly order of this High Court of Parliament, where at once
I behold all the glory of this Nation, I am almost in the condition of St.
Paul, when he was taken up into the third Heavens; all he could say upon his
return, was, He saw things unutter able.

God, that made all things for the use of Man, and made him Governor over all
his Works, thought it not fit to leave him to himself, nor to live without a
Law and Government. The Forms and Species of Governments are various,
Monarchical, Aristocratical, and Democratical; but the first is certainly the
best, as being nearest to Divinity it self. Aristocracy is subject to
degenerate and run into Faction; but Democracy naturally runs into Confusion:
Then every man becomes a Tyrant over his Neighbor; Homo Homini Lupus: Homo
Homini Demon.

This famous Island, Historians tell us, was first Inhabited by the Britains,
then by the Romans, then by the Saxons, then by the Danes, then by the Normans;
and during all these successions of Ages, and variety of Changes, though there
was sometimes Divisum Imperium, yet every Division was happy under a
Monarchical Government.

Since the Entrance of the Norman Race, Five and twenty Kings and Queens famous
in their Generations, from whom Your Sacred Majesty is lineally descended, have
swayed the Royal Scepter of this Nation.

The Children of Israel, when they were in the Wilderness, though they were fed
with Gods own hand, and ate the food of Angels, yet they surfeited, and
murmured, and rebelled against Moses.

The same unthankful spirit dwelt in this Nation for diverse years last past;
the men of that Age were weary of the Government, though it was refined to the
wonder and envy of all other Nations: They quarrelled with our Moses, because
he was the Lords Anointed; Nolumus hunc regnare, was their first quarrel; but
levelling Parity and Confusion followed; then Tyranny and Usurpation was the
Conclusion.

We read of the Emperor Adrian, when he lay a dying, he complained that many
Physicians had destroyed him; meaning, that their contrary Conceits and
different Directions for his Recovery, had hastened his Death.

So it was with us; we were sick of Reformation; our Reformers were of all
Ages, Sexes, and Degrees, of all Professions and Trades: The very Cobbler went
beyond his Last; these new Statesmen took upon them to Regulate and Govern our
Governors: this was the Sickness and Plague of the Nation; their new Laws were
all written in Bloody Letters; the cruelty of their Tribunals made the Judgment
Seat little differ from a Slaughterhouse; the Richman was made an Offender for
a word; Poor men were sold for Slaves, as the Turks sell Heads, twenty for an
Asper: Yet for all this Villainy; there was at length found a Protector.

No amendment at length would serve these Reformers turns; no Concessions,
though the most Gracious that could be imagined, would satisfy these Usurpers;
but Root and Branch, all must go: Our late Sovereign Lord, of blessed memory,
must be offered up a Sacrifice to their Lusts: Your Sacred Person (Great Sir)
proscribed, and all the Royal Family exiled: Monarchy it self was voted
burdensome; and therefore they must try a Commonwealth, and the better to
digest it, the People were intoxicated with a belief, that they should all like
themselves be Princes in their turns.

Amongst the Persians, after the death of their Governor, there was used to be
(...), a five days Lawlesness, in which time every man might do what he listed.
During those five days, there was such Killing and Robbing, and destroying one
another, that before they were ended, the People longed again for their old
Government.

After the death of Your Majesty's most Royal Father, here was the like
Licentiousness; but alas, it continued more then twice five years: Liberty they
called it, but it was Libertas quidlibet audendi. Your Loyal Subjects were a
Prey to Wolves and Tigers, and to the most cruel of all Beasts, unreasonable
men: Every man did what seemed good in his own eyes, for in those days there
was no King in our Israel.

But as the former Spirit of Reformation at first brought us into this misery;
so the Spirit of Giddiness which God sent amongst our Reformers, at length
cured us. The Brazen Serpent was the best cure for those that were bitten by
the Fiery Serpent. The Divisions and Subdivisions of those that exercised
dominion over us, weakened their own power, and stirred up the hearts, and
strengthened the hands of Your Loyal Subjects, to restore our ancient
Government, and to bring Your Sacred Majesty back to Your Royal Throne in
Peace, as to the joy of all our hearts, we see it is this day.

This was the work of God alone, and it is admirable in our eyes. And as we
have cause at all times to bless God that he has thus brought Your Majesty to
Your People; so we have just cause at this time to return our hearty thanks
unto Your Majesty, that You have thus brought Your People to Your Self.

The Sun exhales the vapors from the Earth, and then sends them down again in
showers of plenty; so we to our great joy, do find that our obedience and
affection to Your Majesty are returned upon our heads in plenty, peace, and
protection.

The last meeting here in Parliament was happy in healing the bleeding wounds
of this Nation; they were blessed also, even for their works sake, Your Sacred
Majesty did bless them, and therefore they shall be blessed to all posterity.

But Sir, we hope You have a blessing left for us too: That was Your Parliament
by Adoption, but this is Yours by Birthright; this Parliament is Freeborn: I
hope this honor will beget in us an Emulation to exceed the Actions of our
Predecessors, and not only to meet Your Majesty as our Sovereign, with the
duty of Subjects, but with the love of Sons to a most indulgent Father.

Next to the glory of Your Majesty's Royal Throne, I cannot but observe the
brightness of this -- second Orb, this Firmament is richly decked with Stars of
several magnitudes, each Star appears like the Morning Star, and yet each Star
differs from another in glory.

You cannot want Commanders, either by Sea or Land, to manage Your Designs,
whilst all these Sons of Mars stand candidate to serve You in the Wars.

You cannot want Counselors to advise you in the great Affairs of the Nation,
whilst all these Senators, each fit to be a Consul, contend who shall most
ease you in the Thorny Cares of the Government.

Amidst these Noble English Barons, and at Your Majesty's Feet, are placed the
Reverend Judges of the Land, the Sages of the Law, Men so learned and expert in
the Customs, and Statutes of this Land, that if Wat Tyler, or Jack Cade, or the
new Phanaticks of this latter Age had burned our Books, they were able to
restore our Laws in Purity and Perfection.

And next to these, though in a lower Orb, appear the worthy Knights, the
prudent Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, being the Third Estate
of Parliament.

When the fame of Solomon's Wisdom had filled the Neighbor Nations, the Queen of
Sheba could not contain her self at home, but with many Camels laded with
Spices, with Gold and precious Stones in abundance, she comes to Solomon to
commune with him of all that was in her heart. Great Sir, whilst this Your
Native Country was unworthy of You, Foreign Nations were made happy in the
knowledge of Your Person, Your Piety and Your Wisdom: And now the Lord our God
has brought You home, and set You in Your Throne, Your Subjects long to see
You.

What striving and rejoicing was there at your first landing, to see our Rising
Sun?

What striving was there at Your Coronation to see the Imperial Crown set upon
Your Royal Head?

What striving has there lately been, in all the Counties, Cities and
Borroughs of this Nation, who should be sent up to hear Your Wisdom, and confer
with You in Parliament?

Royal Sir, these chosen worthy Messengers are not come empty-handed, they are
laden; they are sent up to You, heavy laden, from their several Counties,
Cities and Borroughs.

If the Affections of all Englishmen can make You happy; if the Riches of this
Nation can make You great; if the Strength of this Warlike People can make You
considerable at home and abroad; Be assured You are the greatest Monarch in the
World. Give me leave I beseech You, to double my words, and say it again; I
wish my voice could reach to Spain, and to the Indies too, You are the greatest
Monarch in the World.

I fear Your Royal Patience may be tired, I will therefore no more speak my own
words, but in the name of the Commons of England, humbly present unto Your
Majesty their accustomed Petitions, when first they are assembled in
Parliament, and so conclude.

1. First I do beseech Your Majesty, that for our better attendance on the
important Service of the House, our selves, and our necessary servants may be
free in our persons and estates, from all Arrests and Troubles.

2. That Debates and Disputes being necessary to the Disquisition of many
Matters in the House, Your Majesty will be pleased to vouchsafe us Liberty and
Freedom of Speech; which I doubt not, we shall use with Loyalty and Sobriety.

3. That if the great Affairs require it, Your Majesty upon our humble suit,
will vouchsafe us access to Your Royal Person.

4. That the Proceedings of the House may receive a benign Interpretation, and
be free at all times from Misconstructions.

The Lord Chancellor's last Speech in Answer to the Speakers second Speech.
Mr. SPEAKER,
THe King is well pleased with your Obedience, and that you have so cheerfully
submitted to undergo that Province the House of Commons has designed you to:
He promises Himself, and the Kingdom, as great Fruit and benefit from your
Joynt-services, as ever any of His Progenitors received from a Speaker, and a
House of Commons. The King did His part, by publishing the very day He intended
the Parliament should meet, a good time before the Writs were sealed, by
sending out the Writs much longer then was necessary before the day of Meeting,
that the Country might not be surprised in their Elections, but that they might
send up such a Representative unto Him, as He might make a clear view and
prospect of the Affections and Desires of His People: And He is persuaded, that
the Commons of England were never more exactly represented, then they are at
present in you, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses; and yet I have a very
particular command from His Majesty to tell you, which in truth He meant to
have said to you Himself the other day; and which He hopes you will not take
ill in point of Privilege, that His Majesty takes notice, indeed He cannot
choose but take notice of one ill circumstance in many Elections, which He
imputes rather to the Vice of the Times, a Vice worthy your Severity, then to
any corrupt Intention, that is, Excess of Drinking, which produces that other
scandalous excess in the expense: His Majesty does very heartily recommend it
to your Wisdom, for the Honor and Dignity of Parliaments, that you will take
some course to prevent this Inconvenience for the future; and if you think fit
to call for any help from Him toward it, you will be sure to have it.

You have made Mr. Speaker a very lively description of the extravagancy of
that Confusion which this poor Nation groaned under, when they would throw off
a Government they had lived and prospered under so many Ages, indeed from the
time of being a Nation, and which is as natural to them as their Food or their
Raiment, to model a new one for themselves, which they knew no more how to do,
then the naked Indians know how to dress themselves in the French fashion; when
(as you say) all Ages, Sexes, and Degrees, all Professions and Trades would
become Reformers; when the Common People of England, would represent the
Commons of England, and abject men who could neither write nor read, would make
Laws for the Government of the Heroic and the most Learned Nation in the
World: For sure none of our Neighbors will deny it to have a full excellency
and perfection, both in Arms and Latters; and it was the grossest and most
ridiculous Pageant that great Imposture ever exposed to public view, when he
gave up the Nation to be disposed of by a handful of poor Mechanic persons,
who finding they knew not what to do with it, would (he was sure) give it back
to him again, as they shortly did, which makes his Title complete to the
Government he meant to exercise. No man undervalues the Common People of
England, who are in truth the best and the honestest, I and the wisest Common
People in the World, when he says they are not fit to model the Government
they are to live under, or to make the Laws they are to obey. Solomon tells us,
There is a time when one man rules over another to his own hurt; we have had
abundant instances of such a time. It is the Privilege, if you please the
Prerogative (and it is a great one) of the Common People of England to be
represented by the Greatest, and Learnedest, and Wealthiest, and Wisest Persons
that can be chose out of the Nation; and the confounding the Commons of
England, which is that noble Representative, with the Common People of England,
was the first Ingredient into that accursed dose, which intoxicated the brains
of Men with that imagination of a Commonwealth, a Commonwealth Mr. Speaker, a
Government as impossible for the spirit and temper, and genius of the English
Nation to submit to, as it is to persuade them to give their Cattle and their
Corn to other men, and to live themselves upon Herbs and Roots. I wish
heartily, that they who have been most delighted with that imagination, knew in
truth the great benefit under that Government. There is not a Commonwealth in
Europe, where every man that is worth One thousand pounds, does not pay more to
the Government, then a man of a thousand pounds a year did ever to the Crown
here before those Troubles. And I am persuaded that Monster-Commonwealth cost
this Nation more in the few years she was begot, born, and brought up, and in
her funeral (which was the best expense of all) then the Monarchy has done
these Six hundred years.

You have done well Mr. Speaker, in taking notice of the great esteem the King
has of the memory of the last Parliament; He takes all occasions Himself to do
it, and it deserved it at His hands. But as the wisest Father takes joy in the
hopes his Heir will be wiser then he, and the greatest Monarch in the hopes
that His Successor will be greater then He: And if the Souls departed feel any
joy upon what is done in this World, it is in the case of such an Heir, such a
Successor; so you may be confident the Ghost of the deceased Parliament will be
much delighted, much exalted to see your Actions excel theirs, and your Fame
exceed theirs. It was a blessed Parliament, but there are other and greater
Blessings reserved for you: They began many things, which you may have the
happiness to finish; they had not time nor opportunity to begin many things
which you may have the honor to begin and finish: They invited His Majesty
home, restored Him to His Throne, and Monarchy to the Nation. It will be your
glory so to establish Him in His Power and Greatness; so to annex Monarcy to
the Nation, that He nor His Posterity shall be ever again forced to be abroad,
that they be mvited home, nor in danger to be restored: So to Rivet Monarchy to
the hearts, and to the understandings of all men, that no man may ever presume
to conspire against it. Let it not suffice that we have our King again, and our
Laws again, and Parliaments again; but let us so provide, that neither King,
nor Laws, nor Parliaments, may be so used again. Let not our Monarchy be
undermined by a Fifth Monarchy, nor men suffered to have the Protection of a
Government they profess to hate; root out all Ante-Monarchical Principles, at
least, let not the same stratagems prevail against us: Let us remember how we
were deceived, and let not the same Artifices overreach us again: Let King,
and Church, and Country, receive more and greater advantages, by the Wisdom and
Industry of this Parliament: Let Trade abroad and at home, be encouraged and
enlarged, all Vices and Excesses be restrained and abolished, by new Laws and
Provisions: Let prositable Arts and Industry find so great encouragement, that
all thriving Inventions may be brought from all parts of the World to enrich
this Kingdom, and that the Inventors may grow rich in this Kingdom. And upon
this Argument of encouraging Industry, I have a command from the King to
recommend to you, the encouragement or preservation of a great work of
Industry, in which the honor and interst of the Nation is more concerned, then
in any work this Age has brought out, it may be in any Nation; and that is,
All the Drainings in England which have given us new Countries upon our own
Continent, and brought an inestimable benefit to King and People by an art of
Creation, making Earth, and mending Air by Wit and Industry: Let no waywardness
in particular persons, or consideration of private and particular advantage,
give disturbance to Works of so public a nature, muchless destroy such works,
but provide out of hand for the upholding and supporting them by some good Law;
in which, due care may be taken for all particular interests, when the public
is out of danger.

I have but one desire more, Mr. Speaker, to make to you from the King, which
the season of the year, as well as your Inclinations to gratify Him, will
dispose you to; and that is, that you will use such expedition in your Councels
of most importance, that the rest may be left to a Recess in the Winter after
an Adjournment, that His Majesty may have a time to bestow Himself upon His
Subjects in a Progress, which He would be glad to begin before the end of July.
I have leave to tell you the Progress He intends; that He desires again to see
His good City of Worcester, and to thank God for His deliverance there, and to
thank God even in those Cottages, and Barns, and Haylofts, in which He was
sheltered, and feasted, and preserved; and in the close of that Progress He
hopes He shall find His Queen in His Arms, and so return to meet you here in
the beginning of Winter.

Mr. Speaker, all your Petitions are very grateful to the King; you and your
Servants in your Persons, and Estates, are free from all Arrests or
Molestations; your liberty and freedom of Speech is very willingly granted to
you; when you would repair to His Majesty, you shall be welcome; and His
Majesty will be so far from jealousy of your Actions, that He believes it is
impossible for Him to be jealous of you, or you of Him; and if you please, He
will make it penal to nourish that unwholesome Weed in any part of the Kingdom.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by John Bill, and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty. 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


