A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE MESSIAH, In Three CHAPTERS.

The First concerning the Preparatories to his Appearance in the Types and
Prophesies of the OLD TESTAMENT.

The Second demonstrating that it was Typically or Prophetically necessary,
that he should be born of a VIRGIN.

The Third, that he is GOD as well as MAN.

To which is prefixed a large Preface, asserting and explaining the Doctrine of
the Blessed TRINITY, against the Late Writer of the Intellectual System.

And an Appendix is subjoyned concerning the Divine Extension, wherein the
Existence of a God is undeniably proved, and the main Principles of
CARTESIANISM and ATHEISM overthrown.

By John Turner, Hospitaller of St. Thomas Southwark, and late Fellow of
Christ's College in CAMBRIDGE.

(...).

There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, and hid that shall not be
known.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Randolph Tailor, near STATIONERS' HALL. MDCLXXXV.

TO MY HONORED AND Dear Friend Robert Nightingale Esquire
SIR,
THE Obligations for which I stand indebted to Your Goodness, are so many and
so great, and the Friendship with which you have been pleased to own an
unprofitable Servant, so constant, so sincere, so zealous, that I am forced to
break out into this public Resentment, rather out of necessity than
deliberation or choice, to ease my self of a Load of Gratitude, which is very
troublesome to me, while it keeps within and preys upon it self, without any
hopes of ever being consumed, like the Torments of that miserable State to
which the unthankful, as well as the unjust, or cruel, or intemperate are
condemned, rather than that I have any prospect of doing any thing by it, which
You will interpret a Service or a respect, whose Modesty is such in the midst
of many excellent Virtues, that it endeavors to conceal them even from Your
self, and will scarce endure to hear of them from others.

You must Pardon me therefore, if being provoked to extremity by an importunate
Goodness, that pursues me with so unusual an Affection through every Stage, and
every days Journey of my Life, I now endeavor to make You, as You ought to be,
an Example to the World, that You may not shine any longer in darkness and
obscurity, though that be no more than the best Diamonds are known to do, but
that like the Sun, the King and Fountain of the Day, You may communicate the
Brightness and Influence of Your Temper to the cold and insensible Corners of
the Earth, where the Poles of Humanity move with a listless Pace, and where
true Honor and Friendship are not known. Not that I intend to present You with
a Character of Your self: For it may be dangerous to tell You all Your own, as
humble and as equal as You are, as free from any thing of Vanity or
Affectation: But instead of that as a further Testimony to, and a new Trial of,
the Goodness and Gallantry of Your mind, I lay this worthless Trifle at Your
Feet, and bid You good morrow by the Name of Patron, which I hope You will bear
with Patience, not only for my sake, but as You do an hard Frost, or the
Mid-summer Heats, or the Autumnal Faintings and Decays of Nature: For this is
no more than one of the common Calamities incident to human Life, and the
natural Inconvenience of being an Author's Friend. Yet when I call it worthless
and Trifle; two very ill Names to make a Present withal, I mean it only with
respect to the transcendent Merit of Him, to whom it is offered, to the
smalness of it is Bulk, and the greater meanness and littleness of the Writer,
who has scarce any thing else to value himself upon besides Mr. NIGHTINGALE's
kind and charitable Opinion; otherwise for the Subject there can be nothing
greater than that which is concerning that auspitious Birth with which
impatient Time and Expectation were so long in labor; in which so many
Predictions and Prophesies were fulfilled, so many Mystic Types and Shadows
answered, so many and so costly Sacrifices and Expiations ended; and for my
Management of it, I am so far from being one of those that do magnifice sentire
of themselves, especially without, and contrary to, Reason, as most of those
magnificent Opiniators do, That all I dare pretend to say concerning it, is
only this, that I have endeavored to do something, which may in some measure
excuse and justify Your Friendship to me.

Particularly what I have written in the First Part of this Discourse
concerning Moses and Joshua, and the rest of the Judges and Saviors of Israel,
concerning Hobed and Jesse, and Saul, and David, and Solomon, as having all of
them in their Names or Offices, or both, a preparatory Allusion to the Coming
of the Messiah, the quality of his Person, and the nature of his Dispensation,
is I think so plain and so convincing to any Man, that shall consider those
Instances singly, and by themselves, and much more all of them in Confederacy
together, That I am confident, there is no Man, who has seriously considered
with himself, how full of Types and Symbols the Old Testament is, both as to
the Names and Things that are contained in it, but will be forced to confess,
what I without much Vanity may affirm to be true, That it is no inconsiderable
Service which is done to the Gospel, the Person, the Authority of Christ, and
consequently to Religion by it.

There may yet perhaps be some Scruple concerning the Etymology of David, which
I have made to be as much as Dod, or The Beloved; but as it cannot be
questioned, but Dod is a very proper Contraction of Daoud, and that Doudaim, a
Word of the Dual Form in the Story of the Mandrakes is as much as Daoudaim; so
it can as little be doubted, that David and Daoud are exactly the same, only
that the former is more usually the Chaldee Form, as the latter is the Hebrew,
and yet there are not wanting other Words of exactly the same Form in the
Hebrew Bibles themselves, as Nagid, a Participial Noun for a Captain or
Commander from the Adverb Neged, and so also Phakid or Phakoud are
indifferently used, for a Visitor, Intendant or Inspector.

In the Second Part, which is a Defense of the Chastity of the Virgin Mother,
against the Jewish Cavils and Misinterpretations, I see not that it is possible
that any thing should be plainer than that Sarah and Elizabeth were very proper
Types of a conceiving Virgin, as she is by the Evangelists represented to have
been, and whether the undoubted Agreement as to Signification in the Names of
Sarah and Mary with one another, the first of which seems to have received some
little alteration on purpose that it might exactly suit and correspond with the
latter, do not give invincible strength to the Force of this Conjecture, I
leave it to Your self, or to any other candid Interpreter of things impartially
to consider: So also for the Exposition of Psalm. 45. v. 16, 17. all that I
shall say for it is, That it must be acknowledged to be a fair Exposition,
grounded upon a safe and certain bottom, and that if I could discern upon the
maturest Deliberation, which I am capable of entering into, that there was any
other way of untying or explaining the difficulty to be found, which could have
the shape or color of a possible Interpretation, I should not so much rely
upon it as I do.

For the Application of the Story of Melchisedek in this Second Chapter, I will
be so ingenuous to acknowledge to You, that I lay no great matter of stress upon
it, but am rather inclinable to believe that that whole Verse is alike
applicable to the Divinity of Christ, not any of it to his being born of a
Virgin, and that the several Clauses to be met with in it, are exegetical and
explanatory one of another; without Father, without Mother, without Descent,
having neither beginning of Days, nor end of Life; only that which I have made
use of upon this occasion, was at the least a possible Exposition, which the
Laws of Argumentation do not forbid me to use; so the stress and weight of the
whole Argument be not laid upon it, which I am so far from having done, that in
the last Place, besides those Arguments which were beforehand produced, I have
after this applied the History of Lot and his two Daughters to the same
purpose, and as there is no Exception against this Application, but only that,
that whole story is made up of Circumstances, of an incestuous and immoral
Nature; so whether this be not very fairly answered by the plain proof which I
have given that our Savior was contained in the Loins of Moab, by the
Genealogy of Pharez, to which we may likewise add the inexcusable Love and
ignominious Marriage of David and Bathshebah, whence Solomon was descended; and
lastly, whether this be not likewise a very fair Interpretation of that Passage
in the Prophet Esai. concerning the Messiah, That He should be numbered with
Transgressors, as all of those his Progenotors were in a very high Degree, I
refer my self willingly to any man that is not eaten up with prejudice to
determine, and what Service it is, which is done to Christianity, by showing
that the Types and Shadows and Prophesies of the Old Testament, as they are
related by the Evangelists, do so exactly answer to the Events of the new,
although those Types or Prophesies have not been taken notice of by the
Evangelists themselves, I had rather others should frankly confess than that I
should seem to boast of my Performance, (...).

For the Third and last Part of this Discourse which concerns the Divinity of
the Person of Christ, in opposition to the Arians, Photinians, Sabellians and
Socinians, though it be a Field that has been frequently trodden by very
Learned Men, and the thing in question unanswerably proved to the advantage of
the Catholic side, yet it is to be considered that it is a very large Field,
and therefore there may be probably some new Paths to be found which have not
yet been trodden in before, and such I take my Argument from the Name Emanuel,
from the Words of St. John; in the beginning; and without him was not any thing
made that was made; and from the Stories of Jonas and Melchisedek, as I have
managed them, to be, and indeed the Divinity of our blessed Savior is a thing
so plainly, so industriously, so frequently inculcated and asserted in the
Evangelical and Apostolical Writings, that we may as well deny not only his
being born of a Virgin, but expound any Proposition, how plain soever in the
Sermon on the Mount, to a quite contrary Sense to that in which it is usually
received, as scruple or boggle at the Divinity of Christ, when once we have
acknowledged, as the Socinians profess themselves to do, the Authority of the
Scriptures.

The Socinian Heresy, which answers to that of Photinus and his Followers in
the Primitive Times, so far as the Doctrine of the Divinity is concerned, was
condemned at a Council held at Sirmium, where Photinus was himself Bishop, by
the Arians themselves, and this Doctrine in those Times was so generally
disliked, so severely prosecuted, and so constantly condemned and censured,
that Epiphanius tells us, that in his Time, which was not long after, it was
utterly extinct, and indeed it proceeds out of so perverse and refractory an
humor, the very Spirit and Soul of waywardness and disobedience, at the same
time acknowledging the Authority of the Scriptures, and yet denying those
things which are most plainly Revealed in them, that it ought not to be
tolerated in any Commonwealth, and a frank Deist, who utterly discards the
Authority of those Sacred Writings, which give so ample Testimony to
themselves, is much to be preferred before so incoherent, impudent and
inconsistent a Fellow, who will swallow Forty Absurdities one after another,
rather than let go that Position which he is resolved shall be true, let the
Scripture say what it pleases, and though at the same time he shall acknowledge
the Scripture to be the Word of God, and the undoubted, unquestionable
Revelation of the Divine Will to Mankind.

Neither do the Socinians deny only the Divinity, but also the Satisfaction and
Expiation of Christ, and in this indeed they are consistent to themselves; for
the latter has a manifest Dependence upon the former, and cannot possibly be
understood without it, as I have shown very briefly, but yet very clearly, in
these Papers with which I now humbly present You; but yet what is this in
effect, but to ridicule all the Types and Sacrifices of the Law of Moses, and
to say that they signified just nothing at all, That Christ was not our
Passover, nor our Sin and Trepass Offering, and that when the Apostles compare
these things together, it signified no more than if it had been a Dream, or
some distracted and Lunatic Imagination, and that the Old Testament and the
Legal Dispensation might well enough have been spared for any Typical Relation
they had in them to the New, or to the Dispensation of Christ, and of the
Gospel?

Prodigiosa Fides and Thuscis digna libellis,
Quaeque coronata lustrari debeat agna!
But yet as bold and impudent as the Heresy of Photinus was, which seems to
have been the true Reason, why it was so soon and so universally exploded, as
being so open and so barefaced an Affront put upon the Credit and Authority of
the Scriptures, yet the Sabellian seems to me to have been much the less
excusable of the Two, being not only every whit as inconsistent with the
express Declarations of the Holy Scriptures, or such legitimate Consequences as
may be fairly and unanswerably deduced from them, but it is all of it Cant and
Mystery and Phanatic Nonsense into the bargain; whereas Photinus and his
Followers did no question proceed upon the same ground, upon which the modern
Revivers of that Heresy have done, that is, they looked upon the Doctrine of
the Trinity, as an impossible and contradictious thing, and they would believe
nothing of which they could not give some intelligible Account; a great Fault,
I confess, when we speak of a Divine, that is, a confessedly infinite and
incomprehensible Subject, but not so great as theirs, who make new difficulties
to avoid the old, and to escape one Mystery run into another, and that so
strangely freakish, and so palpably ridiculous, that it is a great dishonor
and disparagement to the Scriptures to be thought to have imposed such whimsies
upon the World for Articles of Faith, and the most Sacred Mysteries of
Religion. For the Doctrine of Sabellianism was no other than this, (they are
the Words of Your Neighbor Dr. Cudworth in his Intellectual System, p. 605.)
That there was but one Hypostasis or singular, individual Essence of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and consequently, that they were indeed but three
several Names, or Notions or Modes of one and the self-same thing. From whence
such Absurdities as these would follow; That the Fathers begetting the Son, was
nothing but one Name or Notion or Mode of the Deity's begetting another; or
else the same Deity under one Notion, begetting it self under another Notion.
And when again the Son or Word, and not the Father, is said to have been
incarnated, and to have suffered Death for us upon the Cross; That it was
nothing but a mere Logical Notion or Mode of the Deity, that was incarnate and
suffered, or else the whole of the Deity under one particular Notion or Mode
only.

It would have been very well si sic omnia dixisset, although in this very
Citation, there be sufficient matter for a very just Reprehension; For, by the
Dr's Favor, the Sabellian Doctrine is by no means a Consequence of this
Proposition, That there is but one Hypostasis, or singular, individual Essence
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, so far as the Divinity of all the Three
Persons is concerned; for the divine Nature in them all is, to use his own way
of Expression, singularly, individually, numerically the same, as I shall now
immediately show, and yet for all that the Sabellian Doctrine still continues
to be as false and as absurd as ever.

But so extremely cautious was the Orthodox Doctor of running into the Heresy
of Sabellius, That he not only denis the Three Persons of the Trinity to have
One singular, existent Essence, but to avoid an Assertion, which to him seems
to be so full of absurdity, and the more effectually to baffle Atheism, which
says there is no God, he tells us, if we will believe him, That there are
Three, They are his own Words let him speak for himself, page 604. It is
evident from hence, that these reputed Orthodox Fathers, who were not a few,
were far from thinking the Three Hypostases of the Trinity to have the same
singular, existent Essence; they supposing them to have no otherwise one and
the same Essence of the Godhead in them, nor to be one God, than three
individual Men, have one common specifical Essence of Manhood in them, and are
all one Man. But as this Trinity came afterward to be decryed for Tritheistic;
so in the room thereof started there up that other of Persons Numerically the
same, or having all one and the same singular, existent Essence; a Doctrine
which seems not to have been owned by any public Authority in the Christian
Church, save that of the Lateran Council only. In which words it is as plain as
Words can express it, that he represents the Orthodox Fathers asserting the
Belief of Three Gods, as much as Three Men are Three Men, numerically distinct,
though having a specifical Identity with one another, and this I think is to
assert Three Gods, if the Father, Son and Holy Ghost be as distinct from one
another as Paul and Apollos and Cephas; for no man doubts but they were three
several and distinct Men; nay he owns the thing to save us the trouble and the
charge of proving it: For in the Running-Title of that very Page, he calls this
Trinity of these reputed Orthodox Fathers, a Tritheistic Trinity, and
afterward when he condemns the Doctrine of a singular, existent Essence of
Novelty, and by consequence disallows and disapproves it, as he had done
deservedly the Sabellian Doctrine before, we must either conclude him to be
himself a Tritheistic, a Sect for which I believe he may have a kindness,
because he loves hard Words, or something else without either stick or trick
which I will not name, because his Book pretends to be written against it.

Neither was he barely content to have insinuated thus much under the Covert of
the reputed Orthodox Fathers, but p. 605. He is at it again, being wonderful
zealous to expose and baffle this Lateran, Popish Doctrine of a singular,
existent Essence; The Word (...), says he, as was before insinuated by
Petavius, was never used by Greek Writers otherwise, then to signify the
agreement of things numerically different from one another, in some common
nature or universal essence, or their having a generical Unity or Identity of
which sundry Instances might be given; nor indeed is it likely, that the Greek
Tongue should have any Name for that, which neither is a thing in Nature nor
falls under human Conception, (viz.) several things having one and the same
singular Essence; So that it is plain according to him, having already refuted
and blasted the Sabellian Doctrine, that if there be indeed a Trinity of Divine
Persons, it consists of Three several Natures numerically different; although
they have a specifical sameness or Identity with one another, that is, in plain
English, there are Three Gods, let Nature and the Scripture say what they
please; for they do both of them assure us, there is but One; but in regard he
has no where declared for any Trinity at all, as it is his Custom to lie close
in a difficult Point, only has made it his business in a multitude of Words,
to expose the Trinity of the reputed Orthodox Fathers; therefore the most that
Charity it self can allow him, if it were to step forth, and speak his most
favorable Character to the World, is, That he is an Arian, a Socinian, or a
Deist; and therefore he will oblige us very much in the close of the next
Volume, (which is expected to come out upon the last day of the last Platonic
Term; for the Intellectual Universe, like the mundus aspectabilis, is to
consist of Two Globes, of which the Celestial that is the biggest, is yet to
come) among which of all these reputed Orthodox Divines he has enrolled and
listed himself.

Nay, not yet satisfied with having, a Man would think, sufficiently betrayed
the most sublime and sacred Mystery of the Christian Faith, he confirms and
inculcates the same thing by new Arguments and fresh Examples, in what he says
afterward, p. 611. of the Orthodox Fathers condemning and disallowing the use
of the words (...) and (...) in the declaration of their Doctrine and
Sentiments concerning the Blessed Trinity, and yet p. 605. after having
represented the Absurdity and Folly of the Sabellian Doctrine, he tells us,
That should it be averred, that this Trinity which we now speak of (the reputed
Orthodox Trinity of the reputed Orthodox Fathers) was not a Trinity of mere
Names and Notions, as that of the Sabellians, but of distinct Hypostases or
Persons; then must it needs follow, (since every singular Essence is an
Hypostasis, according to the Sense of the Ancient Fathers) that there was not a
Trinity only, but a Quaternity of Hypostases in the Deity: Which is a thing
that none of those Fathers ever dreamed of; perhaps not, and how it came into
the Doctors Head, or where the necessity of the consequence lies, that if
there be three Persons in the Deity, there must be four, I cannot Imagine, and
I refer my self as I said before to the second part of his Moreh Nevochim, to
resolve this scruple together with the other; for till that Book comes out,
which I am very much afraid it will not do, till a little after the coming of
Elias, it is more then probable this difficulty will never be explained, only
thus much we learn in the mean time, by what he has already declared, that if
he do believe a Trinity at all, it is a Trinity of three several and distinct
Hypostases or singular existent Essences, numerically distinct from one
another, and that if there be three such Hypostases, there must be four, which
is absurd, therefore there is no* Trinity at all, quod erat ostendendum, the
very thing he all along designed to show.

(...) And yet this is the Man that can neither speak a common Truth nor a
notorious Falsehood, but out steps our self, and sometimes we our selves a kind
of a Platonic Triad of Impertinents, the Doctor, the Professor, and the Master
or Keeper, in the Imperial Style of Patents and Proclamations, as if R. C. and
C. R. were the same, the best and the wisest of Princes and of Men, and a small
Euthusiast, a Rosicrucian Brother, with his Girdle stuck with Noes, and Henades
and Antoagathotetes, and such like Platonic and Bombastic Baubles, whose Book
instead of being, as it calls it self, an Universe, is a Chaos of crude and
indigested Notions; an Abyss of bottomless Vanity and Ostentation, as
Intellectual, as the Scholastic Intelligences themselves, that move those Orbs
which are no where to be found, and a true System by the same sort of Figure,
by which a True Protestant is no Protestant at all. But my Zeal for the Honor
and Credit of our Religion transports me, I am afraid, to an immoderate Degree,
a Degree that would very ill comport with the known Mildness and Mercy of Your
Nature, but that I hope You will consider with Your self, that there is a
Justice in Censures, as well as there is in Punishments, and that no Man in the
World, let him be who he will, can be too sharply or severely dealt with, who
under pretense of defending Christianity has betrayed it, and who after
comparing so many Heathen and Philosophic Trinities together with the
Christian, declares that the last of them, if it be any thing at all, is a
Trinity, not of Persons but of Gods, and by consequence has very sliely
endeavored, under pretense of representing the Opinion of the Orthodox
Fathers, to expose that Doctrine to the scorn and contempt of all considering
Men; and if he himself, or any body for him, can put any other Interpretation
upon it, than I refuse no Punishment nor any Disgrace; besides, that it is to
be considered, that he will not allow the Pagans themselves to have been so
absurd and foolish as to have paid their Worship to many supreme and
independent Beings, and by vindicating them, it is manifest that at the same
time he is to be understood to declare against it himself, otherwise this would
not be to vindicate, but accuse, and therefore when he represents this to have
been the Opinion of the Fathers, That the Three Persons of the Trinity differ
only from one another as Three Men do, by a Numerical Distinction, pertaking
all of them of the same generical or specific Nature three times repeated to no
purpose; for at this rate there is nothing in the one, which is not in the
other, what is this but to represent them under the same ill Character, as
Worshippers of three Supreme and Independent Beings; from which he endeavors
to vindicate the Pagans; for if there be a distinct and several Divinity in
each of the Persons, which is not numerically to be found in any other, then is
it manifest that they must all of them be Independent, for one Divinity cannot
possibly produce another, which shall be Numerically different from it self,
and shall have equal perfection in all other respects, but only that it is not
the same; for then there is a possibility, that there may be as many or more
Gods then there are Men: And so the Pagans need not be excused from
Polytheisme, that is, the Worship of more Supreme and Independent Beings, or
may perhaps be mistaken, if they were not guilty of it. To be produced, is
plainly the Character of a Creature, and to be Uncreated and Independent, that
of God; so that if there be three Divinities Numerically distinct, there must
also be three Supreme and Independent Beings, which being a position so
frequently Condemned in Terminis by the Doctor, as it does very well deserve,
it is plain he had no other design in setting down the Sentiments of his
reputed Orthodox Fathers, as to the manner in which the three Hypostases of the
Trinity may be said to be three and one at the same time, but only to show the
World that they were but reputedly Orthodox; and to explode the Doctrine of the
Trinity together, for he declares there can be no other Trinity but this.

These things are so plain against him, that I am of opinion he would not have
dared to Print those Pages by themselves, wherein he sets down the opinion of
his Orthodox Fathers, and explodes the Doctrine of a singular existent Essence;
but that he had a reasonable ground of Hope, that in so vast an heap of
Trinitarian Impertinence, which he has amassed together out of Heathens and
Philosophers, rather to gratify an affectation of appearing learned, then for
any Service it is like to do the World, this mock representation of the Blessed
Trinity might be the less regarded, by the sound and sober part of the World,
and yet might be sure to have its designed Effect upon such as were Heretically
or Schismatically given, and that he might not seem so much to have banished
this Doctrien out of the World, a thing which he will find too difficult for
all his Craft and Sophistry to accomplish, as to have lost it in a Wood by
chance, without being able to find it any more, but though he cannot find the
Trinity, yet it is not to be questioned but the Trinity will find him, if he do
not seriously repent and publicly recant the horrid Indignities which he has
cast upon it.

The notion of three Supreme and Independent Beings, is therefore an Absurd and
Foolish Notion, not only because it makes three Gods to no purpose, there being
nothing in any one which is not in the other, but also because it is an
impossible one into the bargain. For to the notion of this Supreme and
Independent Being the attribute of Omnipresence does of necessity belong;
wherefore in the case of three Gods, that is, three Supreme and Independent
Beings, Numerically distinct, although specially the same, there must also be
three Vbiquitary or Omnipresent Natures at the same time, so that they must of
necessity imbibe and penetrate each other, by such a kind of knack, as the
Doctor out of the Greek Fathers is pleased to call (...) or Circuminsession;
and so being supposed before hand to be Specifically the same, it is now the
same thing, by reason of this mutual penetration and total Inbibition of each
others substance, as if they were the same Numerically too; and in this appears
the Nonsense of Polytheism, that is, the worship of many such Supreme and
Independent substances, if indeed there were ever any to be found that have
been so stupid to be guilty of it, that it supposes more Omnipresent Immaterial
Natures then one, which if it be once granted to be a possible thing, there is
no reason why it may not also be possible, that there may be as many
Independents in Heaven, as there are upon Earth, and all of them having the
same Understanding, Will, and all other Attributes so many times Numerically
repeated, that there may be a Balance of Power, an Harmony of Sentiments, and
a Concurrence of Will to hinder them from falling out or squabling among
themselves, so as at this rate, not only Varro's Catalogue would be increased
and swelled to a proportion more prodigious then that ever was esteemed, but
even Conception and Arithmetic would fail to find a thought or a number to
express them.

The Doctor was not insensible how very invidious it must needs appear, to
charge the Orthodox Fathers, and more especially Athanasius himself, with
asserting Three Gods Numerically distinct, and therefore, though he was
resolved to lay it home upon them, partly to expose that Doctrine as it
deserves, and partly to show the absurdity of a singular existent Essence
Numerically the same in three several Persons, which he would have us believe
to have been so great, that the Fathers ran into Polytheism to avoid it, and by
both of these means to open a fair passage for Arianism to enter in, and take
possession of the minds of his Readers; yet he draws off and on by very
Artificial Movements; for thus he tells us after a Multitude of Citations, as
his manner is, p. 606. From all which it is unquestionably evident, that
Athanasius did not by the word Homoousios understand, that which has the same
Singular and Numerical Essence with another, but the same common, generical or
specifical only; and consequently that he conceived the Son to be co-essential
or consubstantial with the Father, after that manner, that is, in plain English
he conceived the Father and the Son to be two several and distinct Gods, and
again, p. 612. (which is falsely marked 596) he has these words: And now upon
all these considerations, our Platonic Christian would conclude, that the
Orthodox Trinity of the Ancient Christian Church, did herein agree with the
genuinely Platonic Trinity, that it was not Monoousian; one sole singular
Essence, under three Notions, Conceptions or Modes only, but three Hypostases
or Persons, as likewise the right Platonic Trinity does agree with the Ancient
Orthodox Christians in this, that it is not Heteroousian but Homoousian,
Coessential or Consubstantial; none of their three Hypostases being Creatures
or particular Beings made in time, but all of them Unconceived Eternal and
Infinite. And this I think again is to represent the Orthodox Trinity, as
consisting of three several Deities, or Divine Substances Numerically distinct,
but specifically the same, which is the true Interpretation of all those cramp
words, that they are Homoousian, that is, specifically Co-essential and
Consubstantial, not Monoousian nor Tautoousian, that is Numerically the same,
nor Heteroousian, that is, specifically or generically different from each
other, and this, I take it, is to expose the Orthodox Trinity; but he goes on,
and I must follow him, Notwithstanding all which, says he, it must be granted,
that though this Homoousiotes, or Co-essentiallity of the three Persons in the
Trinity, does imply them to be all God, yet does it not follow from thence of
necessity, that they are therefore one God. No, by no means, but it follows
unavoidably, that they are three Gods, and that is it which the Doctor would
intimate when he tells us that it does not follow from thence of necessity,
that they are one God; implying that the contrary does manifestly follow, and
so good Night to the Trinity, a Doctrine which ran the reputed Orthodox
Fathers, by which it is employed, that they were not really so, into so many
absurdities, and so foul mistakes: But this is not all; What then, says he,
shall we conclude that Athanasius himself also entertained that opinion before
mentioned and exploded; of the three Persons in the Trinity, being but three
Individuals under the same species (as Peter and Paul and Timothy) and having
no other natural Unity, or Identity then Specifical only? Indeed some have
confidently fastened this upon Athanasius, because in those Dialogues of the
Trinity, published amongst his works, and there Entitled to him, the same is
grossly owned, and in defense thereof, this absurd Paradox maintained, that
Peter, Paul and Timothy, though they be three Hypostases, yet are not to be
accounted three Men, but only then, when they Dissent from one another, or
disagree in Will or Opinion. But it is certain, from several passages in those
Dialogues themselves, that they could not be written by Athanasius, and there
has been also another Father found for them, to wit, Maximus the Martyr. And
this is wonderful pleasant; Indeed some have confidently fastened this upon
Athanasius, as if the bashful Doctor, whose Chin must be acknowledged to be
very Modest and Maidenly, whatever his Forehead may be, had not done exactly
the same; for he makes Athanasius himself expressly to assert a Specifical Unity
of the Three Persons, and what closer Unity there is, unless it be the
Numerical, I do not understand, and I challenge him to explain, unless it be
the Emperichoretic or Circuminsessive, a couple of very fine words to signify
just nothing at all, for it is every whit as hard to understand at this rate,
how there shall be Three Persons Specifically, as how they shall be Numerically
the same; nay, they will be Numerically the same, whither we will or no; for if
they are all Omnipresent, if they do mutually and necessarily and eternally
penetrate and imbibe one another, if they have the same Will, Understanding,
Affections, Operations and Effects, I think it is all one, as if they were
Numerically the same, and I know not what notion of Numerical or Individual can
be more precise and exact then this is, so that this Emperichoresis, that is
Gim-crack; for that is the proper English of the word not Circuminsession, as
the Learned Doctor has rendered it, instead of explaining the Trinity,
perfectly destroys it. Nay, Notwithstanding this (for you must know the Doctor
did not bring off Athanasius, but with a design to bring him on again) thus
much must not be denied by us, that Athanasius, in those others his reputedly
genuine Writings, does sometimes approach so near hereunto (that is, to the
making the Unity of the Three Persons to be Specifical only) that he lays no
small stress upon this Homoousiotes, this Co-essentiality and common Nature of
the Godhead, to all the three Persons, in order to their being one God: And
indeed the Citations by him thereafter immediately produced, do sufficient
prove, that he did sometimes lay the whole stress and weight of the matter upon
it; but yet not with so much steadiness and resolution, but that p. 614. he
begins to repent his Bargain; for there the Doctor tells us, That Athanasius
elsewhere plainly implies, that this common Essence or Nature of the Godhead,
is not sufficient alone, to make all the three Hypostases one God, as in his
Fourth Oration against the Arians, where he tells us, that his Trinity of
Divine Hypostases cannot therefore be accounted Three Gods nor Three
Principles, because they are not resembled by him to Three Original Suns, but
only to the Sun and its Splendour, and the Light from both. Now Three Suns,
according to the Language of Athanasius, have (...), a common Nature, Essence
and Substance, and therefore are Co-essential or Consubstantial; and since they
cannot be accounted one Sun, it is manifest, that according to Athanasius, this
Specific Identity or Unity, is not sufficient to make the Three Divine
Hypostases One God. And what is this but plainly to contradict and overthrow
all that he had said elsewhere concerning the Specific Unity of the Three
Persons; for if they are not One, as Three Original Suns are One, then are they
not Specifically the same, which was the very thing Athanasius had in other
places affirmed: Again, if they are not One after this manner, how then are
they One? Why as the Sun, the Splendour and the Light; an hopeful Trinity
indeed! For the Splendour and the Light are but two words, as I take it, for one
and the same thing, and so we have lost one Hypostasis already, and what if the
Splendour and the Sun should not be really distinguished neither? What then
becomes of this excellent comparison? For certain it is, that the Light or
Splendour is not in it self a real existent thing, but only the result or effect
of the pressure of the subtle matter in the Body of the Sun, upon the Visionary
Organs of Animals capable of being affected with it; it is a relative or
conditional appearance, resulting from the pressure of that subtle matter, and
the disposition of a Nerve or Organ rightly prepared to receive that pressure,
and this impression, if it be strong and indistinct, it is called Splendour, if
it be more gentle and distinct it has the Name of Light, but now certainly no
Man ever affirmed that the pressure, and the Body pressing, are in reality
different from one another, any more then a shape or color, and the Body
shaped or colored can be; and by the same reason the Sun and its Splendour or
Light have not any real, but only an imaginary, relative or notional
distinction, so that whatever becomes of the Rhetoric of this Comparison, it
is certain that it savours neither of a sound Philosopher nor a sound Divine.
But it is still more express against this Specific Identity, what the Doctor,
immediately after alleges out of his Writings, (...), etc. Neither do we
acknowledge Three Hypostases, divided or separated by themselves (as is to be
seen corporeally in Men) that we may not comply with the Pagan Polytheism. From
whence it is evident, as the Doctor infers, that neither three separate Men,
though Coessential to Athanasius, were accounted by him to be one Man, nor yet
the Community of the Specific Nature and Essence of the Godhead, can alone by
it selfexclude Polytheism from the Trinity, wherefore the true reason, why
Athanasius laid so great a stress upon this Homoousiotes, or Co-essentiality of
the Trinity, in order to the Unity of the Godhead in them, was not because this
alone was sufficient to make them one God, but because they could not be so
without it; Which last thing he speaks not only as the opinion of Athanasius,
but his own; for what else is the meaning of the running Title of p. 614, 615.
Co-essentiality necessary to the Unity of the Godhead? and that by
Co-essentiality hemeans a Specifical Identity, not a Consubstantiality of
singular existent Essence, we have already sufficiently seen, that being an
opinion, which he has endeavored with abundance of pains and industry, to
explode out of the World, but with how little Skill or Judgment we shall
discern more clearly by and by.

To the same purpose with the former Citation, is what he tells us farther p.
616. That though Athanasius no where declare, the Three Hypostases of the
Trinity to have one and the same singular Essence, but on the contrary, denies
them to be Monoousian; and though he lay a great stress upon their (...) their
Specific or Generic Unity and Coessentiality, in order to their being one God;
for as much as without this they could not be God at all; yet does he not rely
wholly upon this, as alone sufficient to that purpose, but adds certain other
considerations thereunto to make it out, in manner as follows: but let what
will follow, it seems to me very manifest without examining the particulars
proposed, that the Doctor and Athanasius too, if he have represented him
aright, are certainly very much beside the mark; for if the Unity of the
Trinity be only Specific, then it is plain that it is not Numerical, and there
can be nothing but a Numerical Identity that can excuse the Three Persons from
being Three several and distinct Gods, for if they be not Three Persons
Numerically the same, as to the common substance of the Divinity, which belongs
to them all, then each Person is likewise a Divine substance by himself,
Numerically distinguished and separate from the other two, so as the first
substance is not the second, nor the second the third, nor the third the first,
and if this be not plainly to introduce Polytheism, that is, a Belief and
Worship of three distinct and Independent Gods, then I would fain know what is?
Notwithstanding that the admission of three such several Divine Substances, be
loaded with as great difficulties, and be every whit as hard to understand, as
the Lateran Trinity which the Doctor would expose, as has been already
showed, and though that be indeed the only Trinity which the Scripture
teaches, and which the first Christians of Apostolic simplicity and antiquity
believed, as shall be hereafter more particularly declared.

But what are the Expedients proposed by the Doctor out of Athanasius, to
secure the oneness of the Deity, and to exclude Polytheism; notwithstanding the
Trinity consists of Substances, which are no more then specifically the same,
but have a Numerical difference from one another? Why first he tells us, That
this (the Athanasian Trinity) is not a Trinity of Principles, but that there is
only one Principle or Fountain of the Godhead in it, from which the other are
derived; thus does he write in his fifth Oration, (...) There is but one
Principle, and accordingly but one God. But what does he mean by one Principle,
are there Three Divine Substances or no? if there are not, then there is but
One, Numerically and Individually One, and by consequence, either there is no
Trinity of Divine Persons, or they do all of them belong to that one Divine
Substance, which is not specifically, but Numerically one and the same. If
there are three Substances properly Divine, that is, Eternal and infinitely
perfect, then either one proceeds or is begotten, by way of emanative causality
from the other, and so though there are not three Principles, yet there are
three Gods notwithstanding, and, a part post, three Independent Beings, in as
much as that Substance which is not only begotten or produced, but may be
destroyed, is not a Divine or infinitely perfect Substance, but a mere
Creature, obnoxious to Ruin, and subject to the Will and Power of its first
cause, it is indeed Dependent in one sense, in as much as every Emanative
effect has a perpetual dependence upon its Emanative cause, but yet it is such
a dependence as the cause it self cannot take away, and therefore if the Cause
be Eternal, the Effect must be so too. Besides that, it is perfect Nonsense,
as I have already shown, for one Divine Substance to beget or produce another,
either by an Emanative Power, or by any other Power whatsoever, which it may
exert or suspend pro Arbitrio, and as it pleases: For the Substance begetting
and begotten, being both of them ex Hypothesi, otherwise they cannot be Divine
Substances, infinitely perfect and omnipresent, endued with the same
inclinations of Will, and the same degree of Understanding and Power, exerting
the same Operations and concurring to the same Effects, mutually imbibing and
penetrating one another, it is the same thing as if they were Numerically the
same, and it is impossible to conceive them otherwise then so, neither is it to
any purpose at all that it should be otherwise, and if it be once admitted that
otherwise it may be, there may be infinite Divine Substances for ought we know,
all of them Omnipresent and Infinitely perfect to no more or no other purpose,
then if there had been but one; and where this Divine facundity will cease, we
can no more conceive then how it is possible for it to begin.

Again, if they do not proceed from one another by way of Emanation, then they
are not only (...), but (...) not only three Gods but three Principles
likewise, three Absolute and Independent Beings, according to the Doctrine of
the Marcionists, and so the former inconvenience returns again; for there may
be three or thirty, or three hundred Thousand Divine Substances as well as
Three, which must be granted to be the extremity of extravagant Nonsense, and
if it be once admitted, will excuse and justify the most absurd Polytheism in
the World, the worship of Gods that are infinite in number, and all of them
Supreme, Self-existing and Independent, and all of them to no more purpose,
then if they were exactly and Numerically the same, imbibing and penetrating
each other, and having a Community of Will, Understanding, Operations and
Effects, so that they cannot possibly be distinguished from being the same.

But in the next place he tells us, Athanasius further adds, That the three
Divine Hypostases are not (...) and (...) separate and disjoined beings, but
(...) indivisibly united to one another, p. 616, 617. By which, if he mean the
same with the (...) or Circuminsession, which is the next expedient of working
a closer Union between Substances Numerically different from each other, it
has been already sufficiently considered and deservedly exploded, but
otherwise then this, I know not what to make of it, and so I let it pass
together with that other, to which it is so like, that they are more then
Twins, and have not so much as a Numerical Dictinction, for one great piece of
Enthusiasm split into two, only to swell a Book that is too big already, and
adorned with Quotations, to please a sort of Men that have a Veneration for
Greek Authorities, beyond what they have for English Sense.

Lastly, The same Athanasius in sundry places, p. 619,
still further supposes those three Divine Hypostases, to make up one entire
Divinity after the same manner, as the Fountain and the Stream make up one
entire River; or the Root and the Stock and the Branches one entire Tree: And
in this sense also, is the whole Trinity said by him to be (...) and (...) and
(...) one Divinity, and one Nature, and one Essence. And accordingly the word
(...) seems here to be taken by Athanasius in a further sense, besides that
before mentioned; not only for things agreeing in one common and general
Essence, as three Individual Men are Co-essential with one another; but also
for such as concurrently together make up one entire thing, and are therefore
jointly Essential thereunto. For when he affirms (...), that the Tree is
Congenerous or Homogenial with the Root, and the Branches Co-essential with the
Vine; his meaning is, that the Root, Stock and Branches are not only of one
kind, but also altogether make up the entire Essence of one Plant or Tree. In
like manner, those three Hypostases, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are not
only Congenerous and Co-essential, as having all the Essence of the Godhead
alike in them, but also as concurrently making up one entire Divinity.

In which words it is prodigious to me, and will I persuade my self be so to
you also, when I shall have represented my Sentiments concerning them, to
consider first the Impertinence of this fourth and last particular it self, to
the end, for which it is made use of by the Doctor, and secondly the strange
inconsistence of Athanasius with himself, if the Doctor have truly represented
him, and thirdly, the manifest contradiction of which the Doctor finds himself
guilty, without any other evidence then what he produces himself, as to the
signification of the word (...).

That which he asserted, p. 614. was that Co-essentiality or Specifical
Identity was necessary to the Unity or Sameness of the Godhead in the three
Persons of the Blessed Trinity, but that it was not of its self sufficient, and
therefore p. 616. he adds certain other considerations thereto to make it
out, of which considerations this which I have last transcribed is the last, by
which the Unity of the Godhead is resolved into an Unity of Integrant or
constituent parts, with relation to the whole, in which they are all United,
and become as it were one with one another, by their Universal concurrence to
make up that, which consisting of all these in confederacy together, is under
one denomination called the whole.

But he did not consider that this Specific Unity, which is nothing else but
the agreement of several such wholes together, or of things that are considered
as entire and perfect in themselves, in the same common nature, and this other
Unity resulting from the conspiracy of the parts, to make up the whole, are
inconsistent together. For though it be trueindeed, that in an whole consisting
of simular parts, as in an heap of Sand, a flake of Ice, a massy Stone or
Marble, a pain of Wainscot or Glass; there is a Specific Unity of the similar
parts of which these things consist, as well as a confederacy of them
altogether, to constitute that which is considered as the whole resulting from
them, yet the Specific Unity and the Unity of Integration, are two several
sorts of Unity that have nothing at all to do with one another, and
consequently they cannot advance or improve each other, neither can the
Integral Unity tie the Specific more closely then it was tied before; nay,
after all, they are both of them, not real, but imaginary Unities; for that
which is Specifically United, is really distinct from that to which it is said
to be United, and is as much another thing and at as great a distance from it,
as a Man living at Bagdat or Grand Cairo, and another at the same time
inhabiting and residing at London can be, and so the parts of which the whole
consists, may each of them be considered as wholes by themselves, and have no
other Band of Union then only in our way of imagining or conceiving things.

But in such integers or wholes as consist of Dissimular and Heterogeneous
parts, there cannot be that which Anaxagoras called an (...) or Specific Unity
between parts of a different contexture and composition, as the parts of blood
are Specifically United, and so of Nerves, Muscels, Cartilages, Veins,
Arteries, Bones, and the like, but a Bone and a Nerve are Specifically
different; and so is a Cartilage, and a Vein and Fiber, because they consist of
parts of a different contexture, it being nothing else but likeness of
contexture, similitude of Uses and Properties and Consistences, which makes the
Specifical Unity in these things, and therefore in this case the Integral Unity
can by no means advance or improve the Specifical, they being not only in all
cases Unities of a different, as I have showed already, but in this, of an
opposite and contrary nature, so that the one does manifestly destroy the
other; and yet such is the instance which the Doctor gives us out of
Athanasius, of the Root and Stock and Branches of a Tree, which are
specifically different from each other, because of their different use,
contexture and consistence, although the Root of one Vine and the Root of
another be Specifically United, and so as to the Stock and Branches.

Neither is that other comparison of Athanasius any better, concerning the
Fountain and the Stream making up one entire River; for this is only an whole
consisting of similar parts, the Particles of all that Water which flows from
the same Fountain, being all of them of the same nature and contexture; and
though there be a Specific Unity between the parts and an integral Unity of
them altogether, by which they make up and constitute the whole, yet these are
two sorts of Unities, which have nothing to do with one another, and both of
them only imaginary, as has been already declared, so that they cannot improve
and strengthen one another; and if this comparison be stretched as far as it
will go, it would follow that the Unity of the three Persons in the Blessed
Trinity, was only Imaginary, and Fantastic likewise, which is but to mock and
ridicule the most sacred and venerable Article of Religion; besides that, there
is nothing in the Stream, which was not once, I do not say virtually and
eminently, but really, formally and substantially in the Fountain, nothing in
the fountain which will not be in the stream, and this is exactly the Sabellian
Doctrine, which Athanasius himself did other times so much and so deservedly
detest and abhor, that the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are in reality all of
them the same, only that they differ modally and respectively from one another.

Wherefore in the next place it will be very well worth our while to consider a
little, if you please, how extremely fluctuant and uncertain Athanasius, is,
and how extremely inconsistent with himself; for whereas it has been above
abundantly manifested, that Athanasius and sometimes resolve the Unity of the
Godhead into a Specific Unity, as three Men, Peter, Paul and Timothy are one,
yet not being able to defend this notion from the Imputation of Polytheism, at
other times he recants it, and will by no means stand to his word, as has been
seen already in his own words, as they are cited by the Doctor, p. 614. (...),
etc. Neither do we acknowledge three Hypostases, divided or separate by
themselves (as is to be seen corporeally in Men) that we may not comply with
the Pagan Polytheism; he acknowledges they are three Hypostases, but not
divided or separated, as is to be seen corporeally in Men, that is, they are
not Specifically the same; for whatsoever things are Specifically United, are
at the same time supposed to be Numerically distinguished from each other, and
it is all one whether they be corporeal or incorporeal, for three Human Souls,
which are, without question, incorporcal beings, are as truly separate and
divided from each other by a Numerical distinction, as three Stones or three
Trees, or three Stools, or three Flowers, or any other three Bodies or three
things whatsoever: But this it seems was a way which Athanasius had not, when
he was at a dead lift, to distinguish between corporeal and incorporeal
without, and contrary to, reason, as when he speaks of the Cavil of the Arians
against that saying of our Lord, I Intel. Shst. p. 618.
am in the Father and the Father in me (...), etc. The Arians began to quarrel
with that of our Lord, I am in the Father and the Father in me; objecting, how
is it possible, that both the former should be in the latter, and the latter in
the former? Or, How can the Father being greater be received in the Son who is
lesser? In why of reply whereunto, says the Doctor, Athanasius first
observes, that the ground of this Arian Cavillation, was the grosseness of
their apprehensions, and that they did (...), conceive of incorporeal things
after a corporeal manner, and then does headd (...) etc. For the Father and the
Son are not as they suppose transvasated and poured out, one into another as
into an empty Vessel; as if the Son filled up the Concavity of the Father; and
again, the Father that of the Son; and neither of them were full and perfect in
themselves: For all this is proper to bodies; wherefore though the Father be in
some sense greater than the Son, yet notwithstanding may he be in him after an
manner. But now if we speak of an an extended Substance; it is manifest that
the Arians were thus far in the right, that a lesser Extension, such as is the
Humane Soul and Humane Nature of Christ, which was all that they meant in this
exception, cannot swallow up and receive into it self a greater, and much less
that which is infinite, as the Divine Substance was on both sides acknowledged
to be, and therefore to say that the Father was in the Son, that is to say, a
greater extension in a less, after an incorporeal manner, was an absurd and
impossible reply; for Extension is the same in both cases, and it is as
impossible that the part should be bigger then the whole in the immaterial, as
in the meterial World.

How this Place of Scripture proves against the Arians, and by consequence the
Socinians too shall be declared hereafter in the Process of this Address, which
I perceive is like to swell to a much greater Proportion than I at first
intended for it, and would as little suit with Patience on your part, as with
good manners on mine, but that You are used to put a favorable Interpretation
upon every thing that I do, and that where no Offense is taken on the one side,
neither can there be any given on the other; but I cannot choose but take notice
before I go any further, that this place of Scripture, by the Confession of the
Arians themselves was an utter Enemy to the Arian cause, and in truth, I think
the Scripture is so very flat and peremptory against it, that for a Man to
profess himself at the same time to be an Arian and a Christian, are two
professions that are plainly incompetible and inconsistent together; a Man
ought to disown the Authority of the Scriptures, before he sets up for an Arian
or Socinian, and it would be much less impious, and much more modest to do so,
then at the same time, when a Man calls himself a Christian, to oppose with the
constancy of a good cause, or the Impudence peculiar to a bad one, that which
is so plainly, so expressly, so frequently, so industriously Revealed in the
Gospel.

Yet after all, Athanasius being as little satisfied at sometimes with this
fine expedient, the distinction I mean betwixt Corporeal and Incorporeal, to
salve the Unity of the Godhead in the Trinity, as with that other of the
Specifical agreement, trys a third conclusion of the Integral parts, of which
the Physical totum or whole is constituted and composed, and he illustrates it
as has been seen by the comparison of a Vine, to whose Integrity the Stock,
Root and Branch do p. (...)
concurrently belong; and in like manner, says the Doctor, as he thinks
according to the Sentiments of Athanasius himself, those three Hypostases, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are not only Congenerous and Co-essential, as
having all the Essence of the Godhead alike in them, but also as concurrently
making up one entire Divinity. But herein was the Doctor very plainly, and
very grossly mistaken, for these two Unities as I have shown, are either
opposite and inconsistent the one with the other, or else they are at least
Unities of a quite different nature, so that the one cannot improve or
strengthen the other, wherefore Athanasius did not pitch upon this expedient,
to make the Specific Unity more close, but only that being dissatisfied with
that way of Solution, and being loath, as he had reason, when it is so plainly
Revealed, to part with his main position, which was, that there is but one God,
notwithstanding, that there are three Divine Persons, he fled, as it were, for
refuge, out of that Solution into this; which was as absurd as the other, for
as sure as God is, he is a Being simple and uncompounded, neither is there any
possible way to be conceived, wherein this notion may be rendered intelligible,
unless it be by conceiving God to be, as he is, an Infinite and Omnipresent
Extension, endued with all possible blessedness and perfection, one part of
which space shall be looked upon as the Father, another as the Son, and another
as the Holy Ghost, which bateing the Blasphemy and Impiety of it; how foolish
and how childishly absurd it is, I leave to any Man of common Sense and common
understanding to consider.

So that this way of removing the difficulty being every whit as ineffectual,
and to as little purpose as the other; he was sometimes forced upon the
Numerical essence whether he would or no, And accordingly, says the Doctor,
Athanasius further p. 619.
concludes, these three Divine Hypostases have not a consent of will only, but
essentially one and the self same will, and that they do also jointly produce
ad Extra, (...) the self same Energy, operation or action; nothing being
peculiar to the Son as such, but only the Economy of the Incarnation, and for
this he produces a place of Athanasius; for which I referr you to p. 620. of
his Book, for I care not for more Greek then needs must. I Know the connection
of the word accordingly, which is the beginning of this excerption from the
Doctor, was designed to confirm what he had said that Athanasins did sometimes
look upon the Trinity, as upon the constituent and concurrent parts, by which
the whole is made up: Accordingly whereunto, says he, Athanasius concludes,
that these three Divine Hypostases have not a consent of will only, but
essentially, one and the self same Will. But by his good favor, this is so far
from being a consequence, that it is more naturally inverted quite the contrary
way; for if they have one and the self same Will, which Will, it is absurd to
say that it can be divided into three parts, then is it plain that that
substance in which this Will resides, must likewise of necessity be simple and
uncompounded, or else each person, if it have not a piece of a Will, which is a
piece of Nonsense, whether you respect the faculty in general, or any
particular operation proceeding from it, must have a distinct Will by it self;
which though it may possibly be consistent with a consent of Will in them all
three, yet with the self same Will it is not, and therefore I rather look upon
this, as the Doctor ought to have done, for another instance of the uncertain
and fluctuating humor of Athanasius then any necessary consequence or result
from the Fantastic Trinity of integration, which it is so far from, that the
contrary is evidently true, if there be any such thing as truth or
demonstration in the world; and in strictness of Speech that other expression
of Athanasius, which he cites in page 619. will bear no other sense than this
(...). The Godhead of the Son, is the Godhead of the Father; For this cannot be
true of a Specifical Unity, though of a Numerical it may and must, for granting
that all the Three Persons have a Specifical agreement, yet the Godhead of the
one, is not the Godhead of the other, any more then the Person of the one, is
the Person of the other; as Peter and Paul agree specifically in the Humane
Nature, but yet the Humane Soul of Peter is not the Humane Soul of Paul, any
more then the Two Persons of Paul and Peter are the same; and this I think is
sufficient to demonstrate that Athanasius did not certainly and constantly
determine upon any thing, as to the Modus by which the Three Persons are one
God, only in general he was always steadfast and firm to this position, that
there was but one God, notwithstanding that there are Three Divine Persons; and
so having fairly dispatched this second point, which was of the inconsistency of
Athanasius with himself; it is now time to proceed to the third thing proposed
to be considered, which was to show that in this respect the Doctor is an exact
parallel to the great Athanasius, although in other respects the comparison will
not hold, for he is also troubled with that worst sort of self-denial, which
consists in palpably contradicting and varying from himself. For it is no
longer ago then p. 605. that he told us, as he had it from Petavius's own
mouth, ( a person well acquainted with Ecclesiastic Antiquity, page 604.) that
the word Homoousios was never used by greek Writers otherwise, then to signify
the agreement of things Numerically differing from one another, in some common
Nature or Universal Essence; or their having a Generical Unity or Identity, and
what he affirms here of all the Greek Writers in general, that he says more
particularly concerning Athanasius himself, page 606. after many instances
there produced, from all which it is unquestionably evident, that Athanasius
did not by the word (...) understand that which has the same singular and
Numerical Essence with another, but the same common, generical or specifical
only; and consequently, that he conceived the Son to be Co-essential or
Con-Substantial with the Father after that manner, and yet here page 619. he
has the confidence to tell us, that Athanasius himself, a Greek Writer to be
sure, and the same Athanasius that he was before, that this same Athanasius
himself, one of the Greek Writers that never used the word Homoousios otherwise
then for a specific Unity, but only now and then when they do use it otherwise,
as the Greeks have always been observed to be of a very changeable and
inconstant humor, that this very Athanasius Affirms, (...) and (...), that
the Tree is congenerous or homogenical with the Root, and the Branches
co-essential with the Vine, and his meaning is, as it should seem, that the
Stock and Branches are not only of one kind, but also altogether make up the
entire essence of one Plant or Tree; and this I think has been sufficiently
proved to be another sort of Unity, than that which is called Specific, neither
was this the only time, that the Greek Writer Athanasius in spite of Petavius
and his Transcriber Dr. C. used the word Homoousios; after the same manner, for
so the Doctor himself tells us, page 606. out of Athanasius, (...) that the
Branches are Homoousious and congenerous with the Vine or with the Root
thereof; and this testimony is the more to be regarded, not only because it is
alleged by the Doctor himself, to the utter undoing of his general
observation, page 605. that the word Homoousios is never used otherwise by
Greek Writers then to signify the agreement of things Numerically differing
from one another, in some common Nature or Universal Essence; But still the
rather because this is one of those very Citations from which the Doctor infers
that observation as a legitimate conclusion in the bottom of that page. From
all which it is unquestionably evident, that Athanasius did not by the word
Homoousios understand, that which has the same singular and Numerical Essence
with another, but the same common, generical or specifical only; and again
before this also page 598. speaking of the Platonic Trinity, he has these
words: The entireness of the whole Divinity is made up of all these three
together, which have all (...) one and the same Energy or Action ad extra, and
therefore as the Center, radious distance, moveable and circumference may be
all said to be co-essential to a Sphere; and the Root, Stock and Bows or
Branches, co-essential to an entire Tree, so but in a much more perfect sense,
are the Platonic Tagathon, Nous and Psyche, co-essential to that (...) that
Divinity in the whole Universe, neither was Athanasius a stranger to this
notion of the word (...) also he affirming (...) that the Branches are
coessential with, and indivisible from, the Vine, and illustrating the Trinity
by that similitude.

But notwithstanding that at some times, the Doctor may look upon this Unity
of Integration, not as a different Unity, though such it be most certainly, but
as an improvement of the Specific, which is the thing he drives at. p. 619.
yet at others he is pleased to display his ignorance in another way, and talks
after such a manner, as if the Specific Unity, and the Unity of Integration
were the same; for so, p. 606. He not only tells us according to the Doctrine
and Language of Athanasius, (...), That the Branches are Homoousios
(Co-Essential or Con-substantial) and Congenerous with the Vine, or with the
Root thereof. But he parallels this place of Athanasius with another of
Plotinus, where he affirms concerning the Soul, that it is (...), That it is
full of Divine things, by reason of its being Cognate or Congenerous and
Homoousios with them: That is, by reason of its Specifical Agreement in the
common genus of the Immaterial and Incorruptible Nature; for this was certainly
the sense of Plotinus, so that besides the bare sound of the words (...) and
(...) which in these two Citations have as different Senses, as it is possible
for the same words to put on, there is no manner of congruity or agreement
betwixt Plotin and Athanasius, and yet the Doctor not only manifestly implies
there is, but after having alleged the Testimony of Athanasius, he immediately
subjoyns; Besides which, the same Father uses (...) and (...) and (...)
differently for (...), in sundry places, none of which words can be thought to
signify an Identity of singular Essence, but only of Generical or Specifical:
Now the words, besides which are manifestly used, if they have any sense, to
strengthen and corroborate, what went immediately before, which was the place
of Athanasius concerning the Unity of Integration in the several parts of a
Vine, which place being paralleled with a place of Plotinus, concerning the
Specific Unity, and backed immediately by an observation which relates to
nothing else; we must either say, that the Doctor talks impertinently and
confounds the Elements of his Intellectual System, so that we may say of that,
what Ovid said, of such another System, before this comely Fabric of the
World, was brought into that beautiful and Majestic order in which we now
behold it, that it is,

-- -- rudis, indigestaque moles,
Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners, congestaque eodem
Non been Junctarum discordia semina rerum.
And the same Character will be exactly true, of the Intellectual Chaos, which
that incomparable Poet and Philosopher gives us of the natural,

Quaque erat and tellus, illic and Pontus and Ether,
Sic erat instabilis tellus, innabilis unda,
Lucis egens Aer, nulli sua forma manebat,
Obstabatque aliis aliud, quia corpore in uno
Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
Or else if the Character of an impertinent, be thought a little too severe and
sharp for a Man that is so proud and would be thought so learned, then you will
do well the next time you see him, to put him in mind of an honest English
Proverb, which is not to be found in Suidas, or Zenodotus, or Michael
Apostolius, or any of the Greek Paroemiographers, that ever I have met with,
that the greatest Clerks are not always the wisest Men; for if it be not
Impertinence, it is downright Nonsense, and who would think that so much
inconsistent, contradictious, incoherent Stuff should be the work of twice as
many weary days and restless nights, as Penelope spent upon her unravelling
Loom, in the long absence of her dear Ulysses, of twenty painful and laborious
years, and of two hundred and sixty variable Moons.

O rem ridiculam, Cato, and Jocosam! I wonder in my heart how the Learned
Doctor, as Learned as he is, came to be so cock sure that the word Homoousios
never was used otherwise by Greek Writers, than for things that were
Specifically the same, but had a Numerical difference from each other, the
chief reason he assigns is because Petavius told him so, and in this he seems
to be guilty of the same infirmity which he despises so much, p. 604. in the
(...), the many that are led by new Names and Authorities. It is true, he
produces many places where the word Homoousios is without question to be
understood of a Specifical Unity, but what is that to the purpose? Does it
therefore follow that it is never used otherwise? If he had given a particular
and complete Induction of all the places where this word is used in any Greek
Writer, and shown that in every one, it could not be understood otherwise then
of a Specific Identity, this had been a legitimate conclusion, but to say of a
word that may have diverse significations, that in some places it is used
altogether in one sense, and therefore there is no place where it has any
other, is an inference peculiar to the Doctors Logic, and shows him
sufficiently to have been a very unfit Architect to build an Intellectual
System, an Intellectual Castle in the Air, he should have called it, unless it
were built upon more solid Foundations, and had more substantial Pillars to
support it.

Well, but Petavius told him so, I marry did he, and what if he did? what then?
must we believe every thing that Petavius tells us? why then we must believe
that Transubstantiation is true, and that the Church of England is
Schismatical, in separating from the Church of Rome, for there is no doubt but
Petavius would have determined affirmatively upon these questions, as often as
any one had put them to him: Nay, but Petavius was a Man well skilled in
Ecclesiastic Antiquity, so he was, and so is not the Doctor who pretends to
follow him, but yet nothing hinders but both may be deceived; for Petavius was
neither Pope nor general Council, and if he had been both of these at once, yet
there is a Pestilent Heresy sprung up in these Northern parts, that will have
both of these to be liable to Error, and if Petavius be deceived the Doctor
must too, for they are Bithus and Bachius, Hand and Glove, an Original and a
Transcript, an Author and a Plagiary, so that if Petavius be blind, it follows
unavoidably, that the Intellectual Systemer must wink hard for Company, and so
they are both in danger of the Ditch; I do not mean Democritus his Ditch, at
the bottom of which the Truth was supposed to lie, but of the Ditch of Error
and Hallucination.

But after all, perhaps the Doctors memory may fail him, for is he sure that he
had this notion from Petavius; why truly when the matter comes to be sifted to
the bottom, Don John of Austria does not prove so tall as our Enformant first
took him to be, for by the Oath he has taken, he can say no more then that
Petavius intimated thus much, p. 605. but how did he intimate it? O it is no
matter for that! Intimations, you know Sir, may be made a thousand ways, which
it would be tedious at present to recount, and if this were but one of them it
is enough, as a Man of comprehension will tell you, there are several Roads to
Heaven, a Man might have taken lately a very convenient opportunity of going
thither through Turkey, in the company of the Grand Vizier, or if he will have
patience for a little longer, he may have a convenient and safe passage in the
Caravan of Count Tekeley, who goes thither in the Hungarian Road, there is a
very pleasant way thither through the Banians Country, and another that goes
all along under the great Wall of China, and people may go thither in what
habit they please, and to what Profession or Sect soever they belong, in Fur or
in Silk, in a Cowl or a Cassock, with Ribbands up to the Pocket holes, or in a
Coller-band, and a yea and nay pinner; but if you do but get to Heaven at last,
it is no matter for the Road you take, though you were to pass through
Purgatory it self, which is by much the furthest way about.

Petavius was a Jesuit every inch of him, and these Jesuits are mightily
given to sham the World with Equivocations and Mental Reservations, and such
like Loioliteish and Ignatian Tricks, as you will see particularly in this
Instance, in the Sequel of my Story; for I did my self the Honor to'ther day
to make him a visit; and to procure a more easy admittance, and a more kind
reception, I thought it best to make use of the Doctor's Name, and I told him
in as civil Language as I could, that I had Service to give him from Christ's
College, and that it run mightily in the Head of his humble Servant and
faithful Transcriber, as if he had intimated something that looked that way, or
let fall some words accidentally to that purpose, that the word Homoousios was
never used otherwise by Greek Writers, then to signify an agreement of things
Numerically different in the same common Nature or Universal Essence, and I
desired him that he would be plain in the business, and let us know whither we
might report this in Company, as from himself to be his opinion: Why truly,
said the Jesuit, after a little pause, and he put on, me thought, a very
intimating look, that had as much obliging Rhetoric as would have held a
Sheet, and that would have sold for a Guiney, had his Worship been to
Transcribe it from his Countenance, and Translate it out of red and white, into
white and black; truly said he, it is no small comfort and satisfaction to me
to find my Dogmata so pleasing, to one that is given so extremely to dogmatize
himself, yet am I not pleased so much for mine own sake, as for that of the
Catholic Religion, which I in that Book have maintained and asserted, for it
is manifest that this Gentleman has not only read my Book, but that he writ it
too; I do not mean so as if it were not mine, but that he writ it after me, so
kind is he to any thing that bears my Name, that he indulges and huggs it as if
it were his own, and then a smile, unbent the severity of his brow, a false,
Jesuitical, intimating smile it was, and was as much as if he should have said,
These Heretics are all of them Plagiaries and Transcribers; but really Sir,
continued he, as for what he charges me with, and I perceive he pretends great
intimacy with me, as if I had made, as if the word Homoousios had no other
meaning then what you speak of, in any Greek Writer; believe me Sir, I never
said any such thing in all my life, nor any thing that looked with half an Eye
that way, he denied it with all the Asseveration of a Jesuit at the Gallows,
so that I knew not what to think; but finding the Man grow warm in his own
defense, I was very weary of his Company, and offered to take my leave, making
the best Apology I could for giving him this disturbance, and it so happening
just at that nick of time, that there were other scruple-mongers rapping at the
Door, and in great haste to be resolved, the Father was glad to take me at my
word, and referred me for my further satisfaction to his Book de Trinitate,
where he said, I should soon be satisfied how much the Learned Heretic had
misreported him, and accordingly, notwithstanding that he was a rank Jesuit,
yet I found his words afterward to be very true.

For he tells us plainly in his Fourth Book that the Word (...) was in use not
only among the Orthodox, but among the Manichean Heretics themselves, long
before the Nicene Council, to express their Notion of the Trinity, which did
not consist of a specific Unity, but was taken up wholely in the Unity of
Integration, and every part of that whole, of which the Trinity was composed,
they called (...), or rather Homoousion according to them signified the whole
Substance taken together, of which every single Person was (...) a Part, as our
incomparable Bishop of Chester has observed, and withal corrected the Mistake
of Petavius in this matter; For whereas the Learned Jesuit speaking of St.
Hilary's Translation of the Word Homoousion has these Words: Quod Hilarious ita
Latin reddidit, tanquam Homoousion id significaret, quod partem substantiae
habet ex toto resectam, The Judicious Prelate observes, that this was done by
Petavius without reason, for, says he, St. Hillary clearly translates
Homoousion barely unius Substantiae, and it was in the Original (...), which he
expressed by partem unius Substantiae; from whence it is manifest in the Usage
of the Manichees, who were as good Greeks, as the Orthodox themselves, that as
(...) signified a Part of that Substance, whose whole was all of it of a
similar and homogeneous Nature; so Homoousion by it self signified that
Substance, which was numerically one with it self, and not specifically one
with another; and yet this it seems was an ordinary and constant Use of the
Word among some Sort of Men, and which Athanasius himself favored in his
comparison of the Vine, before the Nicene Creed was known in the World; or if
we should allow that the whole could not so properly be said to be Homoousion,
as the Parts of which it consists, yet this is only an Unity of Integral Parts,
not a specific Unity of several things, that are considered as wholes by
themselves, and this is enough to destroy the Doctor's Observation; Nay, this
Interpretation of the Word Homoousios was so proper to the Manichees, that, as
the same excellent Bishop observes; Arius, for this very reason pretended to
reject the Name, Homoousion, lest hereby he should be thought to admit a real
Composition, or Division in the Deity; and Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea refused
to subscribe to the Creed of the Council of Nice, till this Word was mollifyed
by Interpretation; so that he might be sure to take it in an Orthodox Sense.

But it is still more remarkable what Petavius observes, concerning the Schism
that happened at Antioch, about the Hypostases of the Blessed Trinity, some
would have it, that in this Mystery there was but one Hypostasis or Divine
Substance; (for that was it which in that Controversy they understood by the
word Hypostasis) others that there were three, yet did the one endeavor so to
explain their notion of Three Hypostases (though that in Truth cannot be done)
as to avoid Polytheism, and the other so to interpret the Doctrine of one
Substance, as to avoid the Heresies of Sabellius and Paulus Samosatenus and
Photinus; and therefore meeting together to compose the business at a Synod at
Alexandria, both Parties were by the authority of Athanasius himself persuaded
to acquiesce in the Nicene Formulary of Faith, to which it was impossible for
any one to subscribe without acknowledging the Persons of the Blessed Trinity
to be Homoousious one with another; for though this word before the Nicene
Council were abused to an unsound and erroneous sense by the Manichean
Heretics, and therefore were at first rejected by the Orthodox themselves; yet
at last it began to be looked upon, as a word that did the most significantly
declare the meaning of the Orthodox, against Heresies of all sorts, so far as
the Mystery of the Trinity was concerned; and for that reason it was inserted
in the Symbol of Nice, and it is not only clear by the acknowledgment of
Petavius, but it is unavoidably necessary in the nature of the thing, that if
both Parties in the Schisma Antiochenum did equally subscribe to and acquiesce
in the Nicene Confession, that they must also subscribe mutually to the word
Homoousion, although they took it in different senses, the one as expressing only
an Unity of Specific Nature, and the other an Unity of Individual Essence, and
is it not then extremely bold in this unskillful pretender to Ecclesiastic
Antiquity? First to tell us with so dogmatical a confidence, that the word
Homoousion was never used otherwise by Greek Writers, then to signify a
generical or a Specific Unity, and then to quote Petavius for his Author, who
does so plainly and so substantially confute him? and moreover shows that even
as it is set down in the Nicene Creed, it was not a word of a determined
signification, but signified indifferently according to the different opinion
of those who had themselves subscribed to it; either the Specific Unity or the
Numerical, though to speak truth, as they that were for one Hypostasis, yet
made more then a Sabellian or Nominal distinction betwixt the Three Persons; so
they that were for Three yet were ashamed, when they were urged, to explain
their Doctrine after such a manner; as if the Three Persons were as distinct
and different from one another as three several men are known to be, (which is
the Doctors Athanasian sense of Homoousios) and would have been very loath to
be so understood, as if they ran into Gentilism to avoid the inconvenience of
the Sabellian Doctrine; but yet so, as that this was all the while the
different principle upon which they proceeded; the assertors of one Hypostasis
were afraid of Polytheism, and the maintainers of three of Sabellianism;
notwithstanding that when they came to discourse together, neither could
explain or vindicate their own Doctrine, so as to make it plain and free from
all exception, but both Parties mutually centred in this point, that there was
indeed but one only God, notwithstanding that there were Three Divine Persons,
but said the one of them how can there be Three Divine Hypostases, without
admitting Three Gods? to which the other not able to give any satisfactory
answer, contented themselves with being able as they thought to charge their
adversaries with an equal difficulty on their part, how can there be said to be
Three Divine Persons, unless you admit Three Divine Hypostases or Substances
also? and this last mentioned difficulty whatever answer it is capable of
receiving, yet it is certain, that in Antiquity it never met with any, so that
the controversy was endless, and both of the contending Parties, being mutually
agreed, that there was but one God; notwithstanding that there were Three
Divine Persons, though neither could give a satisfactory account of their way
of explaining it; it was indeed no better then a (...) or Controversy about
words, when in the main business they were both of them agreed, and neither
knew how to explain their particular sentiments, as to the Modus of it to the
other, or to themselves, and this is no more then what St. Jerome expressly
tells us in E. 57. ad Damascen cited by Petavius L. 4. C. 4. of his book de
Trinitate -- fufficiat nobis dicere unam substantiam, Tres Personas
subsistentes, perfect as, aequales, coaeternas, taceantur tres Hypostases, si
placet, and una teneatur, non bonae suspicionis est, cum in eodem sensu verba
dissentiunt.

This was the true reason that made Athanasius and others so extremely
uncertain in their determinations, how there could be Three Divine Persons, and
yet but one Divine Substance they could not tell; and there is no question, but
they were miserably run a ground as often as they encountered with the Arrians
about it; and this made them sometimes fly to the Specific Unity, as Athanasius
himself is sometimes found to have done, but this was more professedly and
constantly the Doctrine of Gregory Nyssen and Cyrillus Alexandrinus and some
others of the Fathers; but this lying so fairly open to the charge of Gentilism
from their Arrian Opposers; they sometimes fled for refuge into the Manichean
Unity, which was the Unity of the Vine and Stock and Branches or the Unity of
Integration, but then at other times being made sufficiently sensible, not only
of the weakness but Impiety of this Doctrine, they compared it to the Sun, and
its Splendour and Light, which have no real difference from one another, and
herein, if I am not mistaken, they fell in with the Heresy of the Valentinians
who made the Son to be (...) a kind of a ray, or shooting out of that Divine
Substance which is called the Father, they are the words of Arrius himself
concerning Velentinus in his Epistle to Alexander, (...), which St. Hillary
has rendered prolationem patris; and this if I am not mistaken is the very same
Heresy which was branded with an Anathema, by several Presbyters and Deacons of
the Marcellian Party, under the name of (...) as if the Son were a kind of an
enlargement or dilatation of the Divine Substance, of which I shall have
occasion to say more in a very little while, so that to avoid the poison of the
Arian Doctrine they ran almost, by turns and without any constancy or fixed
assurance, into all other Heresies and absurdities whatsoever, the reason of
which was that without discarding the Authority of the Scriptures, they thought
they could not by any means let go that Fundamental Position, that there was
but one God, notwithstanding that there were Three Divine Persons, and
therefore sometimes being perplextand entangled in their own Meditations, and
at other times forced in a manner upon it by the Arians, urging them
perpetually to explain the Modus in which it was at least possible for such a
thing to be, they resolved the difficulty sometimes one way, and sometimes
another; and what I say of the Arians the same is to be understood of the
Ebionites, and of the Followers of Artemon and Paulus and of the Disciples of
Sabellius and Photinus, for all these Heresies were owing more or less to the
inconceivable obscurity, and as they thought implicit Contradiction, of this
proposition that the Godhead being but One, there were notwithstanding Three
Personalties to be met with in it.

Again as the difficulty of explaining the Doctrine of the Trinity, as to the
manner wherein it was possible for Three Divine Persons to be really existent,
notwithstanding that there was but One Divine Substance, occasioned as well the
Heresy of the Arians themselves, as all those other Heresies that have been
mentioned; so the constant Attestation of the Scripture to this Truth, That
there is but One God, or One Divine Substance, and that there were Three
Persons, that were truly and properly Divine, did sometimes shake the
confidence of the Arian Party, and produced that Heresy which was called
Semiarian, which banished the Word Homoousion out of the Creed, as may be seen
in the Confession of the Selcucian Synod under Constantius, and introduced that
of (...) instead of it, which was received by some of the Catholics
themselves, though in a different Sense, as Petavius has observed, and indeed
there was no reason why it should not equally have been received by all, if
they had looked upon the Unity of the Blessed Trinity, to be no more then
Specifical, for this is that which (...) does most properly signify, as
Lucretius explains the (...) of Anaxagoras to be a Specifical Identity of
similar parts: Furthermore as they acknowledged the Son to be (...),
Co-essential or Consubstantial with the Father, though in a sense much beneath
the Specifical, so did they likewise call him (...), God of God, but in so cold
a sense, that when the matter came to be examined to the bottom, they differed
scarce any thing from the Arians themselves, as Epiphanius has taken notice.

But when all is done Athanasius, when he was not disputing with himself, nor
with the Arians or other Heretics, and when he attended only to the
declarations of the Scripture concerning this great Mystery of the Christian
Faith, the Doctrine of the Trinity, he did believe and affirm plainly, that
there was but one Hypostasis or Substance in it, and that the three Persons of
which it was composed, did all of them belong, to use the Doctors Language, to
the same singular Existent Essence, and yet notwithstanding he must be supposed
all this while to subscribe heartily to the word (...) in the Nicene Creed, and
by consequence did understand it after that manner, in which the Intellectual
Dogmatist asserts, that it was never understood by him or by any other Greek
Writer; and because he is pleased to hold the World in hand, that he speaks
this by intimation from Petavius, therefore I will prove what I have said to be
true, by the Authority of the same Writer, who not only intimates, but plainly
affirms the contrary, L. 4. de Trin. c. 13. where after having cited a passage
out of Athanasius, in his Fifth Oration, to prove that he held but one
Hypostasis or Divine Substance in the Trinity, he adds this Comment upon the
Citation, Vbi quod Divinitate unum ait esse Patrem and Filium, de ea sola, quae
speciei convenit, unitate non potest accipi, alioqui non id adjungeret; Filium
a Patre sectum ac divisum non esse neque ab eo separari: cum individua
quaelibet sub eadem comprehensa specie, ab iis unde propagata sunt, divisa sint
ac separata. And at the end of another Citation out of this Exposition of
Faith, a very good place to Judge of Athanasius's opinion, he has these words,
Prorsus in tribus personis unam and individuam substantiam ac naturam
Athanasius agnoscit; non cujusmodi in tribus est hominibus, aut in Diis
pluribus, si Dei species esset ulla communis pluribus, sed quem admodum una
Fontis aqua est and Fluvii; quae continua cum sit, neque interrupta; non specie
tantum, sed numero aqua una censetur. And that this was Petavius his settled
opinion appears from L. 1. c. 13. S. 5. Where he has these words, referring to
this Chapter in his Fourth Book, at vero unam tantum Hypostasin Trinitatis
Athanasius agnoscit, ut Libro quarto demonstrabimus; the Sum of all which is no
more than this, that the Systematical Compiler thinks Petavius to have
intimated as much; as if neither Athanasius nor any other Greek Writer
understood the word (...) in any other sense, then only to signify a
Specifical Agreement between things Numerically differing from each other, and
Petavius thinks he has demonstrated the contrary, not only out of Athanasius,
but other of the Fathers, who did concur with him in the acknowledgement of a
singular Essence, as may be seen in that and other Chapters of that Book,
notwithstanding that they did all of them unquestionably subscribe to the word
Homoousios in the Nicene Creed; to all which it is still farther to be added,
that in the Antiochian Schism, they which were the true occasion of it, were
not they who asserted one Hypostasis, but the maintainers of three, which gave
such offense to the Assertors of one, as tending to Polytheism, that it
occasioned a separation between them, and this happening as it did, though in
the same Age, yet somewhat after the Nicene Council, it is manifest that those
Fathers before this Schism happened, did generally maintain the singular
Existent Essence, and by consequence, that they understood the word (...) in
that signification, and so here is a public, and the greatest of all public
Authorities in the Church, for the Numerical and Individual Essence, long
before the Lateran Council was thought of in the World, if we will take the
unquestionable Sentiments of the Nicene Fathers, for a public determination
upon this question, although they did not definitively declare their meaning,
in express words, for the individual Essence, which if they had done, it would
have been impossible for both parties, in the Schism of Antioch, to acquiesce
in the Authority of that Council, and mutually subscribe to their confession of
Faith; and indeed the signification of that word, not having been definitively
and scrupulously determined by the Council of Nice, is a very strong Argument,
that all those Fathers were Unanimous for the singular Essence, otherwise there
would have been a division upon this account, in the Council it self,
Antecedent to that of Antioch, and this division would either have occasioned a
mutual separation, as afterward it did, or they would have explained their
Sentiments concerning the Blessed Trinity, in such terms of Latitude, as both
parties might well enough acquiesce in, which would have rendered a Schism upon
that score, in a manner afterward impossible.

Another thing which I shall instance in to show what Sentiments the Council of
Nice had in this Affair, shall be the Story of Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, who
was one of those 318 Fathers of which that Council was composed, a very strong
Oppugner of the Arrian Faction, as himself assures us in an Epistle written
afterward in his own Defense to Julius Bishop of Rome, but yet notwithstanding
not long after this Council, he was Deposed from his Bishopric for Heresy by
Eusebius Caesariensis and his Party; but Epiphanius makes a great doubt,
whether he should reckon him among Heretics or no, and it is certain, that he
not only approved himself to the said Julius the Roman Bishop, and to
Athanasius himself for a Man sound in the Faith, but that the Council of Sardis
determined in his favor, and judging that he had been abused and
misrepresented by the above mentioned Eusebius, restored him to his Bishopric
again. Now if it can be proved that the Doctrine of Marcellus was no other then
that of the singular existent Essence in the Persons of the Trinity; then it
follows likewise, that this was the Judgment of Julius and of Athanasius too,
to whom he approved himself, and not only so, but of the Council of Sardis
also, by whom he was restored, and the Doctrine of the Nicene Council, being at
that time the Orthodox Measure of Faith, we may from hence infer their
Sentiments likewise.

The Confession of Marcellus is set down in his Epistle to Julius in
Epiphanius, in these words, (...) that is, we are assured from the Holy
Scriptures, that the Godhead of the Father and the Son, is indivisibly United,
for if any one shall separate the Son, that is, the word from God Almighty (or
God the Father) it is necessary that he either maintain the existence of two
Gods, which is agreed to be repugnant to the Scriptures, or that he say the
word is not God, which is equally inconsistent with the Catholic Faith with
the other; for the Evangelist tells us, the word was God, and I have been
exactly ((...)) or certainly taught, that the Son is the indivisible and
inseparable Power of the Father, for our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ says, I
am in the Father, and the Father in me, and whosoever has seen me, has seen the
Father also. This Faith I having received from the Scriptures, and from the
Succession of Believers that have gone before me in the profession of it
((...)) I Preach in the Church and write it to you. In which confession
Epiphanius himself grants, that there is nothing which is not Orthodox and
sound, but yet he thinks it reasonable to believe he might be guilty of some
Errors, which occasioned this Defense of himself, and Petavius says, That in
the Books of Eusebius, which were written against him, there are several
excerpta cited out of his own Writings, which cannot bear a Justifiable
Interpretation; but yet he acknowledges Eusebius to have been too uncharitable
and morosely critical and censorious, in putting the worst construction upon
every thing, in Marcellus his Writings, and representing every thing to an
extremity of disadvantage, very disagreeable to a fair and candid Writer, and
the Judgment of Petavius is confirmed by a passage in Epiphanius, concerning
Athanasius, of whom, when Epiphanius himself demanded what his Judgment was of
Marcellus, he gave him little or no answer, (...), only intimated by a smile,
that he was not far from Heretical pravity, but that he looked upon him as a
convert. He did not say he ever was an Heretic, but only seemed to intimate
some such thing by a smile, upon which a Man might have put different
Interpretations, as his fancy served, as if he had not been far from something
that was amiss, but afterward both saw and amended his Error, which is a
mighty extenuating way of calling a Man Heretic, as can possibly be imagined:
Petavius himself supposes him, out of hatred and detestation of the Arian
Herisie, to have run sometimes a little too far into the other extreme, and to
have inclined to the Sabellian Doctrine; but it is strange to me, that none of
the Bishops that sat to Judge and Determine upon his Cause at Sardis, and who
were equal Enemies to both Extremes, could discern any such thing; for it is
manifest they approved the Man and his opinions, and whereas Petavius gives it
still further, as his Judgment, that in this very Epistle, which was directed
to Julius, his Confession is worded after so cold a manner, that it will scarce
serve to free him from the imputation of Sabellianism, which his Adversaries
would have cast upon him: It is sufficient to me, that it satisfied Julius at
that time, who knew Marcellus better then Petavius could do, and that
Athanasius himself was one of his Compurgators, who is unanimously
acknowledged, bating the uncertainty of his resolutions as to the Modus of the
Trinity, none of which ought therefore to be looked upon as his fixed opinion,
to have been far enough from any thing that looked that way, and yet there is
one thing in the Confession of Marcellus, which might have been thought to
savor of Sabellianism, were it not the express Language of the Scripture it
self, where speaking of the Son, he says that he was (...), the inseparable and
indivisible Power of the Father, as if he were not a distinct Person, but only
an Attribute or affection of that Divine Substance which is called the Father,
but so the Scripture speaks 1 Cor. 1. 24. Christ, the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God, but what then? does it follow from thence that he was not a
distinct Person from God the Father? by no means, but only that he was a Person
endued and furnished with divine Power and Wisdom; as when the People said,
though falsely and mistakenly of Simon Magus, Act. 8. 10. This Man is the great
power of God, they meant no more then this, not that he was an Attribute or
Affection of God the Father, or God the Father in a certain respect, not
differing from him in Person, and in a separate reality of Existence, but only
that he was a Person working by Divine Power; although I confess what the
Apostle said of Christ is true in an infinitely more noble and exalted Sense,
than that which the People said of Simon Magus, tho all had been true of him,
which they can be supposed to have understood by it; for they meant no more
than that Simon was a Person working by Divine Power and Assistance; but St.
Paul referred to the Union of the two Natures in the Person of Christ, by which
it came to pass, the same divine Substance being common to both, as shall be
hereafter more particularly declared, that the same Power and Wisdom,
numerically the same, as belonging inseparably to the same Divine Substance,
did belong to both, the Father and the Son, and what that is which
distinguishes the Persons, notwithstanding the same singular Essence belong in
common to them both, shall be considered more largely by and by; so that if we
reflect upon this Passage of Marcellus, which is the only thing that can derive
an Imputation of Heresy upon him; and consider first, that it is no more than
the Language of the Scripture it self; and secondly who it was to whom this
Epistle was directed in his own just and necessary Vindication, it will appear
in both respects not only charitable, but highly just and reasonable to
believe, that Marcellus meant nothing but what was truly Orthodox and
unquestionably sound; and it is strange to me, that Petavius should discern so
much Art in this Confession of Marcellus, as if it were written so that it
might possibly bear a Sabellian Interpretation, notwithstanding that he has
taken no notice of this Passage in it, which is the only thing that looks that
way.

And what if Eusebius condemned him in his Writings, and by his interest
deposed him from his Bishopric; certainly the Opinion of the Bishops that sat
in Council concerning his Affair, and his Restoration to his See, which was
consequent upon it, is more considerable in his Justification, then the other
can redound to his prejudice or disgrace; they did not condemn him after the
example of Eusebius, but on the contrary, censured Eusebius, for what he had
done; which is a very great testimony of Antiquity in his behalf, besides that
notwithstanding some of those excerpta which Eusebius pretends to have taken
out of Marcellus, cannot perhaps be reconciled to an Orthodox Sense; yet since
it was the Opinion of so many Ancient and unquestionably Orthodox Bishops, with
whom Petavius himself in part agrees: that Eusebius was possessed with a violent
prejudice against his adversary, and that he laid hold of the most trifling
occasions, of things that would by no means bear it, to run him down; which the
Learned Jesuit confesses him to have done, how can we tell but he might
misquote him also, for there is nothing more ordinary even in our days,
notwithstanding that since Printing came in, and so many Copies are immediately
spread abroad, it is more dangerous to do it now, then it was then; and may be
more effectually remedied by Printing, and dispersing a true and impartial
representation of the case.

Nay, that there was indeed a great deal of foul play in the behavior of
Marcellus his adversaries toward him, of which adversaries Eusebius of
Caesarea was the chief, appears from the great praecaution of Marcellus, as to
that very Epistle which he sent to Julius, for he took a Copy of it for himself
before he sent it away, and he beggs likewise of Julius to send faithful Copies
of it to the Bishops within his Jurisdiction for the prevention of mistakes,
and that the world might be satisfied from himself what manner of man he was,
which would have been a needless thing had there not been some ill practices
made use of, to represent him amiss, and to make him say what he never intended.

That Marcellus was a firm and resolute Assertor of the singular Divine Essence
in the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity, may be proved undenyably from the
words of his Confession. For first he says, (...), etc. The Godhead of the
Father and Son are divisible and inseparable from each other, which is as much
as to say in other words; as Athanasius himself did sometimes (...), The
Godhead of the Son, is the Godhead of the Father, which can be understood of
nothing but the Numerical Essence, as I have shown already, and so I find since
Dionysius Petavius to have applied it before me; but now upon supposition of a
specifical Unity, there will as really be Two Godheads, and by consequence Two
Gods, as any two things specifically united are numerically distinct from one
another; and yet this was that which Marcellus plainly endeavored to avoid, by
saying, (...), That the Godhead of the Father and the Son was inseparable and
indivisible, as it appears by what is immediately subjoyned, (...) that is, He
that separates or divides the Son, that is, the Word from God (the Father)
Almighty, it is necessary either that he assert Two Gods, which is repugnant to
Scripture, or that he deny the Son to be God, which seems to be every whit as
inconsistent with the Catholic Faith as the other. In which Words it is as
plain as Words can make it, that he affirms, there is but (...) one Almighty,
and that Christ himself is that one Almighty, or that he does not differ from
him, because upon supposition that he did; one of these two things must be
granted, either that Christ was not God, which he rejects as repugnant to the
Scripture, or that there must be at once (...) Two Gods, at least Numerically
distinct, which is all the sense in which it is possible to conceive of Two
Gods, supposing them both to be Omnipresent, Omnipotent and Infinitely Perfect
Beings, (and otherwise then this they are not properly Gods) For they will both
of them have the same Attributes, and the same Perfections, and so can be only
Numerically distinct from one another, from whence it follows, that if the
Numerical distinction be not of its self sufficient to introduce a Plurality of
Gods, then there can be no Polytheisme in the world, that is Polytheism
strictly and properly so called, and understood of several Beings infinitely
perfect.

Besides that, the Specific Unity, as it is in it self perfect Nonsense, as
has been already sufficiently declared, so is it perfectly inconsistent with
that notion of the Trinity, to which the Assertors of the Specific Unity did
themselves subscribe; For the Son, as such, is begotten by the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, as such, proceeds or flows from the Father and the Son; so that
here is a manifest and a confessed Subordination of the one Person to the other,
and the Son though he be begotten by an eternal Generation, though it be true
as, the Ancient Confessions are used to express it, (...), That there was no
time when he was not, yet it is manifest that an eternal Generation argues an
eternal Dependence upon an eternal Parent, and an eternal Emanation or
Procession, an eternal Dependence upon an eternal Cause; so that here is
self-existence on the one hand, and Dependence on the other; and these two are
so far from being specifically united, that they do toto genere, and toto coelo
distare, and as the Son has an eternal dependence on the Father, as his
eternal Parent, so is the Holy Ghost proceeding from both, with respect to the
Son, posterior natura, though not cognitione, as the Logicians speak, because
there is no time when he was not, so that the Son and Holy Ghost, that is, that
Characteristic mark or difference, whatsoever it is, by which the Son and Holy
Ghost are distinguished from the Father and from each other, is on both hands a
Creature, though it be an eternal one, depending upon, and eternally flowing
from an eternal cause; for that which constitutes the Person of the Son, is the
human nature united to the Divine, and that which fills up the nature and
notion of the Holy Ghost is a certain, subtle, subeternal matter, united and
incorporated with the Divine and Human Nature, and animated by the common life
of both, and yet though these two things, by which the Persons are
distinguished from each other, and from God the Father, who is the Source and
Fountain of the Godhead, are without all question Creatures of his making, yet
the whole Person which results on either hand from the Union of the Created and
Uncreated Nature together, is truly and properly God; for by God nothing else
is or can be understood, but a Person acted and animated by a life that is
truly and properly Divine, and such without question both of these Persons are,
otherwise there can be no vital Union between the created and uncreated Nature
in them, which is that upon which their Divine personality depends, and as they
may all three, as well the one as the other, be truly and properly said to be
God, so also, notwithstanding what has been said yet, is the Father uncreate,
the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate, that is the Godhead which is in
the whole Person, the eternal, simple, abstracted Life in the one, the cause of
life and personality, and the principal ingredient of life and personality in
the two other, which are Persons of a Dissimilar, Heterogeneous and Compounded
Nature, (and the whole Person is rightly denominated from its principal and
chiefest Life) is in all three not only Uncreate, but Numerically the same, so
that there are not three Vncreates, but one Uncreate, nor three
Incomprehensibles, but one Incomprehensible, nor three Gods, but one God, as it
is expressly asserted in that Creed, which goes, how truly I do not now dispute,
under the Name of Athanasius, and was allowed for Orthodox, before the Lateran
Council.

But yet, as the rest of the Trinitarian Fathers, when they were pressed by the
Arians or other Heretics, or disputed and argued the case too nicely with
themselves, were used to recur to the Specific Unity, and the Emperichoresis
and the Unity of Integration, and such like very improper and inadequate
expedients to help themselves, so Marcellus being equally at a loss how to
explain the Doctrine of the Trinity, being a firm and resolute Assertor of the
Vty of the Godhead, and disdaining to make use of such Vnphilosophical ways of
solving the difficulty, which was in effect, but to make a new riddle instead
of explaining the old, though he could not for his life, being, as he was, a
very honest and impartial Person, bring himself to doubt, but that the Language
of the Scripture, in its most plain and obvious Interpretation, did assert the
Divinity of Christ and of the Holy Ghost, yet at some times being startled with
the difficulty of the thing, he would say, with something of doubt and
hesitation, betwixt the difficulty of the thing, and the plainness of the
Scripture, in asserting and maintaining it, that the Scripture did seem to say
thus much; for so in the Confession sent to Julius, he says of those that
denied the Divinity of the Son, (...), which seems to be repugnant to the
Orthodox Faith grounded upon the Scriptures, for that is his meaning, as it
follows in the next words, (...), for so the Evangelist St. John tells us, that
the word was God, but yet it must be confessed that this Interpretation, which
I have put upon the word (...) is not the only possible Interpretation,
neither, as I do verily believe so agreeable to the Sentiments of Marcellus, as
another which I will now mention, and that is that by (...) may be understood,
not as if he had spoken doubtfully, that the Scripture seems to look that way,
as if Christ were a Divine Person as well as God the Father, but that he really
is so, and that this appears plainly to be the sense of the Scriptures; for so
the word seems to have been used in that place of the Author to the Hebrews,
where God is said to have made the things that are seen out of things which did
not appear, (...), that is, out of things which really were not, and so (...)
in this place are things, not which barely appear or are supposed to be, but
which have a real, undoubted and positive existence, and in this sense the
Adjectives (...) and (...) are used, not for things which are only in fancy or
opinion, but which have a real and a manifest Existence, and are discovered by
their own light; and it is plain, that this sense is most agreeable to what
follows in Marcellus; (...), etc. But I, says he, have learnt or know for
certain, that the Son is the indivisible or inseparable Power of the Father;
for our Savior himself, even our Lord Jesus Christ says, I am in the Father
and the Father in me, and I and the Father are one, and he that has seen me
has seen the Father also, which citations of his, as they cannot so clearly
and so naturally be applied to any thing, as to the Numerical Essence, so when
he says, (...), I know, or I have learnt for certain, that the Son, etc. The
Rules of Connection do require that this be spoken in opposition to the two
Opinions just mentioned before, one of which asserted a Plurality of Gods; and
the other denied the Divinity of Christ, and being expressed in such peremptory,
dogmatical and categorical Terms; this is a plain and undeniable Testimony of
Marcellus to himself, that he was for the singular existent Essence, which he
did not only maintain in this Epistle to Pope Julius, but he tells him it had
always been his constant Doctrine; for so he goes on, (...); This Faith I
having received from the Scriptures and Tradition I preach in the Church, as
well as I have owned and asserted it in this Epistle to you.

Nevertheless, for that he would not presume as others did, when they were
pressed upon it by their Adversaries, or intangl'd in their own private
Meditations, to explain the Modus of the Trinity; for this reason he was
charged by his Enemies with denying the thing it self, as if in effect he had
asserted but one divine Person, because he stuck to one Numerical Substance,
without so much as pretending to explain, how it was possible for a Trinity of
Persons at this rate to exist; this was the reason, why Athanasius himself
would sometimes speak with doubt and hesitancy concerning him, or at least make
broad signs, as Epiphanius would have it, as if he were not far from Heresy,
and it was the occasion likewise, why Photinus, who was Scholar to Marcellus,
sticking to his Master' s Sentiments concerning the Numerical Unity or singular
existent Essence of the divine Nature, and not being able upon this supposition
to explain the Modus of a Trinity of Persons, did at last run headlong into
that desperate Heresy, which is answered by that of the Socinians now a days,
and therefore Petavius rightly calls the Men of that persuasion the Novi
Photiniani, and did not only deny the Divinity of the Person of Christ, as well
as that of the Holy Ghost, considered as a distinct Person from God the Father,
but which was more then ever was asserted or believed by the Arians themselves,
he affirmed of Christ, that he had no manner of Being or Existence Antecedent
to his Conception, in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin.

But though the Doctrine of Marcellus, which was very peremptory for the
singular Essence, without explaining the mode of it, gave occasion to the
Heresy of Photinus, yet that in this he plainly degenerated from the
Sentiments of his Master, may be seen not only from what has been said
already, but also from an Epistle still extant in Epiphanius, which was written
by several Presbiters and Deacons, professing and avowing themselves to be
Marcellians, to several Bishops of the Province of Diocaesarea, who were then
under Banishment for their adherence to the Orthodox Religion, wherein they
declare themselves to stand firmly to the declarations and definitions of the
Nicene Council; they condemn the Heresies of Arius and Sabellius, and Photinus
and P. Samosatenus, as also those of the Manichees and Valentinians, in as
plain words as it is possible for the Greek Language to speak, which is, I
think, a sufficient Justification of Marcellus himself, who could not have such
Disciples, without being a more Orthodox Master, then some of his Enemies would
represent him to have been, besides that it is to be considered, that this
Epistle being written to Men under Banishment and in affliction, as it is
probable, in the Reign of Constantius, who persecuted the Orthodox with a
Vatinian hatred, and a cruelty nothing inferior to that of the Blackest
Tyrants, it is the greater Argument of the sincerity of the Writers, the
greater Justification of Marcellus, whose Disciples they do so openly declare
themselves to be, and perhaps one of the best proofs that can be alleged of
the general Sentiments of the Council of Nice, which they pretend to follow, in
favor of the singular Essence.

Lastly, For a still more clear and irrefragable Elucidation of this matter,
and to show still further, what were the Apprehensions of the Nicene Fathers
generally speaking, and at such times when they did not dispute nicely, either
with themselves or others, concerning the Mode in which the Godhead may be said
to be one, notwithstanding there be granted to be a Trinity of Divine Persons,
I will here produce three Testimonies of Epiphanius, with which I will conclude
this business. The first is this Ancorat. p. 120. Ed. Petav. where he condemns
and censures the Impiety of the Arians; in these remarkable words, (...). That
is, the Arians are of all other Heretics, the most wicked and profane, who
have dared to divide and alienate the Son from the substance of the Father, not
vouchsafing to make him equal in Glory with the Father, nor allowing that he is
begotten of the Fathers substance; from which words, which were without
question spoken by Epiphanius agreeably, as he thought, to the Catholic
Doctrine of Nice, there are two things especially to be observed, First, that
he condemns the Arians for dividing the substance of the Son from that of the
Father, which yet there is no question but all Men do, who are not friends to
the Numerical Essence, at the same time Co-existing in the three Persons, and
here it is remarkable that he makes use of two several words, (...) and (...),
by the first of which a Numerical and by the second a Specifical or Generical
difference is manifestly to be understood, this being the most easy and
natural sense of the words, and without this, one of them must be acknowledged
to be altogether superfluous and redundant, besides that, though the latter
included the sense of the first, yet the first will by no means comprehend and
take in the sense of the latter, so that the Arians being here condemned for
two things, first, for making the Son a substance distinct from the substance
of the Father, and secondly, for making him a substance of another Nature, as
well Specifically as Numerically Distinct, nothing can be plainer, then that
Epiphanius in this place was an Assertor of the Numerical Essence.

But secondly, he reproves the Arians for denying the Son to be begotten (...),
of the Substance of the Father, as Epiphanius and all the Nicene Fathers
asserted that he was, and they acknowledging him as they did, to be a Divine
Substance United to an Humane, and it being impossible for one Divine Substance
to beget another, which being once admitted, it will make an infinite
possibility of numberless and endless Gods, and is in it self as downright
Nonsense, as it is possible for any notion never so absurd to be, one of these
three things must of necessity be allowed, either that that Phrase is impious
and profane, that it tends to Polytheism in the most absurd and foolish sense
of that word, and yet the only proper sense in which it is possible for
Polytheism properly so called to be understood, or that it is impertinent and
insignificant, or that it includes in it an Assertion of the Numerical Nature,
or the singular existent Essence.

This is the first of the three places proposed to be produced out of
Epiphanius: The second is, where going about to prove the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost, from 1 Cor. c. 2. v. 10. The Spirit teaches all things, yea, the deep
things of God. He argues thus, (...). That which is not of the substance of
God, it is impossible that it should search out the deep things of God, that
is, that which is not of the same Numerical Substance; for the sense of the
Argument must be taken from the comparison: which is this, the Spirit of God
searches all things, yea, the deep things of God; for what Man knows the
things of of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man which is in him? Even so the
things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God: Now no Man will pretend
that the Spirit and Mind of one Man, knows the Spirit or Mind of another, or
is acquainted with the inward and concealed operation of his Understanding and
Will, so that either there is no comparison, or the Spirit of God and the
Spirit of Man, must on both sides be understood, not of the Specifical but
Numerical Nature, and to say that Epiphanius, or those from whom he borrowed
it, for there is no question but it was the received Argument of the Orthodox
in those times, neither he or they, though they urged a good Argument, yet
understood wherein the strength of it lay, but that on the contrary they did
not argue ad idem, and that according to them, it was no Argument at all, is at
once precarious and rude into the bargain, and is almost like the monstrous
absurdity of the Epicurean Doctrine, that affirms all things to have come by
chance, notwithstanding all the outstrokes, appearances and signatures of the
most exquisite Wisdom, and the most perfect Skill.

The third and last place of Epiphanius which I shall mention is, where
speaking of the Ancient formulary of Faith, which he says was delivered by
Tradition from the Apostles, and agreed upon in a Council of 310 Bishops in the
(...), the Holy City, that is, Jerusalem, he explains that Article, which is at
present extant in the Nicene confession, and was taken from thence, (...),
Begotten of his Father before all Worlds, by (...), of the Substance of the
Father; now there is no other way to elude the force of that argument which may
be drawn from hence, in favor of the singular Essence, but either to question
the Authority of Epiphanius without reason, and to say there was never any such
Council at Jerusalem, nor by consequence any such formulary of Faith agreed
upon therein, or else to affirm with the impious confidence of a down right
Atheist, that the Apostles did not understand themselves, and that
notwithstanding all their pretenses to a Divine Spirit, they were yet so
foolish and ignorant, to believe that one Divine Substance could beget another.

But yet I am far from pretending that all the Fathers of which the Nicene
Assembly was composed, were all of them at all times constant and firm, to the
defense and maintenance of the singular Essence, no, their fluctuation and
uncertainty has been already sufficiently discovered, and Epiphanius himself
giving his judgment of the meaning of the word Homoousios, notwithstanding his
Argument which has been lately produced, to prove the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost, speaks thus, (...), that is, the word (...), does not signify
Numerically one, but by the word (...) two perfect natures are to be
understood, not differing Specifically from each other, nor averse from being
United into one,

Neither indeed does there seem to have been any after the Arian Heresy sprung
up, from that time till a good while after the Nicene Council, who did stoutly
and resolutely adhere to the singular Essence, without any wavering or
hesitation, notwithstanding the difficulties with which it was attended, unless
it were this Marcellus and his followers, who from their Masters name, are by
Epiphanius called Marcelliani, so that it proves true of him what Horace said
of another of the name, after all the reproaches and calumnies, with which his
Adversaies have in vain endeavored to blast his reputation,

Crescit occulto velut arbor aevo
Fama Marcelli -- --
And if we consider that it was to Julius Bishop of Rome, who had exactly as to
this matter the same Apprehensions with Marcellus himself, to whom that Epistle
was written, in which this Orthodox Confession is contained, we may also then
go on as Flaccus does.

-- -- -- -- micat inter omnes
Julium sidus, velut inter ignes Luna minores.
Or in the Language of another Poet, we may say of Marcellus, with respect to
the Trinitarian Bishops, who were used to take shelter in the Specific Identity
or other inadaequate expedients that have been mentioned.

Aspice ut insignis spoliis Marcellus opimis
Ingreditur, victorque viros supreeminet omnes.
And if there be any that stand up firm and faithful to the singular Essence,
without betraying and exposing it, as the Learned Doctor has endeavored to
do, we may say of him as Anchises did when he had finished the Prophetic
Character of his Roman Hero,

Tu Marcellus eris.

And as Marcellus, by his courage and resolution, answers the great Character
of his glorious Namesake in Virgil, so we may every whit as justly compare the
Hesitating Fathers, who sometimes seemed to patronise the Numerical Essence,
and sometimes to seek Patronage and shelter from it, in very improper and
inadaequate expedients, such as rather served to delay the time, and afford new
matter of rangling and dispute, then either to consute the Arians, or to assure
the Victory of the Orthodox Party, to Fabius the Cunctator, who is immediately
before prophetically described by Anchises, and who by frequent halts and
countermarches, and by false alarms, without daring to come to the decision of
a Battle, prepared Hannibal for the Conquest, first of Marcellus, and then of
the great Scipio, from his African Trophies surnamed Africanus, who removed the
Seat of War into the Enemies Country, and perfected that Victory, which Fabius
had scarce the hardiness to begin.

But still it is true, that though the Fathers were generally inconstant and
uncertain in their resolutions, concerning the Blessed Trinity; yet when ever
they swerved from the Numerical Essence, it was only because of the puzling
absurdities with which it was encompassed, as to the manner of it, otherwise
there is no question, not only that St. Athanasius and St. Basil, and others of
the Fathers, who seemed to have wavered in their determinations, but even St.
Cyril, Damascen and Gregory Nyssen themselves, would have declared unanimously
for the Numerical Essence, by which alone the Unity of the Trinity is possible
to be maintained, and which alone could free them from the imputation and
absurdity of Polytheism, with which the Specific Unity was encumbred, such an
expedient as this, if it could have been found out in those early ages of the
Church, would have nipped the Arian Heresy in the bud; it would have silenced
the Enthusiasm of Sabellius (for it was nothing better) and the intolerable
impudence of Photinus, and it would have prevented that uncertainty, and those
endless jangles which happened among the Orthodox themselves, who being
destitute of a solid resolution, exposed themselves and one another to contempt
by inadaequate fancies, the Creatures not of reason, but ignorance and
imagination.

All the several Heretics would have been ashamed of themselves, and would not
have dared to elude the force of so many peremptory Texts, in favor of the
Divinity of the Son and the Holy Ghost, by far fetched interpretations and
distorted expositions, when not only the Scriptures were plain in their behalf,
but also the nature and reason of the thing; this would have rendered the Roman
Emperors more favorable then they were to the Orthodox party, whereas, for
want of this, to put an end to all controversies and animosities that might
arise by the disagreeing opinions, concerning the modus of the Trinity,
disagreeing from each other, and inconsistent even with themselves and with
that Doctrine which they pretended to explain, Constantine himself, at the
latter end of his Reign, began to favor the party of the Arians, and
Constantius during his whole time, was a most bitter Persecutor of the Orthodox
Bishops; nay, and in Julian's time the Arians were comparatively Favorites in
respect of the others, and so were the Donatists too, who seem to have sided
with them; for Donatus himself wrote a Book, de sp. sancto pursuant to the
Sentiments of Arius and his Party, and in the joint Reign of Valentinian and
Valens, the Partners in the Throne, perhaps out of prudential and Political
reasons, the one Espoused the ones Interest, and the other the others, the
better to keep all quiet underneath, by the Union of the two consorts, their
respective Patrons, in the Imperial Throne.

And as there could not have been a greater Service done to Christianity, in
the Primitive times, then by finding out a clear or proper expedient, by which
the Unity of the Godhead might have been kept inviolate and sacred,
notwithstanding there were a Trinity of Divine Persons, so in this Age there is
nothing can so effectually disarm the Socinians, and render them inexcusable if
they persist any longer in that impious, and if any error be so, that damnable
error, as the laying down a possible Idea of a Numerical Substance, branching
it self out without Polytheism or Sabellianism into three intelligible Divine
Persons, which will render all their tricks and fetches useless, and not only
useless, but monstrously foolish and wicked into the bargain; for so it must
needs be thought to sophisticate the sense of Scriptures, and to elude the
force of those Arguments that are taken from it by strained Interpretations,
when the most natural, obvious and willing sense, inculcated over and over in
an hundred places, and upon an hundred occasions, is also reconcilable to
humane reason, as well as revealed by Divine Wisdom, and supported by no less
Authority then that of God himself, and therefore this is that which I am now
about to do, for the Glory of God, and for the Vindication of Religion, from
the Corruption of Heretics and the Scorn of Atheists, and the method I intend
very briefly to proceed in, shall be this; first I will prove by undeniable
force of Argument, that there are more Divine Persons then one, and secondly, I
will show clearly how, notwithstanding this, that it is very possible there may
be but one Divine Substance Numerically the same in all the several
Personalities wherein it is found.

For the proof of the first, it will be sufficient to refer you to the
discourse it self, to which what I have now written, though it were intended
only as a Preface, yet it now begins to swell into so large a bulk that it may
pass instead of a Preface, for a Book by it self, and may deserve the Name much
better than the thing it self, to which it was designed only as a Prefatory
Introduction; For in that Discourse I have undenyably proved the Divinity of
the Son, considered as a Person distinct from God the Father, and this is
enough for the demonstrative clearing of the first thing proposed, viz. That
there are more divine Persons than one; but because nothing can be too sure,
especially an Article of this Importance, therefore to what I have said already
in the following Papers, I will subjoyn two things more.

And the first of those two Things, which I shall insist upon, shall be a
further Improvement of the Story of Melchisedec, which has been already urged
in the following Papers so far, that it would amount already without any
further trouble, if prejudice were not oftentimes too hard for Demonstration it
self, to an unanswerable Demonstration of the Divinity of the Son; this
Melchisedek in that Chapter to the Hebrews, from whence my Argument is taken,
is compared to the Son of God: For it is said of him, v. 3. that made like unto
the Son of God, he abides a Priest continually, (...), which signifies as much
as made after a Copy, or made by way of Emanation, as (...) is a Transcript of
an Original M. S. and (...) and (...) are streams or rays flowing from an
Electrical or a Luminous Body, and so in this place it seems as if there were a
Priority of Existence attributed to the Son, after whose Pattern and
Resemblance Melchisedek was made, and yet v. 21. that place of the Psalmist is
applied to our Savior, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedek, in which the priority of existence seems to be inverted and
attributed not to the Son of God, but to Melchisedek to whom he is compared,
now it being utterly impossible and absurd that the same thing or Person with
respect to the same should be both Prior and Posterior in existence, it is
impossible to reconcile these places any otherwise than by saying that the same
Person is compared with himself; and Melchisedek when he is said to be like to
the Son of God, is the Priest of the most High God, who appeared to Abraham,
compared with that Eternal High Priest, though he had not yet entered upon the
actual Administration of his Priestly Office, who says of himself, before
Abraham was I am, God over all, Blessed for ever, and it is true of both of
them, and applied expressly to both, what we find written in the beginning of
that Verse, without Father, without Mother, without Descent, having neither
beginning of days, nor end of Life, which cannot be truly spoken of any but God
alone; or, in this place, of the eternal Logos, the Word, the Son of God,
begotten of his Father before all Worlds by an Eternal Generation; and there
being but one God or one Son of God in this Superlative and transcendent Sense;
it is manifest that the same Person is compared with himself, and as
Melchisedek appearing in human shape is here compared to the Eternal Son, and
in the Comparison is considered as posterior to him, notwithstanding he were
the very same with him that had existed eternally, and from everlasting without
any such humane bodily appearance, and in this respect might well enough be
said to be prior or antecedent to him, prior to himself as perfectly
incorporeal, with respect to himself, as afterward united to the reality or
appearance of an human Body; so is the same Melchisedek, though subsequent to
the Son of God in that Sense, which has been declared, yet prior to the same
considered as incarnate and born afterward in the Fullness of Time of the
Virgin Mary; for this Melchisedek that appeared to Abraham was a Type and
Figure of Christ incarnate, and by consequence was really before him; that is,
before Christ being born of the Virgin Mary appeared in the Flesh, and dwelt
among us, and so Christ is a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedek, as
well as Melchisedek was made like to the Son of God; that is, he is God and Man
united together into one common Person, as Melchisedek was, and taking not only
humane Nature, which he did before, but human Flesh upon him, as Melchisedek
appeared to Abraham to have done, though in truth it were neither better nor
worse than only the Son of God, or the Eternal Word United by divine Power to a
Vehicle of fitly modified Air, or other subtle matter, and by that means
carrying the external shape and appearance of an human Body.

And that Melchisedek, who is the same with Christ, was God as well as Man, and
Man as well as God, that is, that there was a real and vital Union of two
distinct Natures, the Divine and the Humane in his Person, is so unquestionably
evident from the same place, that as it is the extremity of impudence and
Impiety in conjunction together, to call in question the Authority of this
Writer, who has been allowed for Canonical, and received as such in all Ages
of the Church, so it is absurd and foolish to make the least doubt or scruple
of his meaning, if his Authority be once received.

That he was God is plain, and will for ever continue to be so, to the eternal
confusion of all the Arian and Socinian cavils, till they can show us a
Creature, to whom this Character may justly be applied, without Father, without
Mother, without Descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life: And
as this Character proclaims him God, so his being a Priest, does at the same
time confess him to be a Man, otherwise God will be a Priest to himself, which
is absurd, but as, without the Godhead United to the Humane Nature, Christ who
was a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, could not have made an adaequate
expiation to God the Father, for the sins of the whole World, the value of the
Priest and Sacrifice by him offered, which was the Sacrifice of himself upon
the Cross, being enhanced to an infinite and estimable price, by the infinite
perfection and dignity of the Person, who was God as well as Man; so, that he
was Man as well as God, is expressly testified by the sacred PenMan himself, now
consider, says he, how this great Man, etc. and without his being Man as well
as God, it was impossible for him to be either Priest or Sacrifice at all, so
that these things, I think, are so plain, that it is impossible for plainness
and perspicuity themselves to be more, so plain, that I need stay no longer
upon this first particular, and therefore I proceed.

The second thing which I had in my mind, was that Miracle of Joshua, which we
find recorded, Josh. 10. 12. where Joshua speaks thus to the Sun and Moon, Sun,
stand thou still in Gibeon and thou Moon in the Valley of Ajalon, and then it
follows, v. 13, 14. And the Sun stood still and the Moon stayed until the
People had avenged themselves upon their Enemies, is not this written in the
Book of Jasher? so the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and hasted not
to go down, about a whole day, and there was no day like that before or after
it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a Man, for the Lord fought for
Israel. Now Joshua in several respects, in his Name, and in that he was the
Introductor of the Israelites into the Land of Canaan, which was Typical of the
eternal rest and peace of the future State, after the toyls, hazzards and
temptations of this, was figurative and significative of Jesus, the Messiah
that was to come, who had nature at his beck, as being the God of it, and at
the instant of whose Passion, as if Nature her self had been expiring with him,
the Sun was darkened and the day was turned into night, and nature her self put
on Mourning, to attend the Funeral Solemnity of her Lord and Maker, as it is
said to have happened at the death of Caesar, which was taken and represented,
either by the superstition or flattery of the Romans, for a certain argument of
his Apothesis.

Ille etiam extincta miseratus Caesare Romam,
Tunc caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit,
Impiaque aeternam timuerunt saecula noctem.
The Sun condoling with afflicted Rome,
When Caesar fell by an untimely doom;
Withdrew his conscious and offended light,
And guilty nations feared eternal night.
But not to stretch this Type any further then it will go, I do confess, that
if any Man will deny so much to have been presignifyed by this miracle of
Joshua as I have represented, I know not how to prove it, only I leave it to be
considered fairly between Man and Man, whether the allusion be not fairly
drawn, and whether in concurrence with other arguments, which prove more
directly and with greater force, it ought not to corroberate the Doctrine of the
Divinity of Christ, though the passages that have been cited concerning
Melchisedec alone, if there were nothing else to be considered, are enough to
demonstrate unanswerably all that is contended for, and stand in no need of any
other confirmation.

Wherefore it being thus clear, if we will submit our selves to the Authority
of Scripture, and to the Voice of God himself, that there are indeed more
Divine Persons then one, it remains now only, that I enquire very briefly, how
it is possible for a plurality of Persons, distinct from one another, to be
consistent with a Numerical Identity of Divine Substance, which the voluminous
Creator of the Intellectual System denies, as an impossible and contradictious
notion, where speaking of the word Homoousios, and saying that it was never
used otherwise by Greek Writers, then to signify the agreement of things
Numerically differing from one another, in some common Nature or universal
Essence; or their having a generical Unity or Identity, he adds; nor indeed; is
it likely that the Greek Tongue should have any name for that, which neither is
a thing in nature nor falls under human Conception; (viz.) several things
having one and the same singular Essence; and here, though the Doctor did not
distinguish so nicely as he ought to have done, betwixt things and persons, yet
I will grant him thus much, that several things being supposed to be several,
are at the same time what they are Numerically by themselves; and are
Numerically dictinct from one another.

But yet it does not follow, but that several persons may all have the same
Numerical Divine Substance, though to make a distinction of persons in this case,
there be requisite an accession of some individuating Circumstances or
Properties, which shall be superadded to the common Nature; and this is a great
error of which the Doctor, is guilty, if it be consistent with the insolence
of his humor to endure to be told of his faults, because several things cannot
be the same (which is no such very deep and profound speculation, for how can
they be several and the same at the same time) therefore several Persons endued
with several individuating differences cannot be partakers of the same common
nature, which is false, as I will now immediately show you, proceeding with all
imaginable caution, that the intellectual System being a wild country, and very
full of woods; I may not unadvisedly fall into an Ambuscade, by the following
well weighed and well considered steps.

First, I say, that that which is in it self one, cannot be conceived as three
without division.

Secondly, that those things which are in themselves distinctly three, cannot
be conceived as one without composition.

Thirdly, that the Divine Nature being infinitely and immutably perfect, is
likewise simple and uncompounded, incapable of division on the one hand or
composition on the other.

Fourthly, by God the Father I understand that simple, similar, and Omnipresent
Divine Substance or space, endued with all possible power, goodness and wisdom,
whose parts, by reason of the Omnipresence of the whole, are even by cogitation
inseparable from each other, or that Omnipresent Divine activity, and life,
which is as much and more simply one, in and with it self, then any other
secondary or derivative life can be, being all over nothing else but one entire
Will, Understanding, Goodness, Fruitfulness, or Power of Action and Production,
which being only that which is truly and properly God, is therefore called God
the Father, as being the most simple in it self, and also the source and
fountain of Divinity in the two subordinate Persons, for the Persons are not
equally perfect as to their whole nature, although the Divine Substance which
makes them all to be God, be in all three Numerically and individually the same.

Fifthly, by God the Son I understand the second Person of the Blessed Trinity,
resulting from the Union of the humane Nature, with the Divine Substance, which
Divine Substance being endued and furnished with a life by it self, is for that
reason a Person by it self, simply and abstractly considered; for this is the
most general and comprehensive notion of a Person, that it is a being endued
with life, or with self-consciousness or self-sensation, to which Divine Life
the Human being added, and being influenced, animated and acted by it, and
vitally united to it; there arises from hence a compound life, which is
distinct from the simple (which is a life by it self, without the accession of
the other,) and if a life and a person be the very same, then another sort of
life makes another sort of Person, and another sort of person is another
person, that is a compound Person, which is no more the same with simple, then
unity and composition are themselves the same.

But to make the solidity of this notion the more plainly to appear, it is to
be considered, that though these two natures, the Divine and the Human are
always vitally united to one another, so as they feel and enjoy the same common
life, yet there are some cases to be met with, wherein the Father, that is the
Divine and Simple Substance acts as a Person distinctly by it self, without the
concurrence of the Human with it, and there are others wherein they act in
concurrence together, as if they had but one Will, one Understanding, one
simple and undivided Power of Action and Operation.

To the first of these Heads there are the following particulars unquestionably
belonging.

First, when the Father is said to beget and the Son to be begotten, which he
did from all Eternity by way of Emanation, as it is very easy for any Man to
conceive he might do, for whatsoever is not in it self impossible and
contradictory to be done or performed, is a possible object of the Divine
Power, and was so without question from all Eternity, because the Divine Nature
was always absolutely and infinitely perfect, and by consequence the sphere of
possibility, to which it is coextended, (for there is nothing possible which is
not so a Divine Power) was from all Eternity exactly the same, though there had
not been that eternal congruity and disposition, which there appears to have
been in the Divine Nature, to the production of the Human, by that means, as it
were, to exemplify and enjoy it self in its most perfect image and
resemblance, and the Father when he is said to have begotten the Son, it is not
by any means so to be understood, as if one Divine Substance could beget
another, which is the very height of Nonsense and Blasphemy into the bargain;
but these two things are manifestly couched under it, and to be understood by
it; First, that the Father that is the simple and similar, ubiquitary Divine
Substance, did from all Eternity, by way of emanation, produce that Human soul
or Personality, which was the pre-existing soul of Christ before his
Incarnation and before all Worlds, being the first born of every Creature.

Secondly, he did likewise from all Eternity constitute a vital Union, betwixt
his own simple and ubiquitary Substance, and this eternally begotten or
emanatively produced Human Soul, so as they were made to feel and enjoy one
another, and where ever there is an Unity of self-consciousness and reciprocal
enjoyment of each others life, so as the human life does at the same time
participate and share in the Divine, this is enough to constitute one common
person, resulting from the vital Union of the Divine and Human Nature, into
this common life and mutual enjoyment; for an Unity of life is the most strict,
inseparable, and indivisible sort of Unity that can possibly be conceived, and
yet, notwithstanding, the Human Nature, though it were eternally produced, yet
it did not nor could not possibly produce it self, which is to suppose a thing
or person to be before it is, neither did it or could it possibly unite it self
in that entire and close manner with the Divine, but in both these respects,
the Human Nature is originally passive, though to the latter it may be supposed
to concur by a consent of Will though not of Power, and God the Father, that
is, the simple and original Divine Substance is considered as a person acting
by himself.

In the second place, when the Father is said to send and the Son to be sent,
here the Father or the simple and self-existing Divine Substance is to be
considered as a Person by it self, and acting apart from the Son who is said to
be sent; for in the first place, the Divine Substance which is Vbiquitary and
Omnipresent, cannot be said with respect unto it self, either to send or to be
sent; for whatsoever is Omnipresent, is at the same time considered as
immovable and quiescent, there being no place into which it is possible for it
to remove, and this perhaps may not improbably be looked upon as one eternal
cause of the blessedness and Tranquillity of the Divine Nature, that by reason
of its Omnipresence it is always perfectly at rest within it self, it is
impassible from it self and from any thing without it, it being impossible it
should yield or give place to any impressions, or that it should be capable of
any motion, mutability or change, in which the very nature of true happiness
consists, for perfect rest and perfect peace go together,

Secondly, It is absurd to say that one Divine Substance can send another; for
this were to suppose a plurality of Gods, which has been already sufficiently
exploded, besides that to send implying a superiority, and to be sent a
subjection, both of which are absolutely impossible and absurd, with respect to
two Divine or infinitely perfect substances compared together, it is likewise
absurd in this respect to affirm of one Divine Substance, that it sends or
commands, or that it is obedient to, or is sent by another.

Thirdly, though the Human Nature of Christ be so intimately twisted with, and
so vitally United to the Divine and Omnipresent Substance of God the Father, as
that these two lives, the Divine and the Human, do by this means become one
life, and have a mutual self-consciousness and enjoyment of each other, so as
to constitute the same Person, the unity of Person consisting in nothing else
but an unity of common life, yet when we speak of sending and being sent, this
in the utmost propriety of Speech can be understood of nothing else but the
Human Nature of Christ, which being formerly United (for it is but finite, and
by consequence cannot be adequately coextended to the whole divine space, which
is infinite and Omnipresent) to that part of the Divine space where the most
perfect and the most highly honored and exalted Spirits have their sublime and
glorious abode, far above the dreggs and impurities of this Earthy Region, was
in the fullness of time, for wise and gracious purposes, predetermined and
preordained of God, from everlasting, commanded to descend into it; and adding
human flesh to human nature, to appear in the likeness of a mortal Man, and to
put on the form of a Servant, notwithstanding that the vital union betwixt the
Father and him continued all this while, and being really united in that entire
and vital manner, to any one part of the Divine Substance or space; it was as
much in some sense, as if he had been really and adaequately coextended to the
whole, because, though in this Divine space, it may be said of this, what is in
general true of all extension, that it has partem extra partem, so that this
part is not that, or vice versa, yet in the first place the parts of an
Omnipresent extention, are therefore utterly inseparable and indivisible, even
by cogitation from each other, because the whole is Omnipresent and fills the
very utmost possibility of space, and in the second, though the parts be never so
distinct, yet are they all of them acted by the same Divine Life, which is one
self-consciousness or self-sensation running through the whole, indivisible,
inseparable and tied to it self, by an Unity of self-enjoyment, which is the
highest, the noblest and the strictest unity in the nature of things, by which
means it comes to pass, as it is plain it must do, that whatsoever is vitally
united to any part of this Divine space, which is all of it animated by one
indivisible and inseparable life, is at the same time effectually united to the
whole, and has always the highest and the closest enjoyment and imbibition of
that Divine life, which a finite Substance is capable of receiving.

But yet in this action of sending and being sent, it is not the Human nature
but the Divine that sends, and it is not the Divine nature but the Human that
is sent, and as the Father is said to beget the Son in these two senses, which
have been already explained; first, that he begat or produced the human nature
of Christ, out of the emanative fruitfulness of the Divine substance, by an
eternal generation; secondly, that by the same emanative and eternal power and
goodness, he did vitally unite this first born of all the Creatures, the only
begotten Son of God, in that immediate and emanative sense, into a feeling, and
enjoyment of his own Divine substance and life; so that they became one Person,
which may very truly and properly be said to be God, as being deno-Minated, as
there is all the reason in the world it should, from the principal and chiefest
life, so the descent of the Human Nature of Christ, from one part of the divine
substance to another, notwithstanding, that it were all the while vitally and
consciously united to that Divine life, which is indivisibly, inseparably and
self-consciously the same, through all the parts of the Divine substance or
space, is as plainly asserted, as it is possible for words to express it, in
that passage of St. John. c. 3. 13. where our Savior says concerning himself,
No Man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the
Son of Man which is in Heaven; in which place by Heaven, God or the Divine
space was understood in the Language of the Jews, and by his coming down from
thence, was meant the removal of his Human substance from one part of this
Divine space to another, and by his being in Heaven, as every Man is in some
sense, being included in the large comprehension of the Divine space, is meant
in a more especial manner (for it is manifest that something peculiar to
himself is here expressed) the vital union of the two natures together, by which
he was really God as well as Man, and by his ascending thither, notwithstanding
that his Human substance continued all this while below, is meant, that he that
is vitally united to any one part of the Divine space, does at the same time
enjoy a most entire and perfect Communion with the whole, by reason of that
indivisible and inseparable Life, which enjoys it self fully, perfectly and
entirely in every part of the divine space, which is the strictest Bond of
Unity that can be conceived, and by which all the parts, besides that they are
actually inseparable by reason of the Omnipresence of the whole, are still more
closely and intimately connected with each other, as if they were all the very
same.

Thirdly, in that Prayer of our Saviors uttered in the bitter Agonies of his
human nature immediately before his Passion; O my Father, if it be possible,
let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, which
the Evangelist assures us to have been three times repeated; it is manifest
that the divine nature or substance is considered as a distinct and separate
Person by it self, endued and furnished with a distinct Will from that of the
human nature, and though it be true that in the human nature it self, there was
an absolute resignation to the divine Will; nevertheless, not as I will, but as
thou will; yet these Words themselves do sufficiently express it to have been
only a passive resignation, and an Instance not so much of Inclination as
Obedience, it was an Instance of submission and reluctance together; O my
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless, not as I
will, but ast thou will, and the reluctance of the fleshly nature, or of the
human Soul united to a Body of Flesh and Blood (for in that it consisted) was
so much the more painful and exquisitely tormenting, by reason that it was, as
it were, a tearing in sunder the divine and the human Nature, which were at
once united by the strongest Bond of Union; and for that reason must needs be
the most tenderly and painfully sensible of any Divorce or Disagreement between
them; for in the first place, it was not only a very old but an eternal Union,
there being no time when the human nature of Christ was not, or when it was not
united to the divine: Secondly, it was an Union of Emanation proceeding from,
or begotten by, the Eternal Fruitfulness of that divine Substance, which is
called God the Father, which shows it not to be a positive union, but a
natural; an Union whose parts are actually inseparable, and therefore upon
supposition, that the Natures thus united are endued with Life, and that both,
or either of these Natures are passible and capable of being affected with
pain; the least endeavor or tendency toward a Separation must cause an
exquisite regret, anguish and pain in that part of the Composition, which is
passible and subject to it; wherefore the Union of the divine and human Nature
in the Person of Christ, being an Union of Affection and Will, an Union of
Intellect and Understanding, so far as the human Nature is capable of
Understanding, and imbibing the Wisdom of the Divine, and an Union of Life,
Self-consciousness and mutual Enjoyment; it must needs be, that in the human
Nature, which is confessedly passible, upon the least disagreement or
repugnancy of it to the Will of the Divine, there must arise a most quick,
acute and pungent Sense, created in the humanity incarnate, betwixt the
reasonable and the fleshly Nature, the first of which resigns it self up
perfectly to the most perfect Wisdom, to which it has a vital congruity and
with which it studies always to preserve a most perfect agreement, and finds a
complacency in being conformed to it, withal considering the important Reasons,
for which it was necessary that he should suffer upon the Cross, and become a
Sacrifice for the Sins of the World, in which the Divine Wisdom, Goodness and
Justice were all of them in a manner equally concerned, but the latter full of
human Passions, Apprehensions and Fears had a Dread and Abhorrence of such a
cruel Death, and by consequence found within it self a strange reluctance, and
an unwillingness almost as painful, as the most tormenting and cruel Death it
self, to undergo it; besides that being at the same time vitally and personally
united to the divine Substance, this was another, and without question the most
bitter part of the Agony, which our Savior underwent betwixt submission to the
divine Will and reluctance against it, both of which it did at the same time,
by the Combat of the reasonable and the incarnate life, one of which could not
think of death, without a most passionate and painful aversation, and to the
other disobedience was worse than death, to an extremity not to be expressed, so
that though it was only the human nature of Christ, which properly speaking,
suffered upon the Cross, yet by reason of the intimate Union of it with the
Divine, he suffered infinitely more than any other Man could do.

Fourthly, in that Action by which the Father or the divine Substance
perpetually feels and enjoys it self, and adaequately understands and
comprehends the whole extent and latitude of its own infinite and absolute
Perfection, in that Action the Father is considered as a Person acting by
himself, and because there is no assignable moment of Eternity when he does not
do this, therefore he does always really preserve a distinction of his Person
and Substance, from the Person of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, as well as by
being from, and to, all Eternity vitally united to the human Nature of Christ,
and to a certain subtle and aetherial Matter, he does at the same time concur
to the making up of two other Persons, in that manner which has been, and
shall be still hereafter more fully and particularly declared; for though the
human Nature of Christ be not only the most perfect in it is kind, but without
question the most perfect of any finite, immaterial Substance whatsoever,
though you take in all the Hierarchy of Angels and Immortal Spirits, and though
by being personally and vitally, and that from all Eternity, united to the
divine Substance, it must needs for this reason have the truest Enjoyment, and
the fullest comprehension and understanding of it, of any other Creature
whatsoever, yet as being but a Creature, though an eternal one, as being but a
finite Substance though incomparably and indisputably the most perfect of any
other finite Substance whatsoever, it cannot have a just and adequate
comprehension of an infinitely perfect Nature; For nothing can adequately and
fully comprehend that which is really infinite, or which is all one, which is
endued with all possible Perfection, which is not so it self, and this the
humane nature of Christ is not, neither indeed can it be, unless you suppose
the divine and humane nature of Christ, to be the same; for all that is meant
by the divine nature, is a nature endued with all possible perfection, so that
it remains firm what I have asserted in this fourth particular, that in that
action in which God the Father, or the Divine Substance feels, enjoys and
understands himself in a full, perfect, adaequate and truly comprehensive
manner, he is to be considered as a Person acting by himself, distinct from the
Persons of the Son and Holy Ghost.

Fifthly, in that Action or Operation of the Divine mind, by which at once he
surveys the whole possibility of things, and has all their Ideas and all their
several properties, differences, relations, connexions and dependencies at the
same time present to him, which he always has, and which it is absolutely
impossible for any finite or limited understanding, at any one time to
comprehend together, in this action likewise, in its full extent; the Father is
considered as a Person by himself, and is really so; for although, as to many
particulars there may be, and actually is, a concurrence of the Divine
understanding, and the Human together, so as to view several of these Ideas at
the same time, and with a common prospect, and to have exactly the same notion
and apprehension concerning them; it being impossible for the Human
understanding to differ from the Divine, so far as it is capable of imbibing
it, and of being influenced and acted by it, which it always is to the utmost
of its capacity, (which is but finite) and so far they act as a common Person
informed and ammated by one common life,, yet where the Human understanding
will not reach, as it will not certainly extend to the utmost possibility of
Ideas, at one and the same time, which implies infinite knowledge, or knowledge
in its utmost Latitude and Perfection, an attribute belonging to the Divine
Substance, and incommmunicable with any other, there this Divine Substance is
again considered* in this fifth particular, as a Person acting distinctly by it
self.

Sixthly and lastly, in the actuation of those Divine Ideas, or in the bringing
them out of a state of notion into a state of reality and extra-notional
Existence, or in the Creation of the material and intellectual World, together,
with the several modifications and motions of the one, the several orders and
degrees of the other; in this also the Father is to be considered as acting by
himself, the Power of Creation, or the producing realities out of a state of
nonexistence, out of a state of possibility into a state of being, and from a
state of notion into a state of impenetrability, tangibility or life, being
only competible to God himself, and belonging only to infinite Power, as the
Ideas themselves, which were the principles and patterns, according to which
the realities were made, could not in their full extent and comprehension, and
at one and the same time, be present to any wisdom or understandng, but that
which was infinite, and by consequence Divine, though I deny not but that the
Son, that is, the human nature in conjunction with the divine; for of it self
it could not do it, may in some sense be said to have made the World, as the
Scripture asserts him to have done, and in what sense that is, shall be now
very suddenly and very clearly declared.

For as there are some operations of the divine nature to be met with, wherein
the Father or the simple divine substance acts as a distinct Person by it self,
without the concurrence of the human nature, so there are others wherein the
divine and human nature act jointly, and as it were confederately together, and
are considered as one common person endued with one common life, understanding
and will, and they are these.

First, in the business of Creation, which though it has been already
appropriated as an incommunicable act to the simple divine substance; yet we
find notwithstanding in Scripture, that the Creation of the World is attributed
to the Son likewise, that is, to the second person of the blessed Trinity, or
to the human nature vitally and personally united to the divine as well as to
God the Father, or to the simple divine substance it self, the reasons of
which, if I am not mistaken, are principally, if not only, these that follow.

First, that all things being produced out of nothing by the divine power, or
by a bare act of the divine will, and the human nature, being vitally and
personally united to the divine, so as to be partaker of the life of God, and
to be wholly determined and acted by his will, the will of the human nature,
being as it were included, absorpt, and swallowed up in the divine, and the one
being perfectly determined and acted by the other, whatsoever effect follows
any determination or motion of the divine will, may very properly be said to be
the effect also of the human, in conjunction with it, and acting as one common
person with one indivisible and common determination, it being no more possible
to separate the one will from the other, than it is to dissolve the union of
the two natures, or to divide any emanative and immediate effect, from its
immediate and emanative cause, and it is in a manner the same case as in the
Line.



Where if you consider A as the first mover, and B and C as quiescent, yet B
being first moved by the motion of A, the motion of C is rightly affirmed to be
owing to them both, acting in common and in conjunction together;
notwithstanding, that the original power of moving be wholly to be ascribed to,
and to be derived from A, whose Creature B as to its motion is, as C in the
same respect may be said to be the common creature of them both.

Secondly, the human nature of Christ, though personally and vitally united to
the divine, yet being, as it has been said already, but a finite nature; and
though there were in it a perfect Conjunction and Symphony of will, in all
things to the divine will and understanding, so far as the sphere of its
capacity would reach, yet that capacity being finite and imperfect, it wanted
some external helps to give it the more full and comprehensive notion of the
divine nature, and by consequence the more large and plentiful enjoyment of it;
for which reason it was, that from all Eternity there was Created a Sub-eternal
and Ethereal matter, which being united to and animated by the ubiquitary and
original life, which is called God the Father, constituted the third Person of
the Blessed Trinity, which is called the Holy Ghost.

Now God being infinitely perfect and happy in himself, it could not be, that
this Ethereal matter was produced by him for the more full and perfect
enjoyment of himself, for there could be nothing in any Creature, especially an
inanimate one, as this subtle matter, without the conjunction and animation of
the divine life, must be, which was not before hand eminently and
transcendently to be found in himself, who is considered as its emanative and
its only cause, neither is it reasonable to conceive, though it proceeded from
all eternity from the Divine Substance, by way of emanation, that it was
created out of no end or design, or that no use was made of it from all
eternity, till in the fullness of time the aspectable Universe was Created,
wherefore it is but reasonable in this case, to suppose that this subtle matter
was employed partly in forming the Vehicles of the Caelestial Hierarchy, the
Angels and immortal Spirits, the Morning Stars and Sons of God, that sung
together and shouted for joy, when the first corner stone of the World was
laid, and consequently did exist before it.

And that they were really clothed with such Aetherial Vehicles or Caelestial
Bodies, (as we shall be our selves after the Resurrection, if there be any
sense in the 15th. Chapter of the first to the Corinthians, and our Savior
himself assures us, that in the future state we shall be (...) or (...) as the
Angels or equal to the Angels that are in Heaven) seems to me plainly to be
asserted by the Psalmist in these words, Psalm. 104. 4. Who makes his Angels
Spirits, his Ministers a flaming Fire, not to repeat here what I have Apology
for the mid. way and Sermon of the Omnipresence.
elsewhere said concerning the signification of the word (...) or Angel in the
new Testament; and that they had also a pre-existence before the Foundation of
the World were laid, seems not obscurely to be employed by the Psalmist, in
that immediately after, as if the next thing to the Creation of Angels, were
that of the sensible and acceptable world, he subjoyns, who laid the
Foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever.

But this is not all, it was further necessary that this subtle matter should
be Created, (for it neither is or can be by it self, any more then a Creature)
and that from all Eternity, by an emanative way, that the Son or the second
Person of the Blessed Trinity, or the human nature of Christ, vitally and
personally united to the Divine of God the Father, might have, from all
Eternity, the more large and comprehensive notion of that infinitely perfect
nature, to which it was thus vitally and personally united, and by consequence
might be the more closely united, and enjoy the more perfect Friendship and
Communion with it; for it is but reasonable to suppose, that in this subtle
matter, not only the Vehicles of Angelick Forms and Spirits, but also the
sensible Ideas and Patterns of this lower World were originally drawn, and in
this sense the Heavens, that is, the emanative subtle matter in which those
Archetypal Ideas were framed, may be said to have declared the Glory of God, in
another and an antecedent notion, to that in which the Psalmist understood
those words, by representing the Original Patterns of the World, that was
designed to be Created in the fullness of time, to the Human nature of Christ,
and to those Angels and separated Spirits which were in time produced before
the Foundations of the World, which taught them more fully and perfectly to
understand and celebrate the Power and Wisdom of God, then without such outward
helps any finite or created Being was capable of doing, and this was no more
then Seneca has represented concerning God himself, that he made use from all
Eternity of a certain subtle matter, in which the first Patterns and Archetypal
examples of all things whatsoever were drawn: Miremur, says he in his 58th.
Epistle, See Apol. for middle way A. p. 283 to 289
in sublimi volitantes rerum omnium formas, Deumque inter illa versantem ac
providentem, quemadmodum quae immortalia sacere non potuit, quia materia
prohibibat, defendat a morte ac ratione vitium corporis vincat, in which
passage, though it be manifest that he supposed God to be one Supreme,
Vbiquitary and Immaterial Nature, which is his genuine and true notion, and so
must not be supposed in this particular, to adhere strictly to the Stoical
Principles, which did not acknowledge any thing but matter in the world, and
though that supreme ubiquitary and immaterial Nature, to help him to form and
model his Ideas, may not perhaps have any need of any such subtle and
subeternal matter (although it be somewhat difficult to conceive, how material
Ideas can be represented or conveyed otherwise then by material objects, or by
the help of the materia Ideata) yet with respect to the human nature of Christ,
it was perhaps a matter of absolute necessity, that such a subtle matter should
from all Eternity be created, wherein the first Patterns and Exemplars of
things should be drawn, to fill it with the more large and comprehensive notion
of the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, which was a natural means of the most
close and intimate Communion with him, and this is a second sense in which the
Son may be said no have Created the World, because it was Created as it were on
purpose for him, that part of it, I mean, which makes up the subtle matter of
the Universe, which is infinitely the most considerable proportion of it.

But thirdly, the Son may be said to have Created the World in this sense also,
not that the Power or Wisdom of the Human Nature could extend so far, as to the
Creation of the World, but only that God the Father, that is, the original and
radical divine substance did, as it were, take the advice and Council of the
human nature in it, that is, he created such a World as should have a beauty
and congruity in it, to the Human Nature, because that Nature, which in its
abstracted and separate Estate, is much the same with the Angelic, was to be
the Principal Inhabitant of the Universe, and therefore, beauty or congruity
being nothing else, but a certain satisfaction, complacency and delight, which
a certain object strikes upon a certain nature; such a World was to be Created
as was most naturally suited to please its best Inhabitant with its outward
appearance, as well as to afford it matter of Contemplation; so, that as all
the Creatures were at first brought to Adam to see what he would call them, and
whatsoever he called them that was the Name thereof, so was the whole Creation
presented to the Human Nature of Christ, as it were for his approbation, and to
him perhaps it was especially to be applied, what we find written at the end of
every days work in the History of the Creation, that God, that is, the human
nature of Christ in conjunction with the divine, saw that it was good, that is,
it had a goodness of congruity to the Human part, and I take upon me to affirm
that no sense can be put upon this place, which gives so intelligible an
account of the goodness mentioned in the Text, as this which I have mentioned
seems to do, so also St. John tells us, That by him all things were made, and
without him was not any thing made that was made; all things were made by him,
in the sense already explained, because of the intimate union of the two
Natures, by which it comes to pass that the effects and operations of the one,
are alike attributed and ascribed to the other; and without him not any thing
was made that was made, that is, without his consent, concurrence and
approbation, to whom the World that was to be made, was to be so fitted, that
it was to have in it a certain congruity and harmony with his Nature, and to
strike a certain Sympathy and complacency upon it, and in this sense it is,
that he is perhaps called by the Prophet Isaiah, the Councellor as well as the
Mighty God, God having in this great work of the Creation, consulted
principally the happiness of his Creature Man, and ordered matters after such a
manner as should be most suitable, most delightful, most congruous and most
useful to the human nature.

But secondly, a second instance, in which the divine and human nature may be
considered as acting as one commen Person, is the great affair of our
Redemption; for the divine nature of it self was impassible, and the human of
it self could not satisfy for the sins of the World, but the innocence of the
human nature of Christ, which was, I take it for granted, owing to the intimate
presence and union of it with the Divine; the exquisite and inconceiveable
painfulness of that death which our blessed Lord suffered upon the Cross for
our sakes, resulting in a great measure from the jarring and disagreement of
two natures so closely united, and accompanied all the while with a vehement
desire, to submit in the midst of as vehement an aversation to it, as has been
already declared; and lastly, the vital and inseparable Union of the Human and
Divine life with one another; these were the things that did inhance the merit
and value of that Sacrifice, and therefore in this case the Divine and Human
Nature are considered as jointly and equally concerned.

Thirdly and lastly, in the business of the Intercession at the Right hand of
God; God that is, the divine Nature cannot properly be said to intercede with
himself, and yet the Intercession of the human without so close and vital a
Connection with the divine would be every whit as insignificant and unavailable,
as without the same Union the Sacrifice of himself would have been, besides
that it would perhaps be inexcusable, were it not for this Union, For one mere
man, a finite and a little Creature, like our selves, to take upon him to
supplicate and intercede for all the rest, so that as his human Nature
entitules him to the Priesthood; for the God and the Priest are supposed to be
two things; so it is the Union of that Nature with the divine, that makes him
an High Priest, that Union is his entrance into the Holy of Holies, and
inhances the price and value of his Intercession, and therefore in this third
and last particular also, the divine and human Nature are considered as acting
jointly together, and constituting one Person, resulting from the Union of them
both.

And now having laid down so clear a Notion of the blessed Trinity, I cannot
see what is wanting to give it all the advantage which it very well deserves,
for it is not only very consonant to Scripture, but it has likewise so clear
and so strong a Foundation in the reason of things, that when both these meet,
as they do here, together, it must be acknowledged to be more then a possible
Idea, and that it is neither more nor less then the very truth it self, and a
truth that seems to lie so plain, that it is much more wonderful it should be
concealed thus long, then that at last it should be discovered.

As for the Scripture, what more plain then that those Texts, I am in the
Father and the Father in me, and I and the Father are one, may by this notion
be very clearly explained, for the human nature of Christ is absorped and
swallowed up in the Divine of God the Father, and does on the other hand, by
virtue of its intimate Union, imbibe and take in the Divine Nature into it
self, as far as its capacity will reach, which it does much further then by
reason of its littleness and finite Circumscription it may seem to do, because
the parts of the Divine Extension being all of them similar and actually
inseparable, by reason that the whole is commensurate to an infinite space,
whatsoever is united by an unity of life and selfconsciousness to any part, is
at the same time effectually united to that indivisible life, which is but one
and the same self-consciousness and self-enjoyment, through the whole
extension. And so, I and the Father are one, that is, one in the common species
of immaterial nature, one by mutual penetration and imbibition, one by an unity
of self-consciousness and reciprocal feeling of each others life, one by an
unity of affection and will, and one in many cases, by an unity of operation
and mutual concurrence to the same effect; neither is there any other possible
difficulty to be started in this case, unless it be how two lives can be so
twisted, and intimately interwoven together, as to become one life, and to
constitute one Person, to which it may be answered.

First, that in fact it is true, that an immaterial and material Nature may be
so United, as is plain in every human composition consisting of Soul and Body,
and that there is a greater congruity of one immaterial Nature to another, then
there can be of that which is called life and activity, to that which is
utterly destitute and devoid of both, which is the case of matter, which yet by
its union with an immaterial substance, is made to taste and feel it self, to
become the subject and seat, either of pleasure or pain, and to concur with the
other toward the constituting of a common Person, resulting from them both.

Secondly, upon supposition that one life is capable of being impressed and
influenced by another, as there is more reason that it should, then that that,
which is utterly devoid of life should be capable of the same impressions, this
is enough to constitute one common person; for by a person nothing else is
meant but a self-conscious nature, and therefore, where there is in two
personalities a mutual enjoyment or feeling of each others life; there arises a
compound personality from the mutual reciprocation, enjoyment or imbibition of
two several lives, acting upon and influencing each other, and being brought to
a perfect Harmony, and entire consent of understanding and will, and it is
sufficient in this case, that the difficulties in the union of the two natures,
to make up and constitute the second person in the Blessed Trinity, are not
greater, no nor so great neither, as those in the union of our own soul and
body, of which notwithstanding we are intimately and perfectly conscious to our
selves.

Thirdly, there is no way to expound several places of Scripture, with any
plausibility or show of truth, but by admitting such an union as this, which
seems in those places to be so plainly asserted.

Fourthly and lastly, in the Sympathies of friendship, whether in joy or grief,
and in the mutual complacency and satisfaction, which entire friends experience
in the conversation and company of each other, in their common sentiments,
common wishes and common designs, there is something very like this union which
we contend for, though it be far from being so perfect and entire.

It being therefore so rational, to believe that there may be such a personal
union of two immaterial natures together, to constitute the Person of the Son,
that other of these two natures or persons so united, to a certain, subtle,
subeternal and ethereal matter, to constitute the third Person of the Blessed
Trinity, which is called the Holy Ghost, must be admitted as a possible union,
because the vital union of an immaterial nature to a material, is no more then
we do all of us every day experience in our selves, as has been already
observed.

The Father is the simple divine substance by himself, the Son is the vital
Union of an human soul to the substance and Person of God the Father, and the
Holy Ghost is nothing else but an Ethereal and Emanative matter, vitally
united to both the former. That which makes them all to be God, is the same
Numerical Divine substance belonging to them all, and that which makes the
distinction of the Persons, is the addition of a Created immaterial nature, in
the second Person of the Blessed Trinity, of a Created material one in the
third, and the substraction or precision of both of these in the first.

The Son is said to be begotten of the Father, being a similar, immaterial, and
as it were, univocal effect of his Power and Will, and the Holy Ghost to
proceed from them both, because, though the human nature of Christ and the
subtle matter, which makes the body of that Person which is called the Holy
Ghost, be both of them emanative and by consequence eternal, yet the emanation
seems more natural from one immaterial nature to another, then from immaterial
to material, and so the Son is at least prior natura then the Holy Ghost,
though not cognitione, and the subtle matter which is one part of the third
Person of the Blessed Trinity, being Created, though from all Eternity, yet, in
some sense, for the sake of the Son, as has been already declared, and being
also produced by the Father by a contemporary consent of will in the Son, or in
the human nature, though they be supposed contemporary to one another, yet this
is enough to make it no improper way of expression, to say, that the Holy Ghost
proceeded from the Father and the Son, though in this I do not justify the
heats on either side, between the Greek and Latin Churches, neither do I think
the Schism to be the less inexcusable, because the Latins, in a matter of this
subtlety, were in the right.

I do not deny but that the Father or the simple divine substance, is always
vitally united to the human nature of Christ, and also to a certain subtle and
ethereal matter, in that manner which has been already declared; but yet
notwithstanding the real distinction of the Father from the Son, or of the
first Person of the Blessed Trinity from the second, is always as really and as
clearly preserved, as if in the first case there were no second Person, or no
vital union with the human nature, or as if in the second there were no third
or no vital union of the divine and human nature, with the ethereal matter;
for in the first place, as has been already largely represented, there are
some operations of the simple divine substance, to which the human nature,
being but finite, cannot adaequately extend, and in this case, that substance
is of necessity considered as a Person acting by it self, and in the second,
notwithstanding the vital union of one or more immaterial nature to a material,
yet there are some abstracted operations wherein the immaterial substances do
perfectly withdraw themselves, from any intercourse or communication with
matter, as is plain in those operations of the human soul, which are purely
speculative and intellectual, in which the animal, concupiscibl^ or plastic
life have no share, but they are purely the operations of separated and
abstracted Spirits, and such as would undoubtedly accompany the mind of Man,
though it were disentangled from this mortal body, and yet, the vital union is
not interrupted all this while, but the digestion and Animal secretion still
goes on, the blood still circulates, and the Plastic faculties perform their
office in men not yet arrived to their full growth, as well as in Embrios, not
yet attained to their just form and shape in their Mothers Womb; not that I
would be thought to compare these things with one another, but only in general
to represent, that an immaterial nature, tho vitally united to a material, may
yet have operations purely spiritual and altogether abstracted, in which that
union is not at all concerned, and those operations which are performed on the
one hand by the abstracted, and on the other by the Compound and Heterogeneous
nature, may well enough be considered as the actions of two Jeveral and
distinct persons, as in St. Paul's description of the strife and contention
between the Flesh and Spirit, Romans 7. 15. That which I do I allow not, for what
I would that do I not, but what I hate that do I. Where it is manifest that the
soul of man, considered by it self in its most inward and abstracted
speculation, is considered as one person, and as united and vitally interwoven
with a body or vehicle of matter, as another, and this is enough to show that a
compound and a simple person are by no means the same, or to defend the
personality of the Holy Ghost, as distinct from the simple substance of God the
Father.

Further, that by the Holy Ghost, nothing else is meant but the vital union of
an ethereal or subtle matter, to the simple and original divine substance of
God the Father, is clear not only from the words themselves, by which it is
expressed in Hebrew Rouach and in Greek Pneuma, which signify nothing else but
a subtle matter, but also from the History of the Creation, where the spirit of
God is said to have moved upon the face of the Waters, in the Hebrew it is
Merachepheth, which the Rabbis interpret of the incubation of any bird or
fowl, upon the young or eggs, by which it is manifest that they understood the
Spirit of God not simply, of any wind or subtle matter whatsoever, but of such
as was animated with a divine life, and fitly disposed by brooding upon the
Chaos to make it fruitful and fertile, and when God spoke to Moses out of the
burning bush, when he gave the Law upon Mount Sinai in Fire and Smoke, when he
went before the Camp of the Israelites like a Cloud by day, and like a Flame by
night, when such flaming and fiery apparitions as these, are so frequently
called in Scripture by the name of the glory of God, all these are meant of
that subtle matter, which being animated and enlivened by a divine life, is
called Rouach hachodesh, pneuma hagion, the Holy Spirit, the spirit, or breath,
or wind of God; so also when Moses desired to see the face of God, but was
denied for this reason, that no Man could see the face of God and live, but yet
was permitted to see his back parts which were nothing else but a certain
vigorous and piercing flame, the meaning is plainly this, that no Man in this
life can converse with the naked essence or immaterial nature of God, but his
back parts, or that ethereal and subtle matter, to which from all eternity he
has been vitally united, these may possibly fall under human cognizance as
they did under that of Moses, even in this life, and this in truth is the main,
if not only business of this subtle matter, besides the forming of Ideas in it,
as has been already suggested, that being animated and informed by the life of
God, it is the instrument of the divine power in its external operations; thus
as God being clothed with this subtle matter, did incubate and brood upon the
Mass, and order and dispose its several parts, as seemed best to his infinite
goodness and wisdom, so also those secret operations of the Holy Spirit in the
hearts of good Men, are performed by virtue of this subtle matter, animated by
a divine life, and directed by a divine council and wisdom, and mixing it self
with the Spirits in our brains, giving them such motions and impressions, as
are requisite to produce the ends intended; thus we find in the new Testament,
that Jesus was driven by the Spirit into the Wilderness: that Philip was caught
up by the same spirit and carried to Azotus, that it appeared upon our Savior
at his baptism, in the shape of a Dove, upon the Apostles in the day of
Pentecost, in that of cloven Tongues like as of Fire; we read also that those
who were acted by it, were transported and carried beyond themselves, almost to
a degree of frenzy, so as they were scarce sensible of what they did or said,
all which are clear instances of an extraordinary agitation of a certain subtle
matter, and that this matter animated by a divine life, is that which is called
the Spirit of God, or the Holy Ghost, the third Person of the Blessed Trinity,
and I am inclinable to believe, that the same Divine life warming and directing
the subtle matter of the Universe, is likewise the immediate instrument of
Vegitation in Plants, and of all plastic operations in the animal world.

Thus have I given, I hope, a plain and clear account of the hitherto accounted
unintelligible Doctrine of the blessed Trinity, so as to make it consonant to
Reason and Scripture together, by which we shall at once gain a manifest
advantage over the Arians and Socinians, whose only scruple against it, is its
puzling and unintelligible Nature, and over the Papists, who fly for refuge to
this Doctrine as their last Defense to vindicate the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and the truth is, to swallow the business whole without
chewing, as many too credulous people are used to do, as if three could be one
or one three, without composition on the one hand, or without division on the
other, is a fancy every whit as absurd and indefensible as the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation it self, and as contradictory to experience and common
sense. I have added as an Appendix at the end of these discourses, a large
disquisition concerning the Divine Extension, which was but necessary to the
better understanding that notion of the Trinity, which I have laid down, and I
think I have not only solidly confuted the most beloved Principle of the
Cartesian Philosophy, which would persuade us that nothing can be extended but
matter, but also upon the same ground improved the destraction of the Divine
Existence, beyond what any other Writer has done before me; as for what
concerns my usage of Dr. C. (who though he disclaimes it in one place of his
System, and though he thanks God very solemnly in another, for taking such care
to preserve the notion of a Trinity wakeing in the World, yet after all he is
either Arian, Socinian or Deist, if his book may be believed, and if he have
not taken a great deal of pains to no purpose) all I shall say is, that I
thought no severity too great to be used toward him, who has made use of a
great, however ill deserved reputation, to undermine the great Pillar and
Corner Stone of the Christian Religion, and has by consequence set at naught
the Person and the Sacrifice of Christ, and done no small prejudice, by so
doing to the Authority of his Gospel. I did design that this essay and what
follows it, should be a monument of our Friendship, and my obligation to
succeeding times, and so I hope it will, but if I miss of my intention, it is
in this case but Justice to accept the Will for the Deed.

I am, dear Sir, Your most affectionate, humble and obedient Servant, JOHN
TVRNER

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE MESSIAH, UPON ISAIAH, 7.

Divided into three CHAPTERS.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. in the Year MDCLXXXV.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IF you are inquisitive to know the occasion of the following discourse, it is
word for word what was spoken! ast Christmas at St. Thomas his Hospital;
bateing that now for methods sake it being divided into three Chapters, there
must be some little alteration at the beginning of each.

I know not whether you will not blame me in your mind, for entertaining that
sort of auditory with notions that will seem not calculated for their capacity,
though they were first uttered among them, but I think in the midst of some
appearance of Novelty and Learning, there is a plainness all the way that suits
it self to every common understanding, and I presume there is all along a
practical savor and relish to be met with in it, which was not only fitted to
the occasion, but very proper for the audience likewise, I wish I could say so
much for the Appendix, which was it self the substance of several Sermons
delivered in another place, and made by some little alteration a little more
cohaerent, then when it was divided into several discourses.

I do affirm to you, without any great matter of protestation, which commonly
is an obstruction to belief, by a too fierce and violent endeavor to obtain
it, that it was not any affectation of appearing Learned, before People that
are not Judges of such things, that was the occasion of so intricate a
discourse, as this must needs seem to a Popular assembly, but only that I was
so simple to believe, that things that were so plain to my self, must needs be
so to every body else, till I found by the complaints of such as had but too
much reason to be displeased at me, for going about, as they thought, to puzzle
and confound them, that I was not understood; I beg their pardon with all my
heart, though I have now no other reason to do it, then only that experience
has taught me more wit, and made me more sensible of my error then I was,
when I committed it, and if by what I have said I have demonstrated more
sensibly the Existence of a God, then others have done before me, I ask no
other reward then that you would not laugh at my Infirmity, of which no man is
more severely conscious then my self, and if you meet with any thing by which
either you are edifyed or the truth asserted; I ascribe nothing to my self, but
to the giver of every good and perfect gift, and I desire that God may have the
Glory and his Church the benefit of my undertaking.

Farewell.
Isai. 7. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his
Name Immanuel.
CHAP. 1.
MAnkind had no sooner fallen from their Primitive Estate by the disobedience
of our first Parent, in the effect and consequence of which all his Posterity
were so fatally concerned, but it was the immediate care of the Divine goodness
and wisdom, to restore in us that Image and Participation of his Nature, which
we had lost; and so the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul, in the Acts of the
Apostles assure us, that in the worst of times, when God seemed to have left
the World wholly to it self, and to suffer all Nations to walk in their own
ways, nevertheless he left not himself without Witness, in that he did good,
and gave us Rain from Heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our Hearts with food
and gladness: And so the latter of these Apostles tells us in the first Chapter
of his Epistle to the Romans, at the twentieth Verse, That the invisible things
of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead.

But yet the works of Nature, how pregnant arguments soever they may afford, in
themselves, of the being of a God, and how instructive soever they may appear
to a considering Man, as to the true way by which he ought to be worshipped,
yet not being sufficiently attended to by sensual or heedless Men; the World
for all this was quickly overrun with vice and naughtiness in civil
conversation, and with Idolatry in Religious worship; and therefore such were
the exceeding riches of the Divine love and goodness, so tender were his
Mercies, and so compassionate Nature, that he did not think it sufficient to
have left Men without excuse, by the works of his Hands, and by the wonders of
his Providence, unless he did also by express Messengers dispache, as it were,
on purpose from himself, admonish them of their sin and of their danger.

To which purpose it is, that soon after the fall of our first Parent, God
raised up Seth in opposition to the accursed Seed of Cain, who. carries envy
and disobedience in his Name, to be a Preacher and example of unblemished life,
and of a sound and Orthodox Religion, and to restore that righteous Seed, which
was to bruise the Serpents Head, and which was in so great danger of being lost
and extinguished in the death of Abel; for so says the Scripture expressly
concerning Seth, that his Mother who bare him called his Name Seth, for this
reason, for God, says She, has appointed me another seed instead of Abel,
whom Cain slew, and to continue this Blessed Seed to posterity, that it might
never fail; Enos not long after was descended of Seth, and in his time it is
said expressly, if we will follow that reading which the present Masorethical
Bibles do embrace, az Houchal likroth beshem Adonai, that then Men began to
call upon the Name of the Lord.

Of the Posterity of Enos down to Noah we have no particular account
transmitted to us, only thus much is certain, that none of them are any where
taxed with any thing of bad example, that Enoch is expressly said to have walked
with God, that is, to have lived in his fear and in his favor, and to have
enjoyed a constant intercourse and communion with him, which is not so to be
interpreted, as if the rest did not do so too, but only that his virtue was of
a more eminent and extraordinary nature, then any of his Predecessors, which
was the reason of his Translation to a better place, before the course of
nature was expired, and of Noah the last of that succession before the Flood,
it is said, that Lamech his Father, who, it seems, was not without a Prophetic
foresight of what was afterward to befall his Son, called his Name Noah,
saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our Hands,
because of the ground which the Lord has cursed: He was to take off that curse
of Barrenness from the ground, by removing first the cause of it, which was the
disobedience of our first Parent, for it is said of him, Genesis 6. 9. That He was
a just Man and perfect in his Generation, and Noah walked with God, and
secondly, by removing the effect of that curse, which was the Barrenness and
Unfruitfulness of the Earth, by Natural and Secondary means, by his Skill and
Diligence, in Husbandry and Tillage, as it is in the 9th, Chapter at the 20th
Verse, That He began to be an Husbandman and planted a Vineyard: And in the
second Epistle of St. Peter, he is called the eighth Preacher of Righteousness.
Chap. 2. v. 4, 5. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to
Hell, and delivered them into Chains of darkness to be reserved unto Judgment,
and spared not the old World but saved Noah the eighth Person, a Preacher of
Righteousness, bringing in the Flood upon the world of the ungodly. Where what
we translate the eighth Person, the word Person being supplied by the
Translators to fill up the sense, is by a Learned Prelate of our Church,
translated more exactly thus, and spared not the old World, but saved Noah the
eighth Preacher of Righteousness, which implies as much as if he had said, that
there were seven before him, or that all the Patriarchs from Enos down to Noah,
were Preachers of Righteousness and Repentance to the World, so true is it,
that God did never leave the World without a Witness of himself, in the worst
of times and in the most degenerate ages that have happened; for it was at the
conclusion of this interval, that it is said, That God saw that the wickedness
of Man was great in the Earth, and that every Imagination of the thoughts of
his Heart was only evil continually, that the Earth was Corrupt before God, and
the Earth was filled with violence, that God looked upon the Earth, and behold
it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the Earth, so that it
repented the Lord that he had made Man in the Earth, and it grieved him at his
Heart: And yet in this very time as bad as it was, God did not only give
Testimony to himself, by the works of the Creation, but also by living
Witnesses and express Messengers, who as it seems were assisted and acted by an
extraordinary Spirit, otherwise they would have wanted courage to deliver their
Message in so degenerate and corrupt an Age, and so St. Peter tells us
concerning Noah, who was the last Preacher of Repentance to the old World, That
Christ was put to death in the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, by which also
he went and Preached unto the Spirits in Prison, which some time were
disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the Ark was a preparing, where it is manifest that the Spirits in Prison,
being interpreted of those disobedient and unreclaimable Persons, for whom the
long suffering of God waited with so much patience in the days of Noah while
the Ark was a preparing, the Preaching of Christ must be inpreted of the
Preaching of Noah, the eighth Preacher of Righteousness, by the mission and
authority of Christ, and by the immediate help and assistance of his Spirit.
For (as the same learned Man, whom I have last mentioned with great Judgment
observes) though this was not done by an immediate act of the Son of God, as if
he personally had appeared on Earth, and actually Preached to that old World,
but by the Ministry of a Prophet by the sending of Noah, the eighth Preacher of
Righteousness: Yet to do any thing by another not able to perform it without
him, as much demonstrates the Existence of the Principal cause, as if he did it
of himself without any intervening Instrument.

And when God being provoked to Extermity by the sins of the old World, had
brought a deluge upon them to destroy them, yet what was this Judgment it self
but a Sermon of Repentance and obedience to those eight Persons that were
preserved alive? And was not Noah spared in that Universal Calamity, as well
that he might continue, as he did for three hundred years together after the
Flood, to be an example to those that lived with him, and to those that were
afterward to be descended from him, to preach the same Doctrine to the new
World, which had been so little regarded by the old, as upon account of his own
personal Righteousness and obedience?

Neither was he altogether unsuccessful in his attempt for Shem did manifestly
tread in his Fathers steps, and was a conscientious and a zealous Worshipper of
the true and only God, which was the reason of that benediction, which his
Father bestowed upon him, blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be
his Servant, blessed be the Lord God of Shem, which implies him to have been a
Worshipper of the true and only God, the maker of Heaven and Earth, the God of
Noah, as well as of Shem, which was the reason why he blessed him, but the God of
Noah was the true God in opposition to the Idols of the Heathen World, and
therefore it is plain that the God of Shem was so to, and Canaan shall be his
Servant, that is, the Canaanites who were to be descended of his Brother Ham,
were, for their Idolatries to be rooted out, and those that remained alive of
them, as the Gibeonites and others did, were to be Servants and Bonslaves to
the Posterity of Shem, from whom the Children of Israel were descended.

Neither was Shem the only Instance of Virtue and Religion, to be found in the
immediate Posterity of Noah, but Japhet, also so far as his own Person was
concerned, without extending the Character to his Posterity, seems to have been
as considerable for Piety as the other, which was the reason of that other
blessing, Japth Elohim Lejepheth, God shall enlarge Japhet, that is, he shall
make him the Father of great and powerful nations, and of the joining them both
together in one common blessing, in opposition to the accursed Canaan, Cursed
be Canaan, a Servant of Servants shall he be unto his Brethren.

How long the posterity of Shem continued firm in their obedience to God, we
cannot tell, only thus much we may lay down for certain, that before the time
of Terah, who was the Father of Abraham, Idolatry had got the perfect and
entire possession of an once more Degenerate and Apostate World. For to Terah
were born three Sons, Abraham and Nahor and Haran, and that these three were
all of them bred up and educated in the Idolatry of the Gentiles, is manifest
from this, that Abraham was called to come out from among them by the command
of God, and was enjoined by a particular Revelation or Voice from Heaven, or
inward impulse and motion of the Divine Spirit, to forsake his kindred and his
Fathers House, that he might be brought into closer engagements with his Maker,
and enter into a new Covenant and Alliance with him, and also from this, that
in the Family of Nahor, who was the Brother of Abraham, Idolatry still
continued, as is manifest from the story of Laban and Rebeccah, and if Lot, who
was the Son of Haran, and the Nephew of Abraham, were a Worshipper of the true
God, and had forsaken the superstitions and abominations of the Heathen, yet
this is rather to be attributed to his Converse and Friendship and Cohabitation
with the latter, then to his being descended of the former.

The Covenant which Abraham entered into with God, was the Covenant of
Circumcision, and in that there were these two things implied; First, the
Worship of the true God, in opposition to Idolatry; Secondly, the observation
to all Personal virtues, in opposition to the gluttony and intemperance, the
luxury and riot of the Heathen World.

First, it employed in it a promise and obligation in the Person Circumcised to
worship the true God, and to serve him only, in opposition to Idolatry, which
was the reason why it was performed on the eighth day, that is, seven days
complete after the birth of the Child, to signify that Worship and Honor that
was due to him, who Sanctified the Seventh day, by resting upon it; after he
had finished the Creation in the other six.

Secondly, there was employed in it an obligation to Temperance and Chastity and
self denial, it signified, by the cutting off of the foreskin, the
mortification of all fleshly lusts, all unreasonable appetites and brutish
inclinations, and a casting them away never to return, or to be entertained any
more, and this is that inward Circumcision of which the outward was a Symbal,
which the Apostle calls the Circumcision of the Heart, in the 2d. Chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans, at the 28th. and 29. Verses. He is not a Jew which
is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh,
but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart,
in the Spirit and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of Men, but of God.

To the performance of this Covenant, and of the duties that were shadowed
under it, the promises made to Abraham and his Posterity were annexed, and in
virtue of this Covenant, they continued in a state of separation from the rest
of Mankind, from the time of Abraham to that of his Grandson Jacob, and from
thence all along during the Sojourning of the Israelites in the Land of Egypt,
not that God did intend to confine the effects of his goodness, which is as
large and infinite as his nature, within so narrow a compass, but the Posterity
of Abraham's being thus rewarded and blessed after so extraordinary a manner,
above all other People and Families whatsoever, was intended as a light and a
warning to the rest of Mankind, to deter them from Idolatry, and from the lusts
of the Flesh, and to invite them to embrace that Religion, to espouse those
Principles, and to follow those wholesome and commendable courses, to which
those rewards and promises were annexed, as is evident from this, that Abraham
was not only obliged to circumcise his Son, but also his Servants and all that
belonged to his House, and that the Jewish Church had always a Power of
admitting Proselytes out of the Nations round about them, though they were by
no means to converse with such as remained still in a State of Idolatry,
Uncircumcision and Uncleanness.

The Servitude and the Darkness and the Plagues of Aegppt, were Types and
Shadows of the Slavery, the folly, the inconvenience of Sin, the sprinkling of
the blood of the Paschal Lambs, upon the Posts and Lentils of the Jewish
Houses, the night before their escape out of it, was a Type of deliverance by
the blood of that expiatory Sacrifice, which was in time to suffer upon the
Cross, and so was their passage through the red Sea, a shadow of deliverance by
blood, as on the other side the overflowing and drowning the Egyptians in it,
signified that the same blood instead of saving, will but condemn all reprobate
and impenitent Sinners, who by open impieties have Crucified their Lord afresh,
have disclaimed all title and benefit in his Blood, and have wilfully and
wickedly neglected and refused so great Salvation.

Moses who was their Conductor out of Egypt, represented Christ in his Kingly
Office, and to this their Names agree in sound exactly well, for Mosheh which
is the Hebrew Name of Moses answers to the Hebrew Mashiach, or the anointed,
and Mouses or Moses which is the Greek answers to the Greek Messiah. Moses was
succeeded by Joshua, and he that is called Joshua in Hebrew, is in Greek Jesus,
carrying Salvation and Redemption in his Name; and as Moses and Joshua did
Typifie him in his Kingly Office, so did Aaron and his Successors in the
Priestly, to which they were anointed, as being the Fore-ruuners and Types of
the anointed of God, our Everlasting high Priest, who was to do away all
Sacrifice by the Sacrifice of himfelf once offered, as an Eternal and
Everlasting Propitiation, and so were the Kings of Israel anointed too, for
they represented him in his Kingly Office, and Prophets were anointed as well
as Kings, as being his Predecessors in the Prophetical.

To this purpose it is remarkable, that the first Kings of Israel had their
Names from some particular Circumstances belonging to them, Saul had his from
Shaal, which signifies to ask, because the People asked them a King, but he
being a proper and comely personage, and therefore very unfit to presignifie a
suffering Messiah, a Man of sorrow, and acquainted with griefs, of whom the
Prophet Isaiah said, he has no form nor comlyness, and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him, he was as it seems, for this
reason, among others rejected by God, and the rage and madness with which he
was possessed at the thoughts, that he and his Posterity were to be supplanted
by David, who carried in his very Name a Type of Christ, was an Emblem of that
opposition which the Gospel was to meet with from the Grandees and
Principalities of this World, and from the restless activity of the Powers of
Darkness, and on the other side, this fury being assuaged by the skilful
touches of David upon his Harp, signified the dispossessing and ejecting of
Evil Spirits by our Savior, it signified also the Nature of the Gospel, which
was to prevail upon Men by persuasion and gentle means, to overcome the World
by submission and obedience, and conquer all opposition by humility and
meekness.

David is the same with Daoud or Dod, which is as much in Hebrew as to say the
Beloved, it signifies sometimes an Uncle which is next in Kindred, and
Endearment to a Father, and the Mandrakes of Leah are called in Hebrew Doudaim,
which some have rendered flores amabiles, that is to say, lovely or odoriferous
Flowers, and by this Name David represented him who was the beloved of God, his
beloved Son in whom he was well pleased, his sufferings before the death of
Saul, and the dwarfish meanness and littleness of his Person, were very fit
Emblems of a despised and suffering Messiah, and of the condition of his first
Followers and Disciples, who through much Tribulation, were to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

David, whose time was full of wars and troubles, and therefore he was forbid
to build a Temple, was succeeded by Solomon who carries peace in his Name, and
this may either signify that peaceful State of the Triumphant Church, which is
to succeed the warfare of the Militant here on Earth, or else it is that utmost
perfection of the Church of God in this life, if indeed in this life there be
such a State actually to be expected, though it be no more then what the Gospel
has a natural tendency to introduce, of which the Prophets have foretold, when
the Swords shall be turned into Plowshares, and the Spears into Pruninghooks,
when Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn
War any more. And as Solomon was a peaceful Prince, so is he also represented
as the wisest that ever sat upon the Throne, and both these were Characters of
the Messiah that was expected, he was the Councellor as well as the Prince of
peace, Isaiah, 9. 6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful,
Councellor, the mighty God, the everlastiug Father, and the Prince of Peace.

Solomon and David were descended of Jesse, because they were both of them to
be Typical of Jesus, and Jesse was the Son of Hobed from a word in Hebrew that
signifies to serve, because the Messiah was to appear in the likeness of Men,
and to put on the form of a Servant.

Lastly, Saul who had his Name from Shaal, which signifies to ask, being a
beautiful and comely Person, was a Type of him whom the Jews in vain expected,
and desired a Triumphant and a glorious Messiah, whom God in his Providence
would not admit of, as he rejected Saul from being King, but David was the Type
of the true Messiah, who was to be a persecuted and afflicted Person.

Again, the troublesome and tedious passage through the Wilderness out of
Egypt, was a Type of the difficulties, troubles, dangers and temptations, to
which our Christian warfare in this life is exposed; the raining of Mannah
signified those Spiritual and Heavenly assistances of the Spirit of Grace, by
which we are sustained and supported under them, the raining of the greater
proportion upon the sixth day, signified the administering and dispensing of
this grace, according to the several necessities of good men, so as there
should be no difficulty, no temptation against which God will not furnish every
honest mind, that heartily desires and beggs it at his hands, with a
proportionable degree of his Grace and Spirit to encounter with it: The Quails
that descended in such abundance upon the ground, till the Israelites loathed
what they longed for before, was an emblem of the vanity and unsatisfactoriness
of all earthly pleasures, of their short continuance, and that they soon grow
weary of themselves, and are not unfrequently punished by their enjoyment, the
sight which Moses had of Canaan from the top of Pisgah, was a figure and
resemblance of the Christians Faith, whose property it is to discern things a
far off, and to look upon future things, with the same confidence and assurance
as if they were present; the murmuring and repining of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, notwithstanding they were all the while so manifestly under the
care and conduct, and especial Providence of God, was a figure of that
contention and strife which there is betwixt the Spiritual and Fleshly
Principle in Men, of the Spirits lusting against the Flesh, and the Flesh
against the Spirit, and of their being contrary the one to the other, the
lifting up of the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness, was by the application of
our Savior himself typical of his own, being lifted up upon the Cross, the
burial of Moses in an unknown place, answers to that of Jesus in a new
Sepulcher where never Man was laid before, and was resembled somewhat, though
by the ignorant and causeless suspicion of Mary Magdalen, upon the Morning of
the Resurrection, They have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, and we
know not where they have laid him.

After the Death of Moses and of Joshua, the several deliverances which the
Jews obtained from under the hand of their Enemies and Oppressors, were
significative and expressive of that great deliverance, which was in the
fullness of time to be wrought by Chrict upon the Cross, not only for the Jews
but all the World, and accordingly they were styled Saviors as well as he,
though they did not so rightfully deserve the Name, and for this reason among
others, our Savior took Human Nature upon him, that he might be our Brother,
and as it were of our Family and our Kindred, because the legal Redeemer was
always to be of the Kindred of the Party Redeemed.

To conclude all the Ceremonies and Expiations, all the Sacrifices and
Lustrations of the Jewish Law, did point at that great expiatory Sacrifice of
the Messiah, which in the Language of the Prophet Daniel, was to make the
Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease, to him all the Prophets bare a perpetual
Witness, and by the Writings of Daniel they were instructed in the time of his
appearance, as well as confirmed in the certainty of it, and his business when
he came, was to inform the understandings, to rectify the mistakes, to purify
the Wills and Consciences, and to atone and satisfy for the sins of a
degenerate World, which that he might the better do, it was necessary that he
should answer those Circumstances, as to the mode of his appearance and the
Character of his Person, which were foretold concerning him, and of these,
there are two in the words of the Text, which had the Praeeminence and
Praecedence of all others.

First, That he was to be born af a pure and untainted Virgin, and

Secondly, That he was to be God as well as Man. Behold a Virgin shall conceive
and bare a Son and shall call his Name Emanuel.

CHAP. 2. That the MESSIAH was to be Born of a VIRGIN.
IN the former Chapter having clearly represented how careful and sollicitous
the Divine goodness and wisdom have all along appeared, to preserve and keep up
a due sense of themselves, and of that infinitely perfect Substance to which
they belong, for the better ordering and government of the World, and how all
things all the while have had a perpetual tendency to the last Prophet and the
last Dispensation that was to be introduced by him, to fill the minds of Men
with a desire and expectation of him, and to render them inexcusable, if they
did not give him that reception which was due to the greatness of his
Character, and the dignity of his Person: I shall now discourse more
particularly of the two parts into which the Text does naturally divide it
self, first, that it was necessary that the Messiah or the Christ that was to
come, should be born of a Virgin, secondly, that he was to be God as well as
Man.

And for the first of them, nothing can be plainer then that the Evangelists
are positive and unanimous in the asserting of this truth, that the Blessed
Jesus was born of a pure Virgin. So that nothing more remains to be said upon
this head, then only to prove that it was Typically or a Prophetically
necessary that it should be so.

Behold a Virgin shall Conceive and bare a Son, the Jews to elude the force of
so express a Prophecy concerning the Messiah, have found out two evasions since
our Savior's time, which if they were at all thought of, yet they were never
obstinately persisted in before: The first is this, that what we translate
Virgin is to be understood indifferently of any Woman whatsoever, not past the
Years of Conception, and accordingly what the Seventy Interpreters have
translated by Parthenos a word in Greek, that signifies a pure and untainted
Virgin, that the other Greek Interpreters, who lived since our Saviors time,
have translated more favorably to the opinion of the Jews (...), Behold a
young Woman or Damsel shall conceive; and in consequence of this Notion, they
have presumed to tell us farther, that this Prophecy was fulfilled in Hezekiah,
which could not possibly be, because this Prophecy was written at some time or
other, in the Reign of Ahaz, who Reigned but sixteen years in Jerusalem,
whereas Hezekiah was five and twenty when he began to Reign, and consequently
must have lived nine years before Ahaz was advanced to the Kingdom. Besides
that, the Hebrew word Alma; which is here interpreted a Virgin, has the same
signification in the Punic Language, which was almost the same with the Hebrew,
by the Testimony of St. Jerome, who tells us expressly, that Alma in the Punic
was the proper and peculiar Name of a Virgin.

But this is not all, there are other places, which by the Interpretation of
the Ancient Jews, were constantly expounded in favor of this Doctrine, that
the Messiah was to be born of a pure Virgin that had never known Man, and such
is that of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 31. at the 22d. Verse, The Lord has
Created a new thing on the Earth, a Woman shall compass a Man, a Woman shall
compass, that is, a Woman shall enclose or be with Child of a Man; but now this
was no such strange thing, if we understand it no otherwise then of the
ordinary way of Generation; for certainly that was no new thing in the Prophet
Jeremiah's time, it is therefore of necessity to be interpreted some way
different from the course of Nature, and it cannot possibly be better expounded
then of the Conception of a Virgin, as the Ancient Rablins did certainly
understand it, and applied this Prophecy expressly to the Messiah.

Lastly, in that first promise which was made of the Messiah, The Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head; it is manifest that this Prophecy or
promise is to be understood particularly of the Woman, as she is distinguished
and considered apart from the Man, because it is concerning her particularly,
that God discourses with the Serpent in that place, Genesis 3. 13. And the Lord
God said unto the Woman, what is it that thou have done? And the Woman said the
Serpent beguiled me and I did eat, upon which, v. 14. The Lord God said unto
the Serpent, because thou have done this, thou art cursed above all Cattle, and
above every Beast of the Field, upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall
thou eat all the days of thy life, and I will put enmity between thee and the
Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel; and then it follows verse 17. And unto Adam he said,
because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy Wife, etc. From whence it is
manifest that the Man and the Woman are here distinguished plainly from one
another, and consequently, that what was above prophesyed of the Seed of the
Woman must be understood of that Seed considered apart from the Man.

But to these Testimonies which have been already made use of by learned Men,
and the two first of them interpreted of the Messiah by the Jews themselves: I
will now add some more which have not been taken notice of by any before; which
will give an undeniable strength to the Evidence of this truth, that the
Messiah was to be born of a Virgin; and the first thing which I shall instance
in, shall be the Conception of Sarah, which was without question Typical of
that of the blessed Virgin, for Ifaac was a Type of Christ, as is acknowledged
by all, and his Fathers going about at the command of God to make him a
Sacrifice upon the Altar, was a Type of that Sacrifice of the only begotten Son
of God, which was in the fullness of time to be offered up for the sins of the
whole World.

Isaac carries joy and gladness in his Name, because in his Seed all the
Generations of the Earth were to be blessed, as being the Progenitor of him who
was the desire, and was to be the joy of all nations, of whom the Angel said to
the surprised Shepherds, as they were watching of their Flocks by night,
Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all People, for
unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord, and then it follows, And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude
of the Heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the Highest, on
Earth peace, good will toward Men. The joy was so exceeding great, that
immediately upon the salutation of Mary, the Babe leaped in the Womb of
Elizabeth for joy, and she spoke with a loud voice, and said, blessed art thou
among Women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb, and whence is this to me,
that the mother of my Lord should come unto me: And upon an errant preparatory
to this happy birth, immediately before the birth of John the Baptist, it was
that the Angel Gabriel was dispatched to Zacharias, with this message, Thy Wife
Elizabeth shall bear thee a Son and thou shall call his Name John, and thou
shall have joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at his birth, and when
Zacharias questioned, whereby shall I know this, the Angel answering said unto
him, I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God, and am sent to speak unto
thee these glad tidings, the glad tidings of the birth of John, who came in the
Spirit of Elias, and was the forerunner of the Christ that was to come, of
whom, when Mary was convinced that she should be the happy instrument of
bringing him into the World, she broke out immediately into that lofty and
triumphant Song, my Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in
God my Savior, for he has regarded the low Estate of his Hand-maiden: For
behold from henceforth all Generations shall call me Blessed: And more to the
same purpose, and good old Simeon was so exceedingly transported, that he
desired to live no longer, having once seen the desire and expectation of
Israel and of all Nations. Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace
according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have
prepared before the Face of all People, a light to lighten the Gentiles and the
Glory of thy People Israel.

Isaac was a Type of Christ, as by reason of the great joy that was conceived
at his birth, after it had ceased to be with Sarah, after the manner of Women,
so also in this that he was the only Son of his aged Father, as our Jesus was
the only begotten of God, and therefore by Philo Byblius the Translator of
Sanchuniathon an ancient Phaenitian Writer, he is called Ieoud, which answers
to the Hebrew Iachid, and is as much as to say the only begotten, and as Isaac
was a Type of Christ, so was Sarah his Mother of the Blessed Virgin, and
therefore it is remarkable that the signification of both their Names, though
the one be Hebrew, the other Calday or Syriac is exactly the same, signifying a
Queen or Princess or a Woman of Principal rank or quality, as that heap of
stones which was by Jacob called in Hebrew Galheed, an heap of Witness or
Testimony, was by Laban in the Syriac or Chaldaean Tongue styled Iegar
Sahadoutha, and in this an old Woman, so far stricken in Years, that she was
incapable naturally to conceive, or to bear or bring forth any more Children,
was a very proper Type of conception by a Virgin, since both of them are
equally impossible by the course of Nature, and depend wholly upon the Divine
Power, which nothing hinders but it may exert it self equally in one case as
well as the other.

And the same was true in the second place concerning Elizabeth the Mother of
John, whom the Scripture declares expressly to have been a forerunner of Christ,
for she also was old, and so far beyond the least thought or hopes of any issue
to be descended from her, that Zachariah could not believe the message of the
Angel, when it was first delivered, Whereby shall I know this? said he, For I
am an old Man and my Wife well stricken in Years; and the Angel himself
confessed that it was impossible by the course of nature, and that nothing but
the immediate and miraculous Power of God was capable of bringing such an
effect to pass, in what he says afterward to the Blessed Virgin, Behold thy
Cousin Elizabeth she has also conceived a Son in her Old Age, and this is the
sixth month with her who was called barren, for with God nothing shall be
impossible. But though Sarah and Elizabeth might both of them be very proper
Types and Forerunners of a Conceiving Virgin, because of the natural
inabilities for Conception, which were equal on both sides, yet of any other
young and teeming Woman, they could not, so that either we must say, that the
Conceptions of Sarah and Elizabeth, were not Typical and Significative of that
of Mary, the Mother of our Lord, which has been already sufficiently proved,
or that the latter was as certainly a pure and untainted Virgin, as that the
two former had past the time of Child bearing, and that it had ceased to be
with them after the manner of a Women, and therefore it is observable, that as
Elizabeth's Son was by the Angel himself called by the Name of John, as much as
to say, that he was Conceived by the Grace and Favor of God, when Nature was
no longer able to bring so wonderful an effect to pass, so is Sarah the Mother
of Isaac called by Sanchaniathon Annobert, which is as much as to say, she that
conceives or brings forth by grace, notwithstanding the inabilities and
decays of Nature, and they might all three in some respect and degree, as well
Isaac and John as our very Jesus himself, be said to have been conceived by the
overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, or by the wonderful Power of God, working
without and contrary to nature.

The Third thing which I shall urge to prove that it was Typically and
Prophetically necessary that the Messiah should be born of a Virgin, shall be
that passage of the Psalmist, Psalm. 45. 16, Instead of thy Fathers thou shall
have Children whom thou may make Princes in all Lands, which words if we
consider that the Jewish Genealogies, were always reckoned by the Males, it
being not material in any Genealogy who was the Mother, but who was the Father
and Male Progenitor of the descending Issue; from whence Women in Hebrew were
called Nashim, from a word that signifies to forget, but Men Zecari^^ from
another that signifies remembrance, because they were the Root and Spring of
Genealogy, and their Names were always inserted into the Tables of descent, and
by that means were perpetuated to after ages, I say, from hence it follows,
that this place cannot so properly be interpreted of any, as of her, that being
a Virgin, was to conceive and bring forth, for in this case the Genealogy could
not be reckoned by the Father, since there was no such human Parent to be met
with, and so it would be true as the Psalmist expresses it, instead of thy
Fathers thou shall have Children, that is, the Genealogy was of necessity in
this case to be computed from the maternal stock, and I presume our Church may
be supposed to have looked upon this as a genuine interpretation, by appointing
this Psalm for one of the proper Psalms for Christmas day, and it is still more
pertinent to this purpose, what follows in the next Verse, I will make thy Name
to be remembered in all Generations; therefore shall the People praise thee for
ever: For this is no more then what the Blessed Virgin said expressly of her
self, Behold from henceforth all Generations shall call me Blessed.

My fourth Instance to prove the same thing, shall be taken from the story of
Melchisedek, as it is represented by the Author to the Hebrews, c. 7. v. 1, 2,
3. compared with the 6th. Chapter and the last Verse, the whole place runs
thus, Even Jesus made an high Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedek,
for this Melchisedek King of Salem, Priest of the most high God, who met
Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings and blessed him, to whom also
Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by Interpretation King of
Righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is King of Peace,
without Father, without Mother, having neither beginning of days nor end of
life, but made like unto the Son of God, abides apriest continually; where not
to insist upon any other instance of the Parallel between Melchisedek and
Christ, which will be more properly reserved for the second branch of the Text,
wherein I shall assert and vindicate the Divinity of his Person; I shall here
only take notice that Melchisedek, who, in so many several respects was made
like unto the Son of God, did also resemble him in this, that he had neither
Father nor Mother, the first of which, if we speak of an Human Parent, was
true, of the whole Person of Christ, and the second was likewise true, if we
understand it of the ordinary ways of Generation, or if we extend the title of
Mother in propriety of speech, to the Divine Nature as well as to the Human,
although I know because of the Union of the two natures in the same Person, the
Church has taken the liberty to call her the Mother of God, as well as he
calls himself the Son of Man, with reference to his Human and Inferior Nature.

My last Instance shall be taken from the Story of Lot and his two Daughters, a
Story, which though if it were not Recorded in Scripture, and if all Scripture
were not written for our Instruction, it might need an Apology; yet being to be
found there and having so wholesome and so instructive a Lesson contained in it
I shall made none for it, but only observe that from one of these incestuous
congressions Moab was descended, from whom the Moabites had their Name; And who
was Moab? It is known to all that understand the Sacred Language, that Moab is
Miab, as much as to say Begotten of his Father, Begotten of the same common
Parent, who was the Father of his Mother as well as of himself, which was in
some sense the Case of our Savior with respect to the Blessed Virgin; for God
is the common Father of us all, though he were in a more intimate and immediate
sense, the Father of Christ; now it is manifest that Christ according to his
Human nature was contained in the Loins of Moab by the Marriage of Boaz a Jew to
Ruth a Moabitish Woman; neither let it offend any Man, that the Conjunction of
Lot with his two Daughters was infamous and incestuous in the Highest degree,
for the matter of fact is unquestionably true, that Christ was contained, as to
his Humane nature in the Loins of Moab, besides it is farther true, in the
Genealogy of our Savior, that he was descended of Pharez, who was the
incestuous Offspring of Judah, Thamar and Pharats, in Hebrew, from whence
Pharez, had his Name signified to break down or to break through, and he by
this Name was a Type as was as a Progenitor, of him that was to break down the
Partition Wall betwixt the Jew and Gentile, that so all Mankind might be as one
Sheepfold under one Shepherd; which Union of the Jew and Gentile, by the
Sacrifice and by the Dispensation, and in the Person of Christ, was likewise
Typically denoted in the marriage of Boaz a Jewish Man, to Ruth a Moabitish
Woman, that is, of a Jew to a Gentile, besides, that Boaz marrying her by
virtue of that Law, by which the next of Kin was to redeem the Inheritance of
the Deceased and Childless Husband, this signified that he was to be a Redeemer
as well as a Reconciler of them both together, so that it might be said in this
sense, as well as another, what the Prophet Isaiah has reported concerning the
Messiah, that he should be numbered with Transgressors, and he being so nearly
related both to the Jewish and the Gentile World, it can be the less suspected
that he had any design, but what was for the good and happiness of them both.

So zealous and so tender has the Church always been in asserting the honor
of the Virgin Mother, that she has always* maintained her perpetual Virginity,
as well after the Birth of Christ as before it, whence the Greeks have given
her the Title of (...), and the Latins of semper Virgo, and it is not
reasonable to conceive, that she who was so honored, so highly graced and
honored with the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, should ever submit to any
mortal Embraces, neither is it reasonable to believe, that a Man of so Pious a
Character as Joseph is always represented under, would ever have attempted any
thing so profane, or so extremely Sacrilegious as that may justly be
interpreted to be, and the application of a passage in the Prophet Ezekiel, by
that excellent Prelate so often appealed to, is extremely ingenious, and like
the man that made it, Ezech. 44. 2. This Gate shall be shut, it shall not be
opened, and no Man shall enter in by it, because the Lord, the God of Israel
has entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.

The only reasonable objection against this truth, is contained first in those
words of St. Matthew concerning Joseph, Matt. 1. 25. Joseph Knew not Mary until
she had brought forth her first born; where Jesus being called the first born,
it seems to be employed, as if there were others who were born after him, but to
this, to omit another answer of that admirable Person, which in my opinion does
either, not reach the business, or else is not satisfactory enough to convince
the obstinacy of contentious Men, there is another answer which cannot be
withstood, and that is, that there was a Sacrifice due for every first born of
the Males, whether ever any other Offspring were begotten or brought forth or
no, and this was the express Law of God, Sanctify unto me all the first born,
whatsoever opens the Womb among the Children of Israel, both of Man and Beast
it is mine, and in pursuance of this Law it was, that our Saviors Mother and
reputed Father brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord, as it is
written in the Law of the Lord, every Male that opens the Womb, shall be
called Holy to the Lord. So that he was brought to Jerusalem, as the Law
required, under the notion of a first born, whether there were a second or a
third or no.

But secondly it is objected, that there is mention made in the Gospel of the
Brethren of our Lord, but to this it is answered, that these may either be
understood by the Sons of Joseph, by some other Wife, especially if the age of
Joseph were so great as Epiphanius has reported, or in general, of any that
were of the Relation and Family, either of the Blessed Virgin, or of Joseph his
reputed Father: As Abraham called Lot his Brother, though in strictness of
speech he was his Brothers Son, and Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the Sons
of Vzziel the Uncle of Aaron, and said unto them, come near, carry your
Brethren, from before the Sanctuary; whereas those Brethren were Nadab and
Abihu, the Sons, not of Vzziel but of Aaron, as the same worthy Bishop observes.

I shall conclude this point of the Messiah his being Born of a Virgin, with
observing, first, that the Jews themselves, when they endeavor with so much
care, and study to elude the force of so many demonstrative Texts, wherein this
Doctrine is constantly asserted, do in effect confess, that our Jesus was born,
as the Gospels have unanimously declared concerning him, of a pure and
undefiled Virgin, that had never known Man, for upon supposition that they do
not grant thus much, it would have been needless to stretch their wits, to
evade the force of those Prophecies, wherein it was foretold of the Messiah,
that he should be born of a Virgin, but the ready way would have been, to have
affirmed according to the vulgar error of the Jews themselves, who lived in
our Savior's time, that he was the Son of Joseph the Carpenter, and
consequently, that not being born of a Virgin, as the Prophets had foretold, he
could not be the Messiah that was to come.

Secondly, Since it appears so plainly, by the extorted confession of the Jews
themselves, those Jews, I mean, who since our Savior's time, have endeavored
to elude the Prophecies concerning him, that he was indeed born, as we affirm
and believe after a miraculous manner, of a Virgin; this shows plainly,
according to their own extorted confession, that he was certainly a most
extraordinary Person, who was brought into the World by such a particular act
of Providence, as was peculiar to himself; and it implies, that he was sent
into it upon some very important and extraordinary occasion, and this,
reflected back upon those Prophecies that have been mentioned concerning the
Messiah, and compared with the Doctrine and the Miracles of the Blessed Jesus,
makes it still more probable, that they are to be understood of a Virgin, truly
and properly so called, and that he was indeed the very Person whom the
Prophets foretold, the Messiah that was expected in the fullness of time, and so
the Jewish Evasions are baffled by themselves, and from what they have granted
to be true, they are in effect forced to confess that, which in words and in
appearance they deny.

Thirdly and lastly, when there are so many Types antecedent to the birth of
the Messiah, which did so plainly presignifie, that the Messiah was indeed to
be born of a Virgin, which Types have not been taken notice of, or applied, so
much as by any of the Evangelists or Apostles, or by our Savior himself, such
as those of Sarah and Elizabeth, and Moab and Melchisedek, when it is plain and
evident by many passages of the New Testament, that the Messiah was expected by
the Jews themselves, at that very time when our Savior appeared, when there
was no Man in that age that could compare or vye with him, for the innocence of
his Life, or for the purity of his Doctrine, or for the greatness or the
usefulness of his miracles, all these things compared together, are a further
attestation to the truth of what the Evangelists have told us, that our Jesus
was indeed the Christ, and that he was born of a Virgin; neither is there any
thing that gives greater strength and authority to the History of the Gospel,
then, by comparing the New Testament and the Old together, to find, that the
Types as well as Prophecies of the Old Testament are so exactly answered by the
events of the New, and that, in such instances wherein they have not been
applied, or compapared together by our Savior himself, or by any of his
Apostles, but that the Scripture contains within it self a hidden Treasure of
Testimony, to its own undoubted authority and truth, which Providence did not
think it fit to reveal and lay open, but to let it lie hid in darkness and
concealment, as a reward to the pious curiosity of such as should afterward
diligently read and search the Scriptures, and that in every age there might
some new Evidence appear, for the further confirmation and assurance of the
truth, and to render the Atheists and Infidels the more inexcusable, by the
daily increasing light that continues to surround them.

CHAP. 3. That the MESSIAH was to be GOD as well as MAN.
I Have done with the first branch of the Text, Behold a Virgin shall conceive
and bear a Son, I come now to the Second, and shall call his name Immanuel,
which being interpreted is God with us, from which words, having already
asserted, from the former, the Chastity and Virginity of the Mother of God, I
shall now as briefly and as clearly as I can, assert the undoubted and
unquestionable Divinity of the Son, against those Heretics, whether of our own
or former times, that have with so impious and detestable confidence, presumed
to deny it, and the first argument I shall make use of, shall be taken
immediately from the words themselves, and shall call his Name Immanuel; now
the question is, whether she did call his Name Emanuel or no, and the answer to
this question is very easy, that she did not, and that the Name given him at
his Circumcision, was not Imanuel but Jesus; and this by the direction of the
Angel himself, because he was to save his People from their sins, wherefore it
is clear that these words, and shall call his Name Emanuel, if they have any
sense at all, cannot be understood of his Name but of his Nature, and if so,
then all that I desire is granted, that he was by Nature God as well as Man,
and this is the meaning of that Phrase, and shall call his Name Emanuel, that
is, she shall acknowledge him to be God and worship him as such, and if it can
be proved that ever she did so, then it is plain that this Prophecy was exactly
fulfilled, and that here is all that can be desired for the explication of this
place, and what else, I beseech you, is, or can be, the meaning of the first
words of her Triumphant Song, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit
has rejoiced in God my Savior, for he has regarded the lowliness of his Hand
Maiden, that is, God that is about to take Human Flesh and Human Nature upon
him, has also graciously and mercifully decreed to make me his poor Handmaiden
and lowly Servant, the happy Instrument of conveying so great a Blessing to the
World, or else we may interpret those words, Behold a Virgin shall Conceive and
bear a Son, and shall call his Name Emanuel, after this manner; she shall
Conceive and bare a Son, and such a Son, as shall be as really God as he is
Man; for in the Hebrew Idiom things are said to be called, what indeed they
are, as in that passage concerning Elizabeth the Mother of John the Baptist,
This is the sixth month with her who was called Barren, that is, who was really
so; for the Text tells us likewise, that she was old and well stricken in years,
and the Angel acknowledged that her Conception was impossible by the course of
Nature; and so in that passage of the Prophet Isaiah, concerning the Messiah,
which has been already made use of to another purpose, in the former part of
this discourse, Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful,
Councellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, and the Prince of Peace;
that is, he shall really be all these things, and among others, he shall be the
Everlasting Father and the Mighty God; or in the Language of the Socinians,
Deus ille altissimus, the God of Melchisedek, the most high God.

And this is my first argument drawn from the consideration of the words of my
Text, and shall call his Name Immanuel, neither was that the Name he was called
by at his Circumcision, or the Name by which he was known either to his
Disciples or the Jews, or any other, so that this place cannot possibly be
interpreted of his Name, but Nature, and is as much as to say in other words,
that he was really God as well as Man.

But Secondly, he that raised up himself from the Grave, after his body had
lain there for three days together, was really God as well as Man, but our
Jesus raised himself by his own Power, from the dead, after he had lain buried
in the Grave for three days together, therefore he was really God as well as
Man. That this could not be done by any Human Power, is a thing that cannot,
without great folly and stupidity, be questioned or denied, that he did it by
his own Power, is equally manifest from his own words, Destroy this Temple,
said he, and in three days I will raise it up, which words the Evangelist tells
us, he spoke of the Temple of his Body, wherefore, if he were raised from the
Dead by the Power of God, considered as a Power distinct from that, with which
he was truly and properly invested himself; then it is false what he affirms
that he himself, in the compass of three days, would raise up and renew the
Temple of his Body, after it had been destroyed, but if he did it himself, as
he affirms himself to have done, then he was truly and properly invested with
that Power by which it was performed, which Power, since it could be no less
then such as was truly and properly Divine, it follows unavoidably that he was
really God as well as Man.

Again, in the Resurrection of Jesus from the dead, that Prophecy was
fulfilled, Thou shall not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy one to
see Corruption, which words are the words of Christ, speaking by the Mouth and
Spirit of the Psalmist to God the Father, and that they were Prophetical of the
Resurrection of Jesus from the dead, we have the express authority of St. Peter
for it, in the 2d. of the Acts and the 29, 30, and 31. verses, Men and
Brethren, said he, let me freely speak unto you of the Patriarch David, that he
is both dead and buried, and his Sepulcher is with us unto this day, therefore
being a Prophet and knowing that God had sworn with an Oath to him, that of the
fruit of his Loins according to the Flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on
his Throne, he, seeing this before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that
his Soul was not left in Hell, neither his Flesh did see Corruption; and to the
Testimony of St. Peter, we may add that of St. Paul, in the 13th. of the Acts,
from the 34th. to the 37th. verses. And as concerning that he raised him up
from the dead, now no more to return to Corruption, he said on this wise, I
will give you the sure mercies of David, wherefore he says also in another
Psalm, Thou shall not suffer thy Holy one to see Corruption; for David, after
he had served his own Generation by the will of God, fell on sleep and was laid
unto his Fathers and saw Corruption: But he whom God raised up saw no
Corruption.

From which places compared with the words of our Savior himself, the argument
is clear, David, as his words are expressly applied by two of the Apostles, St.
Peter and St. Paul, introduces Christ addressing himself to God the Father in
such terms, as do manifestly ascribe the miracle of the Resurrection to his
Power; but our Savior he ascribes the same miraculous event to himself,
destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up, the result of which
two places compared together, is unavoidably this, that Christ and God the
Father are the same, the same in substance, although they be divided and
distinguished in Person.

Further yet, Jonas his being three days and three nights in the Whales Belly,
was Typical of Jesus lying for the same space of time in the Grave, by the
application of our Savior himself; for so he tells us, Mat. 22. at the 39th.
and 40th. verses, An evil and adulterous Generation seeks after a sign, and
there shall be no sign given it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas, for as
Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales Belly, so shall the Son of
Man be three days and three nights in the Heart of the Earth, and if the
swallowing up of Jonas was Typical of the burial of Christ, and the continuance
of the one under that Calamity, Typical of the continuance of the other, then
certainly the escape of Jonas after three days, was likewise Typical of the
Resurrection of Christ, after the same space of time, but now Jonas his
deliverance was wrought by the immediate Power of God, Jonah, 2d. and the 10th.
And the Lord spoke unto the Fish, and it vomited out Jonas upon the dry Land,
and therefore though, the Scripture had not expressly asserted it, yet the
Analogy of Type, and Antitype would have required, that the Resurrection of
Jesus should be owing likewise, as indeed it was in it self a much more
miraculous event, unto the same Divine Power, but yet our Savior, as has been
shown, ascribes the same event wholly to himself, therefore God and Christ are
certainly the same, and this is my second argument for the Divinity of Christ,
which is taken from his Resurrection from the dead.

But thirdly, he that made the World, and all things that are therein, he
certainly was God as well as Man, but Christ made the World and all things that
are therein, therefore Christ certainly was God as well as Man.

That no Human Power or Understanding, nay, that nothing short of the Divinity
it self could possibly create, contrive, dispose and preserve the World, will,
I suppose, be granted by all, it being utterly unconceiveable that any skill or
power, but what is infinite should be able to bring so prodigious an effect to
pass, but now that Christ made the World, is as plainly asserted in the New
Testament, as any one thing that is in it, so the Author to the Hebrews tells
us, God, who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made the World; who
being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, and
upholding all things by the word of his Power, when he had by himself purged
our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high; and again, Thou
Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens
are the work of thine Hands, they shall perish, but thou remainest, and they
shall all wax old as does a Garment, and as a Vesture shall thou change them,
and they shall be changed, but thou art the same and thy years shall not fail;
so also St. Paul in his Epistle to the Colossians, By him were all things
Created that are in Heaven, and that are on Earth, visible and invisible,
whether they be Thrones or Dominions; or Principalities or Powers: all things
were Created by him and for him, and he is before all things and by him all
things consist. St. John likewise tells us, that the word was made flesh and
dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of
the Father, full of Grace and Truth, in which nothing can be plainer then that
by the word, Jesus, the Son of God is understood, who did indeed take our Flesh
and dwell among us, he took upon him the likeness of Men, and put on the form
of a Servant, and it is of this very word that he says, the word was with God
and the word was God, and that all things were made by him, which is my third
Argument for the Divinity of Christ, which is drawn from the Creation.

But fourthly, St. John goes further, all things were made by him, and without
him was not any thing made that was made, from whence the inference is plain,
that he himself was never made, for then there would have been something made
without him, for nothing can make it self, but if he were unmade and uncreated,
it follows of necessity, that he was Eternal and self-existent and consequently
God.

Fifthly, St. John does not only tell us, that he made all things, and that
without him was not any thing made that was made, but he says likewise, In the
beginning was the word; now this beginning cannot be understood of the
beginning of the Creation, as it is in the 1st. Chapter of Genesis, In the
beginning God Created the Heavens and the Earth, for he that made the World,
must of necessity have had his Existence before it, and all being nothing else,
beyond the Creation, but a great and vast Eternity behind it, not divided by
any Periods or Epochas of time, it is manifest that this word beginning, as it
is here used, can imply nothing else but the Eternity or self-existence of him,
of whom it is affirmed; for if there was any thing that was before him, then it
would not be true that he was in the beginning, that is, there was no
assignable, no conceiveable moment of Eternity, wherein he did not exist; and
this is my fifth Argument. But

Sixthly, he that has neither beginning of Days nor end of Life, is Eternal,
and consequently God; but Christ had neither beginning of Days nor end of Life,
therefore he is Eternal and self-existent, and consequently God. They are the
words of the Author to the Hebrews, which have been already cited, Melchisedek
being by interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that also King of
Peace, without Father, without Mother, having neither beginning of Days nor end
of Life, but made like unto the Son of God, abides a Priest continually, he
was so like him, that he was certainly the same, for there is but one Eternal
and Everlasting High Priest, but one Mediator betwixt God and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus, who was King of Righteousness and King of Peace, in whose
Dispensation and Person that saying was fulfilled, Mercy and Truth have met
together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other, at whose auspicious
birth the quire of Heaven proclaimed with ravishing Notes and charming Voices,
Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward Men, his
Gospel was the Gospel, and he was the Prince of Peace, and his Spirit is the
Spirit and the Soul of Peace and Love, and he is said to be like Melchisedek,
as he is said in another place to have thought it no robbery to have been equal
with God, because he was indeed the very same, besides that the first
ingredient in that notion, which we mortals are used to entertain of God, is,
that he is a self-originated, selfexistent Being, without beginning of Days or
end of Life, who is the first cause, the first principle and mover, upon which
all other things, whether in Heaven or on Earth, have a necessary dependence,
as upon their primitive Sourse and Fountain, and we are as sure that there can
be but one such being* as that there can be but one God, and that there is none
besides him. But,

Seavently, My seventh Argument shall be taken from those words of our Savior
in St. John, No man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from
Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in Heaven; now it is clear, that in one
sense our Savior had not yet ascended up to Heaven; nor was he like to do it
till after his Resurrection, till when his Body and his Human Nature were to be
confined to the Earth, and it is further clear that in this very Sense Elijah
had ascended in his Fiery Chariot before him, and so had Enoch too before him;
wherefore we must refer this Saying to the ubiquitariness and omnipresence of
the Divine Nature, by which he was in Heaven and Earth at the same time, and
was alike present to all places at once, no man has ascended up into heaven
but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man, which is in Heaven; or
else we must understand the Word Heaven of God, as the Jews in their Writings
do frequently understand it, and to this Sense it is used in several Places of
the New Testament and in one of the Old; and so the Sense will be this, no Man
has ascended up to God, that is no man enjoys a perfect and entire Commerce
and Correspondence with him; but he that came down from God, even the Son of
Man which is in God, as our Savior says expressly of himself elsewhere, that he
is in the Father and the Father in him; and by this way of Interpretation, the
Union of the Divine and Human Nature in the Person of Christ will be very fitly
and aptly represented, but otherwise than by one of these two Interpretations,
I do not see what Sense can be made of the Place.

Eighthly, and lastly, For I shall mention no more, though there be a Cloud of
other Witnesses, which have been already summoned by other learned Men, to give
their Evidence to this mighty Truth; the Divinity and Co-essentiality of the
Person of Christ with that of God the Father; I argue the same thing from the
nature of that Sacrifice, which he performed for us upon the Cross; for it is
certain, that all the Jewish Sacrifices did point at this great and final
Propitiation, which was in the fullness of time to be made; and therefore he is
called Christ our Passover; and the Author to the Hebrews expressly makes the
Sin and the Trepass Offering among the Jews to have been Typical of the
Sufferings of Christ upon the Cross; it is certain likewise, that those
Sacrifices were looked upon to be of an expiatory Nature, by the Priest or the
Owners laying his hand upon them, as it were to transfer the guilt upon their
heads, and by the Bloods being forbidden to be eaten among the Jews, because it
had contracted a Levitical Uncleanness by the guilt of the offending Parties;
as also by the Sin and the Trespass-Offerings, being burnt in many cases
without the camp, because of it is Uncleanness, as Christ suffered without the
Gate: For the same reason, if we will believe the Author to the Hebrews, that
by this he might answer the Sin-Offering among the Jews. Lastly, it is certain,
that this Expiation of the Jewish Sacrifices, whatever Opinion the Jews
themselves might have of it, was not real but typical, and pointed at that
great Sacrifice; which was indeed, and in truth, to expiate for the Sins of the
whole world. For, it was not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should
take away Sins; as the Author to the Hebrews tells us; and for the same reason
it was as little possible, that the blood of one man should be able to atone
and expiate for the sins of another, and much less for those of all mankind, so
that it was utterly impossible, that any thing but the blood of God himself
should be able to work so great, so universal, and so lasting an Atonement,
which is all that I shall offer at present as to the second branch of the Text;
which concerns the Divinity of the Person of Christ; only from what has been
said, there are some practical Improvments to be made, which I will but name.

From his being born of a Virgin, we are in a Figure acquainted with the purity
and cleanness of his Person and his Doctrine, and with that Chastity and
Innocence, which is expected from us, if we pretend to be his Followers and
Disciples, and from the Divinity of his Person there is a twofold Lesson, which
we are to learn.

First, the Infiniteness and unconceivable vastness of that condescension, by
which he did not only stoop to human nature, but to the worst and most
afflicting Circumstances of Poverty, Disgrace, Contempt and Scorn, that it can
be loaded withal, and to the most vile, painful and ignominious Death, which
human Nature was capable of Suffering; and this ought when ever we consider it
to be a powerful and present Remedy against all manner of Insolence and Pride
in our best Condition, when the Son of God, who was God himself, humbled
himself so much for our sakes, and gave us through the whole course of the time
he spent upon Earth a perpetual Example of humility and Meekness.

Secondly, it ought to arm us with Patience in adversity, and with submission
to the Will of God in the worst and most deplorable circumstances that can
befall us.

Thirdly, it ought to inspire us with a Spirit of mutual Charity and mutual
Forgiveness after his Example, who suffered and forgave so much, who blessed his
very Enemies, and laid down his Life as a Sacrifice for them.

Lastly, The consideration of the Divinity of his Person, ought always to
affect us with a just fear and apprehension of him, whom if we will not obey
out of gratitude, yet we ought to do it out of Interest and self-love, least
his Justice should punish us as we deserve; when his goodness and his mercy
have in vain endeavored to persuade us, lest by too frequent provocations and
too obstinate impenitence, we kindle his wrath against us; so that it cannot be
quenched, and turn his merciful expiation and intercession on our behalfs into
eternal vengeance and displeasure.

AN APPENDIX Concerning the EXTENTION OR OMNIPRESENCE OF THE Divine NATURE.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. in the Year MDCLXXXV.

SECT. 1. Of the Nature of GOD, together with a Demonstration of His EXISTENCE.
I Affirm in the general of the Divine Nature, That it is an infinite Extension
or Space endued with all possible Wisdom, Goodness and Power, and I will prove
each of these as distinctly as I can by themselves; For it is very hard to keep
them from interfereing with one another; First, that God is an infinite
Extention, Secondly, that he is an Extention furnished with those attributes
which I have assigned, in their utmost latitude, perfection and extent.

And for the Extention of the Divine Substance, I am so verily persuaded of its
truth and of its absolute necessity, to be believed, as the main Foundation of
all natural, and by consequence, of all revealed Religion, that I am, and have
always been greedy upon every occasion, to inculcate and repeat so necessary a
Doctrine.

It is the Foundation of natural Religion, because Extention belongs to the
very notion of Substance or Existence, considered in the general; for nothing
is, which is not somewhere, and there is no somewhere which is not extended;
and indeed, if we consider the Divine Omnipresence, which is granted by all,
though there are some that treat of it after such a manner, as if they did not
believe it, how is it possible for any Substance, whether finite or infinite,
to be present at this place, and present at that, truly and properly present at
both places at the same time, and yet not be present to all the space between
them, and if he be present not only to the extremes, but to the intermediate
space, then is he manifestly co-extended to that whole space together; from
whence it follows plainly, that there can be no notion of the Divine
Omnipresence, without supposing him to be infinitely extended.

Again, it is manifest, that motion is a distinct thing from matter, all matter
being indifferent in it self, either to rest or motion, neither is there any
part of matter being at perfect rest, which may not by a sufficient force, be
put into a swift degree of motion, nor any part of it never so swiftly moved,
which meeting with obstacles and impediments from without, may not be reduced
to perfect rest, so that it is plain since motion is not essential to matter;
it must therefore either be a thing subsisting by it self, or it must be the
attribute or property of some other Substance.

It cannot be the former, a thing subsisting by it self, because motion in the
abstract cannot possibly be conceived, for there can be no motion, but there
must at the same time be some substance or other that is moved, or that moves
and actuates it self and other things about it, wherefore since it has been
proved so plainly, that motion is not of the essence of matter, which cannot
move it self, nor increase or suspend its own motion, and which from the
swiftest motion, may by natural impediments be reduced to perfect rest, it is
plain that it must unavoidably belong to something which is not matter, that
is, to an immaterial or incorporeal Substance.

If therefore motion it self be extended, as it is plain it is in any fluid
body, whether of Air, or Water, or Fire, the force and activity, which moves it
and keeps it in a state of fluidity, being Co-extended to the substance it
self; then is it necessary also, that that Principle upon which it depends, and
in which it is inhaerent, should be extended in like manner, and to say
otherwise, is to say, that accidents may wander from their substance, and they
may be separated from one another, which all Men know to be impossible and
absurd; for as there can be no color without some substance which is colored;
no shape or figure without some substance which is figured and shapen, so
neither can there be any motion without some substance which does move or is
moved; and if there can be no extention of color or of figure, then certainly
there can be no extention of motion neither, without the extention of that
substance to which it belongs.

From hence it follows, that that motion or activity, by which the far greatest
part of the Universe is kept in a fluid condition, orin a state of perpetual
motion, whose parts would otherwise cling together, as the parts of the Earth
and Moon and other Planetary bodies do; I say, from hence it follows that this
motion or activity must be coextended to some immaterial substance, wherein
this power or activity shall reside, as in its proper subject, its efficient
cause, its original root and fountain and spring, and that substance can be no
other then God himself, or at least it will ultimately terminate in him,
because all secundary, Created Beings can have no activity or principle of self
motion, but what they borrow from the first, which is the sourse and original
of all the rest, together with their respective faculties and powers.

Again, this self-active, this self-moving Principle, this first Cause and
Principle of motion in the World, must not only be supposed to be endowed with
a Power of Motion and activity from it self, but with a Power of suspending,
increasing, or utterly withdrawing this activity, as it pleases it self; for
otherwise if it did always act to the utmost of it is Power, since the matter is
every where in it is own Nature, any otherwise than as it is awakened and
stirred up by this Principle from without, equally sluggish, immovable and
unactive, and since this being is uniform and like it self throughout, equally
self-moving, selfsufficient and self-active, it would follow from these two
things considered together, that all the parts of the Creation should be moved
with equal swiftness, that the Earth should be dissolved and shattered into the
fine and subtle consistence of the purest ether, and that all the Matter in
the World should be not only fluid, but ethereal too, which is contrary to
Experience, wherefore that all things are not moved with equal swiftness, that
all the matter of which the Universe consists, is not crumbled into the finest
Air and the most subtle ether; it can be referred to nothing but this, that
that Cause or ^^^^ciple in which the Power of self-activity and self-motion
resides, can either suspend, decrease, or utterly withdraw that motion as it
pleases it self; and this is confirmed by our own daily Experience of our
selves, who being a lower sort of immaterial Beings, are likewise in our
Proportion endued with a Power of self-activity and self-motion from within,
which, though as being the Power of a finite and imperfect agent, it cannot be
extended beyond such a sphere of activity, yet within that sphere or
proportion, or degree, it may either suspend or increase, or utterly remove and
withdraw its activity as it pleases it self.

Lastly, since this being is not only furnished with an ability to act or move,
but with a power of proportioning that activity, and that motion, according to
its pleasure and since it appears farther by our daily and perpetual experience
of all the objects about us, by the earth which he has made, and by the
Heavens which are the work of his hands, by the admirable beauty and artifice
of all things considered by themselves, by their agreement and harmony with one
another, for the Preservation of the whole, and by the fitness of the whole
Fabric, and the seeming conspiracy of its several parts, for the subsistence
and happiness of those Creatures that belong to the sensitive and the
reasonable world, I say, since it appears by all this, that the activity or
self-motion of the Divine Substance, is tempered by measures of the most
obliging goodness, the most exact Justice, the most profound wisdom, and yet
that all the several instances compared together, are at the same time an
irrefragable argument of a most unbounded and uncontrollable power, this makes
up in short the perfect and complete demonstration of what I undertook to
prove, that God is nothing else but an infinite extention or omnipresent
Substance, endued with all possible goodness and wisdom and power.

SECT. II. That there is of necessity an Immaterial Extention to be granted,
against DES CARTS.
DES Cartez distinguishes very rightly betwixt cogitation or thinking and
extention, for they are two things, and therefore the notion of the latter does
not of necessity include in it, that of the former, there may be an extended
substance which does not, which cannot think, but yet for all that there can be
no thinking substance but what is extended, the reason is, because extention is
the common attribute of all substance whatsoever, and if the very essence and
being of an immaterial substance, do depend wholly and entirely upon
cogitation, and upon nothing else, I would willingly demand of the maintainers
of this Doctrine, whether we must understand this of actual, or only of
potential or possible cogitation?

If the former, if nothing but actual cogitation will serve the turn, then the
Soul in a sleep or trance, or what we are used to call a brown study, ceasing
to think, must also cease to be, for there can be no cogitation without self
consciousness or a sense of thinking, and when it begins to think again, it
must be supposed to be Created a new, or rather every distinct cogitation,
every particular thought that comes into our heads must be a distinct Soul,
which things are so absurd, that nothing can be more.

But if we understand it only of potential or possible cogitation, that is to
say, of a power of thinking, which is sometimes employed and sometimes not,
which is all that is true in this notion, then there must be a substance in
which this power must reside, which power must therefore be distinct from the
substance it self, as causes are distinct from their effects, how immediate or
emanative soever those effects be, as modifications, that is, particular
shapes, colors, magnitudes or respects of the parts of any body, are distinct
from that matter to which they belong, or as the Elasticity or springiness of
recoyling bodies is distinct from the matter of which those bodies are
composed, or because nothing can be more plain then the thing it self, I say
again, that that substance which has a power within it self, of exerting or
suspending a certain degree of activity as it pleases, must needs, be distinct
from that power which may either be exerted or suspended, or indeed, while the
Soul continues united to this earthly body, cannot always be equally exerted in
our selves, besides the difference of temperament and constitution, which there
is betwixt our selves and others, though the substance in which this activity
resides be always the same in us, and always specifically the same, that is, a
substance of exactly the same nature in others.

Des Cartez is the less to be credited, in setting cogitation and extention at
so wide a distance from one another, because it is plain he did it to serve a
turn, for in that Mechanical World which is of his contriving, he has ordered
the matter so, as to divide the whole universe into certain Vortices or
Whirlpools, in the center of one of which is the Sun, round about which the
Earth is moved by the subtle matter of the Heavens, much after the same manner
as you shall see a straw turn round in a Whirl-pool of the water, when by
reason of too strait a passage, and too swift a motion, the water cannot pass
freely on in a direct course, but is obstructed by it self, and is reflected
back with an eddy toward the Fountain.

For all natural motion is in a strait line, as is evident by this, that where
there is no such obstruction, there the water flows easily in a direct Channel,
without any such violent returns upon it self: thus smoke ascends directly,
when its motion is not disturbed by the wind, and heavy bodies descend in a
perpendicular line, and the same is likewise further confirmed by Dez Cartez
himself, by the experiment of a Sling, which the faster it is swung about in a
circular motion, the more strait and tite is the string or thong of it kept by
the stone which is at the bottom, which resists and opposes the circular
motion, which is violent and unnatural to it, and endeavors all the while to
fly off and be gone in a strait or direct line, besides that motion in a right
line, is the most simple and easy sort of motion, whereas there is no such
thing in nature, as an exact and Mathematical Circle, but it consists in effect
only of so many little straight Lines, passing out of one into another, that
is, of so many several violences and interruptions done to the direct and
rectilinear motion.

Since therefore Des Cartez had divided the whole Universe into so many great
Vortices or Whirl pools, one of which is that which we inhabit, the Center of
which is the Sun, as all the fixed Stars that we see in a Starry Night, are, if
you will believe him, who never was there to see, the Center of so many other
Vortices or Whirlpools, such as this is, in which we dance perpetually round
about the Sun, and since it appears plainly, that all motion in a Circle is
violent and praeternatural, and that it would never be, were it not from some
outward impediment or obstruction, which is given to the motion in a right
line, the reason why the subtle matter of the Heavens is moved in a Circle,
must be referred to one of these two causes, either that extension and matter
is the same, and then indeed it is impossible but all things must be full, and
consequently, that they must obstruct one another in their notions, for there
can be no distance which is not extended, and which by consequence is not
matter, so that if this notion be true, it is utterly impossible there should
be any emptiness or vacuity in the world.

Or else 2dly. though there were some other sort of extention besides that of
matter allowed, yet the extention of matter must still be supposed to be as
really infinite, as if there had been no other sort of extention in the world,
it must be co-extended to all the possibilities of space, or else the outermost
Vortices, without a Perpetual miracle, which his Mechanical genius disdained to
submit to, must of necessity, by the pressure and endeavor of all their parts
from the Center, have flown in pieces into the empty space, and by the same
reason that one Vortex is destroyed, all the rest must immediately have
followed, and so the world which he had built with so great study and pains,
would have been irrecoverably lost and spoiled for ever.

And yet still, when you have granted him this infinite extention, which is
more then any Man with modesty can demand, yet there can be no motion, nor any
fluidity possibly conceived, without the admission of such interspersed
vacuities, as the old Democritick Philosophy did suppose, for what is all the
solidity or hardness in the World, but only the exact fitness or juxta position
of one surface to another; neither will all the Epicurean hooks and eyes, all
the complications and entanglements of the particles that can possibly be
thought of, do any more then this, for after all there is no reason but the
same passage, which will let in, will let out, so that solidity or hardness
after all, is nothing else but a mere Juxta-position of the parts, and a
fitness of one surface to another.

If then the whole material Creation be so entirely of a piece, there being no
vacuities between its parts, as if it were all but one and the same body, how
comes it to pass that it is not all as hard as Iron, and solid as the Adamant
it self? How is it possible for one part to be moved, but all the rest must be
moved, at the same time, and with the same degree of motion? Lastly, how can
motion begin when no part can yield, and that which can never begin can never
be?

But because there are some who pretend to a more then ordinary sagacity, and
are used to distinguish very nicely betwixt Imagination and Conception, and
forty things they can conceive which they cannot imagine, nor make out to any
body else, this being usually their last shift, when they have nothing else to
say for themselves, therefore that in this Philosophical age, I may not seem to
be singular in asserting those interspersed vacuities, which are now commonly
exploded and turned out of doors, I must of necessity observe, that besides all
the ancient Epicurean Philosophers, whose Philosophy was indeed, as to other
things, very defective, as appears by those accounts which are left of it in
Lucretius and Diogenes Laertius at this day, and whose defectiveness has been
sufficiently exposed by our noble and renowned Countryman Mr. Boil, in his
Treatise of the usefulness of experimental Philosophy, yet the same honorable
and learned Gentleman; who has much more knowledge in nature, then ever Des
Cartez could pretend to, and who is the glory of our age and nation, for his
admirable skill in experimental Philosophy, does in several of his discourses
upon the experiments of his Air Pump, acknowledge and defend those vacuities
for which I am pleading, and this not only in the cavity of his exhausted
Receiver, or in the hollow of the Pump it self, when the Sucker is drawn down,
and the Cock of the Receiver stopped to hinder all communication between them and
in the top of the inverted Tube deserted by the subsiding Quicksilver in the
Torricellian Experiment, but even in the Water, Air and Ether themselves, and
in all fluid Bodies whatsoever.

And Mr. Boil, setting aside his known Ingenuity and Goodness is the rather to
be believed, because he does not say this merely to serve a turn, as Des Carts
manifestly did; for if extension and matter be not perfectly the same, then
there may be an extension without, and beyond, his vortices, into which they
will fly and be destroyed, but if extension and matter be exactly the same,
then it is altogether necessary, that the World should be full, it being
impossible, there should be any distance which is not extended, and all
extension according to him is body.

But if Des Cartez had considered as he ought to have done, that motion is not
a thing or Creature subsisting by it self, as he seems to make it, when he
tells us that God in the beginning of things Created such a quantity of motion,
which has been ever since preserved, there being no such thing to be conceived
as motion in abstracto or motion without some principle that moves it self and
communicates that motion to the matter, which has no self-activity contained
in its nature, he would then easily have discerned, that this power or activity
being so largely diffused, and so widely spread abroad, as we see it is, the
cause in which it resides, must of necessity be so too.

He might also have known, if it had been for the interest of his beloved
Vortices to do it, that where all things are so crammed that nothing can yield
or give place, it was impossible there should be any motion, and therefore,
that the bare granting of such a thing as motion, as well with respect to those
bodies upon which it acts, as of that substance in which it resides, and whose
Power and Energy it is, does undeniably prove a space or extention, which is
not matter.

And this is so true and so very plain, that though this interspersed vacuity,
as well as the ultra mandane spaces, may seem very inconsistent with the
construction of a vortex, yet the old Epicureans, who had their Dinai, that is,
their Vortices or Whirl-pools too, and from them it is most likely that Des
Cartez received his, yet were forced to admit of such an immaterial space,
without which they thought, and they thought very rightly, no motion could be
performed, and as he received his vortices from Epicurus, so whether his
Cometology, the absorption of his Stars, and the Formation of his Planets were
not a part of the Philosophy of the ancient World may be a question, which
deserves to be considered: For some such thing seems to be alluded to in that
Expression of St. Jude, v. 13. (...), wandering or Planetary Stars to whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

SECTION III. Des Cartez an Atheist, his Argument from the Idaea represented.
BUt I am firmly of opinion, whatever the Philosophers are pleased to say, who
whether they be more conceited of themselves, or of their Master Des Cartez is
hard to determine, that Des Cartez was as rank an Atheist, and a far more
dangerous one: than either Diagoras or Theodorus, or any of those whom
Antiquity has branded with that Name, and that he had a Design of introducing
Atheism, and a Belief of nothing, but Body, into the World.

For though indeed he does very rightly affirm the Notions of extension and
cogitation to be, as they are, very different from one another, yet when he
makes extension to be the very Essence and constitutive Nature of matter, and
takes upon him to assert not only, that all matter is extended, but also that
nothing is extended but what is matter, the consequence of this is, when I come
afterward to consider, that I can have no notion of Substance without
extension, and I have already granted extension and matter to be the same, that
cogitation shall be only a certain mode or disposition of the infinitely
diversifyed, and variously complicated Parts of this extension.

Again, his rejecting those arguments for the existence of a God, which have
been used all along to be taken from the Fabric and contrivance of the World,
as indeed it was necessary for him to do, who had contrived such a giddy
Universe of his own, and substituting in the stead of it, that Bulrush of an
Idea, unable to withstand the least puff of disputation (which instead of
defending the existence of a God, is manifectly to betray the cause of God and
of Religion) does but too plainly discover what thoughts we are to entertain of
him, by whom so fallacious and inconclusive an argument was substituted in the
stead of that, which is so strong in it self, and has been so successful in
all ages, to preserve the belief and worship of a God among Men. To be sure
David and this Philosopher were not of a mind, for he tells us very honestly,
for want of this new Philosophy wherewith after ages have been blessed, The
Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work, day
unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge, there is no
speech nor language where their voice is not heard; Their line is gone out
through all the Earth, and their words to the end of the World.

And that we may see the better how weak and inconclusive his argument drawn
from the Idea is, I will explain as clearly as I can, what it is that he
understands by it, he tells us therefore what is very true, that we are all of
us born Infants, and that we come into the world without any knowledge or
experience of the things about us, from whence it so falls out, that in some
things we pass a wrong Judgment our selves, and in others we are deceived by
taking things upon trust, from those that are themselves mistaken, that having
once embraced an error and espoused it for a long time, it is very hard, as
indeed it is for us to undeceive our selves, or to believe otherwise of it,
then as of a most certain and undoubted truth, he says, that our senses do in
many things delude us, and impose upon us, as a stick in the water shall appear
crooked, though it be indeed straight, and a square Tower or Building shall at a
distance have the appearance of round, and a Marble touched by two fingers
crossing one another shall affect one with a Sense, as if it were two, though
it be indeed but one, he tells us that in our dreams things do appear to us to
be as real, as when we are never so wide awake, and that there is no certain
way to distinguish betwixt the realities of the day, and the delusions of the
night, since the one does always appear as real as the other, and at that time
when they strike our Imagination, we do as really believe them to be true,
there are many, says he, that argue from a false Principle, and then it is
impossible, but all the Conclusions, that are built upon it, must either be
false or uncertain, there are others that let their Principle be never so
right, yet they do not argue rightly from it, and on both sides it happens that
those things are taken for certain Demonstrations, which are indeed nothing
better, than very foul and palpable Mistakes; and upon such considerations as
these he exhorts his Disciple, as the best way to discover the Truth, to doubt
of all things, the truth of his Faculties, the evidence of his Senses, the
certainty even of direct and Mathematical Demonstrations; but yet at the same
time, says he, it is impossible, I should believe otherwise, but that I that
doubt must be; For I can never give my Assent to this Proposition, That that
which is not can either doubt or think; therefore he lays down this as the
first proposition of which we can be certain; I doubt therefore I am, or I
think therefore I am, that is, I am as yet uncertain of the Existence of my
body, which being only an Object of my Senses, I may be deceived in it, as well
as in any other sensible Object whatsoever, but yet still notwithstanding it is
most certainly true; I doubt therefore I am, that is, that thing or nature
whatever it is, which doubts or thinks or disputes with it self about all other
things, must of necessity, have a real and undoubted Existence of its own, and
though I be deceived in all the Judgments, which I make upon the things about
me, or that appear to me, as if they had a Being, yet thus much is still
unquestionably true, I am deceived therefore I am; for that which is not cannot
be deceived.

Wherefore being certain of the Truth of this first Proposition, that is, so
certain, that it is impossible for me to doubt of it any longer, I doubt, or I
think, or I am deceived, therefore I am; his next Enquiry is into the nature of
this Being that thus pronounces of it self, and from it is thinking infers it is
Existence; and, says he, when I look into my self, I find the Sphere of my
knowledge to be very short, and all that I pretend to know very doubtful and
uncertain, when I look back, I cannot recollect that I have been long in Being,
and when I look forward I have no certainty that I shall exist the next moment;
from whence he infers of himself, That he is an imperfect and dependent
Creature, that could not give Being to its self; for then he should always have
been; and cannot preserve it self in Being: For then he should be sure of his
Existence for ever after, and comparing the Idea's or Notions, which he finds
within himself, he discovers some of them to be the Ideas or Representatiosn of
sensible Objects, in which he cannot tell but he may be deluded and imposed
upon, and others, though they appear to be of greater certainty, yet men have
been deceived even in Mathematical Conclusions of which they thought themselves
as certain as the most certain Evidence, and the most unquestionable
Demonstration could make them, but at last after a great deal of Rummaging and
Tumbling over the Ideas of his mind, he finds one Idea or Notion of a Being
necessarily existent, and this he tells us cannot choose but be; because it has
necessary Existence included in it is Nature, and this is that which he calls
God.

SECT. IV. The CARTESIAN Argument from the IDEA Refuted.
I Have laid down in the former Section, as plain and candid a Representation,
as I am able to make, of that famous Argument for the Existence of a God, which
is drawn from the Idaea, or from the Notion of a God implanted in the minds of
Men, including necessary existence in it; from whence the Philosopher is
pleased to infer, that thing or Being which is represented by it, must of
necessity be.

But against this profound way of Reasoning, that has drawn so many eminent
Disciples after it, there are these following Objections to be made.

First, that if we would go the Cartesian way to work, yet this Proposition, I
think therefore I am, cannot possibly be the first Proposition, of which I must
be certain, but there must of necessity be three other Propositions, of whose
Truth I must be well assured before I can be certain of this, and these
Propositions are evidently these,

First, Nihili nulla sunt Attributa, that which is not has no attributes or
affections belonging to it.

Secondly, cogitatio est attributum, cogitation or thinking is an attribute or
affection of some substance. And then,

Thirdly, from this I infer, quod cogitat, est, that which thinks must be,
which in the last place I apply to my self, ego cogito, ergo sum, I think
therefore I am, so that it is manifestly impossible for a Man to doubt of all
things besides his own Existence, since it is so plain and demonstrably
certain, that there must be three other Propositions of which he must be sure,
before he can be sure of that.

Secondly, Suppose a Man to be never so sure of his own existence, yet in this
skeptical way of Reasoning, when I am once at a doubt of the existence of all
other things, besides my self; it is utterly impossible, that ever I should get
rid of this scruple by any means whatsoever; for though I do find the Idea or
Notion of a Being necessarily existent, impressed upon my mind; yet if I
understand this of any thing without, and besides, my self, how can I tell, but
I may be deceived in this Idaea, as well as in any other. It is true indeed
there must be somewhat necessarily existent, or else nothing could be; for out
of nothing comes nothing, but how can I tell, but I my self am that
self-originated, that self-existent Being: For, because I cannot look back for
any long space of time, it does by no means follow from thence, that there was
any time when I was not; for I may possibly have forgot my self, as those that
assert the pre-existence of the Soul, do say, that she had a Being in the
Regions above, before she was thrust down into this dungeon of the Earth;
notwithstanding that neither they, nor we, have any the least Sense or Memory
of any such thing; and (upon supposition that any thing may be forgotten) when
we come to doubt of all things, this is a very unexceptionable way of Reasoning
in the case proposed, and so on the other side, though I am not sure I shall
exist the next moment, yet it does not follow but I may exist to all Eternity;
for I was not sure a minute ago, that I should live till now, and yet for all
that it still remains to this very moment, and may do to the next, and so on, a
very true Proposition, cogito ergo sum, I think therefore I am.

Neither are those frailties or infirmities which I seem to my self to be
sensible of, those decays and weaknesses which I seem to feel in my body, any
argument at all, that I am indeed that frail and dependent Creature, which I
seem to my self to be, for all these are only matters of sense, in which I may
possibly be deceived, and after all the complaints which I am perpetually
making of Aches in this part, and Sickness in the other; it may still be true
according to Dez Cartez, that all this is nothing but a mere delusion, and that
I have no body, and consequently no pain or sickness about me.

Neither can I make any better inference from the sickness or infirmity, or
death of others, that I my self am of a mortal and a fading Nature; for all
this, for ought I know, is nothing but a dream, and perhaps there is no
Creature, nor any substance in the World besides my self.

Lastly, the narrowness of my sphere of Knowledge or of Power, are not any
arguments that I am not indeed that necessarily Existent being, whose Idaea or
notion I have in my mind, for if there be nothing but I, and I know my self, I
know as much as can be known, and again, if there be nothing but I, and
consequently no Power but what I have, I can do as much as can be done, and by
consequence I am endued with those two attributes of Power and Wisdom, in their
very utmost latitude and extent, or which is all one, I am a Being endued with
all possible perfection, which is all that is meant by God.

So that according to this new method of Philosophysing, it is impossible for a
Man, when he is got so far as to call all things into question, ever, to get
rid of those incurable scruples, it is impossible for him to be sure of the
Existence of any Substance whatsoever but his own, and though it be never so
certain, that there must be something which does exist of it self, otherwise
nothing could ever be, yet since I can have no certainty of the Existence of
any thing besides my own Person and Substance, I have more reason to conclude,
that I my self am that self-originated and self-existent Being, then that there
is any other besides me, and thus has Des Cartez very fairly banished a God
out of the World, and the World out of it self, and left himself alone, to
contemplate and admire his own self-existent and solitary being; and if this be
not fine Philosophy and profound reasoning, such as deserves that admiration
which it has met with in the World; let his admirers and Champions themselves
be Judges.

If this Philosophy were true, Men might even shut up their Shops, and sow up
their Mouths, and trouble themselves no farther about the things of this Life;
for why should any Man concern himself about things that are not, but only seem
to be, and when it is utterly impossible for him to get rid of his doubts, I
can hardly understand; how it is possible for such a Man to act with that
steadiness and gravity, and constant purpose of mind, as if he were well
satisfied in the truth of his senses.

It is true indeed, that it does by no means become a Philosopher, to take
things upon trust, without examining into their truth himself; but yet to doubt
of all things, is notwithstanding every whit as Vnphilosophical as to examine
into nothing; for a Philisopher, if he be any thing at all, is a Man that
pretends to know somewhat more then his Neighbors, but at this rate of
Philosophising he will know less, or at least it will be impossible that they
should know less then he, for no man can know less than nothing; and this is
the highest pitch to which a Cartesian Philosopher can attain.

But thirdly, I affirm that we have no notion of a being necessarily existent,
imprinted upon us by Nature, but it is only the effect of our reasoning with
our selves and with one another, we find our selves by experience to be frail
and imperfect Creatures, we are sensible that we come into the world, not by
any power or virtue of our own, and that this was the case of our Parents
before us, and of theirs before them, we remember that we were once Infants,
infirm and helpless things, that we grew up by slow and insensible proportions,
to the strength and stature and maturity of a Man; we find our selves all the
while subject to a thousand casualties and diseases, assaulted by infirmities
from within, and by enemies from without, that we are liable to hunger and
thirst and cold, that we are unable to subsist by our selves, without being
mutually kind and helpful to one another, that we stand in need of Houses and
Garments and Weapons to defend us against the weather, the wild beasts, and one
another, of Food, to recruit the sensible evacuations and the insensible
perspirations of Nature, and of Physic to repair its defects, and supply what
it wants of sufficiency to preserve it self, that notwithstanding this, our
very pleasures and enjoyments do by degrees impair us, and bring a satiety and
loathsomeness upon themselves, that that very food which was intended by nature
for the support of Life, does sometimes in the most temperate, prove the
occasion of sickness and diseases, that the very Air, without which we cannot
live or breath, does by degrees consume us, and prey upon us in the nature of a
menstruum, till, at last old age give a period to all the satisfactions and
enjoyments of Youth, and Death put an end to the complaints and miseries of Old
Age.

And by this means being made sensible of our own imperfection, that we are
born without our own consent, and that we die whether we will or no, that we
cannot subsist without perpetual recruits, and that those recruits themselves
do by degrees, impair and weaken that Nature which they were intended to
preserve, we are forced to acknowledge our selves to be a sort of obnoxious and
dependent Creatures, and that we owe our being, which we see so plainly, it was
impossible for us to bestow upon our selves, or to preserve it for any length
of time, after it was bestowed, to something more perfect, and more noble then
our selves, which if it be a dependent and created Nature, notwithstanding that
it is of greater excellence and perfection, then is to be found in our selves,
we must still run higher in the chain of causes, till we come to some cause
that has a self-existence, and a nature which it did not receive or borrow
from any other, and this is indeed a Being necessarily Existent, to the
knowledge of which we arrive, not by any Idaea or notion, implanted upon our
natures, but by a gradual and painful ratiocination.

Neither indeed were there ever any before Des Cartez, who did assert any such
innate Idaeas or inbred Notions, implanted upon the minds of Men, antecedently
to their converse with the objects that are about them, and the reasoning which
they make within themselves, by comparing and collating things with one
another, but the ancient Platonists, and those that have received it from them,
Men of a Kidney far different from Des Cartez and his Disciples, who did it
upon this account, that they supposed us to have lived in times past, in a
Superior State, in the Region of Angels and immortal Spirits, clothed all
about with bodies of an Ethereal and Heavenly contexture, but that for our
Transgressions in that blessed State, we were cast down from thence by the just
Judgment of God into this lowest Region of the World, which is the very sink
and sediment of nature, which was not only intended as a punishment, but as an
act of goodness, to make a new experiment upon us, whether we would reform our
selves, and, having obtained a perfect Conquest over our lusts and passions,
return again into that blessed place, from whence, by our sins and enormities
we had departed, and from hence they supposed that as in a Shipwreck, though
the far greatest part of the Vessel and her freight be irrecoverably lost, yet
some part of both will frequently swim to shore, so after this great Shipwreck
of our selves, being cast away from the Divine presence, and from the Company
of Angels and immaculate Spirits, yet there were still as it were some planks,
some broken remainders and fragments of Knowledge, that were preserved, and
therefore that all our Knowledge here was nothing else but reminiscency, or a
calling to mind those notions with which our Souls were replenished in the
other world, and which, though mightily defaced and blemished, made a hard
shift to swim along with us, and to preserve some footsteps of themselves in
our minds, in, and after, our passage into this.

But not to concern our selves about this Doctrine of Praeexistence, a Doctrine
which has exercised the Wits and Pens of so many learned Men; It is plain that
this Platonic fancy of innate or inbred notions, ought by no means to find
entertainment in the Creed of wise and understanding Men, not only because it
is precarious, but also because it is needless; for it may be evidently shown,
by a particular induction, that there is no notion which the mind of Man is
capable of receiving, which he may not derive from the information of his
senses, by conversing with external objects, by comparing them together, and
affirming or denying them, (according to the congruities or disagreements,
which by experience we find in them) of one another.

By conversing with objects singly and by themselves, there arise so many
several single Idaeas or Pictures drawn and painted upon our Imagination, by
affirming or denying them one of another, we frame propositions, and by tying
several of these propositions, by those natural connexions which we find in
them together, there arises that which we call Syllogism or discourse or
ratiocination.

And if you ask how by the mediation of our Senses we come to have any Knowledge
of an immaterial Nature, that is of an Object which neither does nor can affect
our Senses, to this I answer, that after having conversed with several sensible
Objects and compared them together, having separated those things, which God
and Nature have separated from one another, and joined those things and notions
which ought to be put together, it is then natural for us to begin to enquire,
what it is that makes this reflection upon the things without us, that disputes
and argues pro and con within it self upon the Objects, that come within it is
Observation; and this, it is easy to perceive, that it cannot be mere matter,
which is a dull, stupid and insensible thing, without any Life, Activity, or
Power; but it needs must be something which is not matter, of whose nature,
because it is difficult for us to have so clear a Perception from the
Information of our Senses, which cannot immediately convey any thing but
sensible and material things; therefore we express it by a negative Term, and
call it an immaterial Being, which does not tell us positively what it is, but
only negatively what it is not, and yet because we have a positive notion of
cogitation, without which we cannot reflect upon any thing whatsoever, nor have
any the least Sense of any the most common Object, that falls under our view
and apprehension; therefore to the negative conception of immaterial, we add
the positive of cogitant, and because we cannot possibly conceive any substance
whatsoever, which is not somewhere, and by consequence which is not extended;
therefore this makes up the complete Idea, which we have of our own minds or
souls, that they are immaterial, cogitant and extended Beings; and because
Wisdom and thought wherever they are found are an Argument in other Substances
of an immaterial Nature, as well as they are in us, therefore when we see the
admirable wisdom and contrivance, wherewith all things in the World without us
are managed and disposed; this brings us to a firm and infallible assurance,
that there is one great and universal mind presiding over all things, and
appointing to all the several Parts of which either the inanimate, or the
sensitive and animated World are made up, all their respective Faculties and
Powers, their Offices and Employments, their several Posts and Stations and
Places of abode, for the better preservation of themselves, and for the greater
harmony, beauty and security of the whole, and this is that which, without the
help of a Platonic or a Cartesian Idea imprinted antecedently to this
ratiocination upon our minds, we are used to call a God.

Besides, that since it is so plain and evident, that we have no Notion or Idea
in our minds, which we may not derive from the information of our Senses, and
if over and above we will needs have recourse to the Platonic Ideas, or inbred
Notions in the mind of Man, then either these Ideas do agree and jump with the
Information of our Senses, or they do not, if the latter, if they do not agree,
then either we must renounce the Testimony of our Senses, which we cannot do
without making Shipwreck of Life it self, or of these supposed Platonical
Ideas, which is much the more safe and reasonable of the two; especially, if we
consider, after all the noise that has been raised about them, that we are not
conscious to our selves of any such things, and that without them, we can give
a sufficient Account of all that Knowledge to which human Nature is capable of
arriving.

But in the second Place, if these two, the Ideas of Plato, and the Testimony
of Sense do agree and jump with one another, then the Rule holds good, Natura
nihil facit frustra, Nature does nothing in vain, if the Ideas be sufficient,
what needs the confirmation of sense, or what signify those Ideas which cannot
be believed till a further confirmation be given from without, but if the
testimony of sense be at last the true touchstone by which we must measure the
truth of our Ideas, then how vain and fruitless are those Ideas themselves? and
this I take to be a sufficient confutation of the innate Ideas, of Plato and
Des Cartez.

But Fourthly, it is still further to be observed, in opposition to this
trifling argument of Des Cartez, that it is a mere Circle, as the Logicians use
to call it, that is, it is such a sort of Sophistical argumentation, wherein
two things are proved by one another, for if you ask this great Philosopher, as
some that are very little ones, are pleased to esteem him, how he can tell,
that there is indeed a being necessarily existent, notwithstanding that we find
such an Idea implanted upon our natures, in which we may possibly be deceived,
he tells you that this depends upon the truth of our intellectual faculties,
and if you ask him again, how he can tell that our intellectual faculties are
true, he proves this by supposing a being necessarily existent, which is endued
with such goodness, that it would not deceive us, and so this is no more then
mulus mulum scabit, one good turn requires another, or it is the same thing in
disputation, as if in a Court of Judicature, you should bring two Persons,
whose innocence is the matter in question, to purge and vindicate one another
by their Testimony, which they will be sure to do for their mutual advantage
and safety, but are for that reason looked upon in Law, as incompetent
Witnesses, and such whose Testimony ought by no means to be taken.

Fifthly, we are so far from having an Idea of God implanted upon our Natures,
immediately by God himself, that in truth we have no such Idea of God at all,
either one way or the other, it is true, a very small proportion of reason will
assure us, that there is such a being as God, but what he is we know not, and
we have only negative Conceptions of his nature, we say he is immaterial, and
he is infinite, he is immortal and incorruptible, but of these things we have
no clear and positive conception, and consequently nothing that can be properly
called an Idea.

All that is meant by immateriality, is, that it includes a negation of matter,
and all that is meant by infinite is, that it is not finite, but for us that
are poor finite Creatures, to have a true and proper notion of that which is
infinite, is impossible; for us that have seen so small and inconsiderable a
proportion of time passing by us, for us that in the compass of a few years,
must molder away and crumble into dust; for us to have a true and adequate
notion of immortality and incorruptibility, is a thing that can never enter
into the mind of Man to believe; all our knowledge of God is inadequate and
imperfect, we say he is a being of infinite Wisdom, and infinite Goodness, and
infinite Power, but all that we do truly understand by these words, is, that he
has all that Wisdom and Power and Goodness, which we have or can discern in
other Creatures, and all that we want, but how much, or what Wisdom that is
which we want, we know not, for that very reason, because we want it, and
because we come infinitely short of it, so that after all, it appears plainly
from whence we have that notion of God, which we find dwelling upon our minds,
we receive it from our selves and from the objects about us, by ascribing to
God all the perfection which belongs to the Creatures, and so much more as they
want, and by excluding or praescinding, as the Schools term it, all their
imperfection, and the case is the same, as when I say such a Man is an
excellent Mathematician, another an excellent Orator or Poet or Musician, that
is, they have all that skill in these arts which I have, and a great deal more,
which I have not, and of which for that reason I can have no apprehension,
which Idea is manifestly raised by my self after a confused manner, not
imprinted by the Artist himself, upon my mind, any otherwise then as his works
and performances in the several kinds, give me some rude conception and
inadequate Idea of him, but it is certain, if he himself had been to leave his
own impression upon me, he would have made it like himself, and by consequence
I should have had the same skill in these faculties whch he has attained.

Just so it is with God, an inadequate Idea or notion of him may be formed by
our selves, from the works of the Creation, without having recourse to any
supernatural impression, but an adaequate Idea I cannot have without being a
God my self, for no one can have a true and perfect notion of infinite
goodness, wisdom or power, but he that is the possessor of them, and he without
question can be no less then God.

Sixthly and lastly, by this it appears how frivolous this argument of Des
Cartez drawn from the Idea, is, that after all, according to him, it is but the
Idea of an unextended substance, that is, in plain English of a necessary
nothing, and it appears likewise, that God never imprinted this Idea upon any
Man's mind, for this would be but to deceive and abuse us, and to make our
intellectual faculties, which can have no notion of any thing, which is not
extended, to contradict his impressions, and consequently leave us in a doubt
and perplexity, never to be resolved, what notion or Idea we are to entertain
concerning him.

And thus I have considered more largely, then ever any Writer has hitherto
done before me, the manifest inconclusiveness of the Cartesian argument, drawn
from the Idea, and that being substituted in the stead of that which was used
formerly to be taken from the admirable structure and contrivance of the World,
it seems rather to have been done with a design to introduce Atheism, then with
an intention to settle and confirm the belief of a Deity among Men.

SECTION V. Other Arguments to prove DES CARTEZ an Atheist.
AND now, that I may dispatch what remains further to be spoken upon this
Argument, I will do these three things.

First, I will go on to give some other proofs, that Des Cartez, who denied
this immaterial Extension, did it indeed, with a design to banish all
immaterial substance out of the world, notwithstanding, that as well he as Mr.
Hobbs, and the Old Epicurcans are wont to impose upon their Readers, by using
the Name of God, that the Laws might not reach them for denying his Existence.

Secondly, I will propose some further considerations, for the proof of this
great and fundamental Doctrine of Religion, that God is a Being infinitely
extended.

Thirdly, I will show the advantage of this way of procedure for the proof of
the Existence of God, and for the demonstrating, as far as human apprehension
can reach, what thoughts we are to entertain concerning his nature.

I begin with the first, that is, to give some other Proofs, that Des Cartez,
who denied the Extension of the Divine Substance, did it with a design to
banish all Immaterial Beings out of the world.

And the first thing which I shall instance in, shall be his banishing of final
Causes out of his Philosophy, that is, the Scripture does expressly assure us,
that the Heavens are the works of Gods hands, and that the Moon and the Stars
are of his ordaining; the Psalmist cries out, being ravished with the
contemplation of that infinite beauty, harmony, and contrivance, which appears
in all parts of the sensible Creation, how wonderful are thy works O Lord, in
wisdom have thou made them all, and the Holy Job tells us in most emphatical
terms, That he looks to the ends of the Earth, and looks under the whole
Heaven, that he made the weight for the Wind;, and weighed the Waters by
measure, that he made a decree for the Rain, and away for the Lightning of the
Thunder, that he did see it and declared it, he separated it, yea, and searched
it out, and then it follows, and unto Man he said, behold the fear of the Lord,
that is Wisdom, and to depart from evil that is Understanding, which is as much
as to say, that the consideration of the wisdom and contrivance of God in the
Creation of the World, this is the great Root and Basis of all Religion, this
is that which alone is able to create in us such an awful and Majestic notion
of his wisdom, goodness, immensity and power, as may the most effectually
provoke, the most winningly entice, and the most powerfully persuade us to
fear, to love and to obey him, to observe his Commandments and to keep his
Laws, and to depart from all ways, which he by the voice of Nature or of
Revelation, has declared to be foolish and unreasonable, and displeasing to
him.

And in the 38th. and 39th. Chapters of that excellent Book, it is very
remarkable to this purpose, to observe the questions which God propounds to
Job, in all of which it is implied, that he himself and none but he, not any
power or wisdom inferior to his own, not any blind chance of the Epicureans,
nor any Mechanical Powers of matter with Des Cartez was the cause of that
wonderful usefulness and beauty, which appears in the whole Creation and in all
its parts, and in the advantage and use and service which they do mutually
afford and lend to one another. Then the Lord answered Job out of the
Whirlwind, and said, who is this that darkneth Council by words, without
knowledge? that is, as it appears by what follows, who is this that ascribes to
chance or fortune the effects of the most unsearchable wisdom and profound
design; and therefore it follows, that Job in his afflictions might not
distrust the providence of God, and think that all things were governed by an
ungovernable necessity, and an inconsiderate fate, Gird up now thy Loins like a
Man, for I will demand of thee and answer thou me. Where wast thou when I laid
the Foundations of the Earth? declare if thou have understanding, who has laid
the measures thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched the line upon it?
Whereupon are the Foundations thereof fastened, or who laid the Corner stone
thereof? And much more to the same purpose, in this and the following, and in
several other Chapters, wherein the Providence of God, in the Creation of the
World, and in the government of it, is with great strength and eloquence
vindicated and asserted, as indeed the whole Book of Job, is little else but a
discourse upon Providence, and the best that ever was written upon that
Subject; so also the Prophet speaks as it were, in imitation of Jobs
Catechistical way, Who has measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand, and
meeted out Heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the Earth in a
measure, and weighed the Mountains in scales and the Hills in a balance? Then
which expressions it is impossible to frame any more significant, to declare
the power and wisdom of God, and to let us see that this world was not the
effect of chance, but of the most wise and wonderful design and knowledge; so
likewise the Apostle to the Romans tells us, though I know that place be
otherwise interpreted by the Socinian Doctors, who have a great deal to answer
for, upon account of perverse and distorted Interpretations, where he impleads
and impeaches the Heathen World, as guilty of inexcusable Idolatry, because,
that when they knevv God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened, and if you ask him how they knevv God? he answers, it was by the
works of the Creation, in which, as in a Glass, his Divinity and his
attributes are clearly represented, Romans 1. v. 19, 20. That which may be seen
of God is manifest in them, for God has shevved it unto them, for the
invisible things of him, from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead, so
that they are without excuse.

Neither does the Scripture assert the Providence of God only as to the whole
creation taken together, or as to the greater and more considerable parts of
it; but that it extends to every individual Creature, and to the most minute,
inconsiderable, disregarded things that are to be met with in it. Are not two
Sparrows, says our Savior, sold for a Farthing, and one of them shall not
fall to the ground, without your Father? But, as for us, he tells us, that the
very Hairs of our Head are all numbered; and in another place, he advises his
Disciples in these words: Take ye no thought for to morrow what ye shall eat,
nor what ye shall drink, nor yet for your Body what ye shall put on; behold the
Fowls of the Air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into
Barns, yet your Heavenly Father feeds them; are you not much better than
they? Which of you by taking thought, can add one cubit unto his Stature? And
why take ye thought for Raiment? consider the Lillies of the Field how they
grow; they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet I say unto you, that even
Solomon in all his Glory, was not arrayed like one of these; wherefore if God
so cloth the Grass, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven; shall
he not much more cloth you, O ye of little Faith: This is likewise the language
of the Book of Job; he provideth for the Raven his food, when his young ones
cry unto God; and of the Psalmist, in the 104th Psalm: He sends the Springs
into the Valleys, which run among the Hills, they give drink to every Beast of
the Field, the Wild Asses quench their thirst, by them shall the Fowls of the
Heaven have their Habitation, which sing among the Branches; he waters the
Hills from his Channels, the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works; he
causes the grass to grow for the Cattle, and Herb for the service of man, that
he may bring forth Food out of the Earth, and wine that makes glad the heart
of man, and Oil to make his face to shine, and bread which strengthens man's
heart; and in another place, speaking of the Organization and contexture of his
own Body, and of all the Parts and Members and Vessels of which it consists,
which may be understood in proportion of the Bodies of all other Animals
likewise, he says, thou have covered me in my Mothers Womb, I will praise thee,
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; mavelous are thy Works, and that my
Soul knows right well, my Substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in
secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth, thine eyes did
see my Substance yet being imperfect, and in thy Book were all my Members
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of
them: How precious are thy Thoughts unto me, O God? how great is the sum of
them? So that this is plainly and constantly the language of the Scriptures, as
well as it is of nature and of reason; that all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made, that God alone is worthy to
receive Glory and Honor and Power, for that he has created all things, and
for his pleasure they are and were created; that he who is the Eternal Source
of Wisdom, Power and Goodness, has created all things for himself, that is, to
be testimonies to the world of his Attributes, and his perfections, of his
unspeakable Mercy, his unsearchable Knowledge, and his unlimited power, and
that all things were made chiefly for these two ends: First, to be a standing
Testimony of his existence and his nature, and secondly, to contribute to the
happiness of his Creatures, and to the mutual subsistence of each other.

But now the Epicureans they tell us, that all things came by chance, that the
Ear was not made for hearing, nor the Eye for seeing, nor the Nostrils for
smelling, but that all this seeming contrivance and appearing Wisdom is owing
to nothing else, but to the lucky concourse of Atoms happily disposed after
such a manner as is requisite for that purpose; and therefore by consequence
that it was but an idle taunt which the Psalmist bestows upon the Idols of the
Heathen, Psalm. 115.

Their Idols are Silver and Gold, the work of men's hands, they have mouths but
they speak not, eyes have they but they see not; they have ears but they hear
not; noses have they, but they smell not; they have hands, but they handle not;
feet have they, but they walk not; neither speak they through their Throat: For
at this rate it could be no manner of disparagement to those Idols, if having
such parts as ears and eyes and feet and hands and nose, they had not that use
of them, which was merely accidental; and for which they were never designed
and intended.

And as this alone is sufficient to prove the Epicureans of old to have been
downright Atheists, that they denied the Providence of God, and left the World
to the management of chance and fortune; for we have no natural reason to
persuade us that there is a God, but what is taken from the contrivance, order,
beauty and usefulness of the whole Creation, and of the several Parts whereof
it is composed; so the same heavy Impeachment lies still more pressing and
unanswerable against Des Cartez, who being born and bred up in a Country
professing Christianity, and a Belief not only of the existence, but the
Providence of God, did yet ascribe all things (that he might magnify himself,
as being able to contrive a World, as well as he that really did it) to the
Mechanical Powers of matter, which as it has no motion or activity of it is
own, so it is impossible it is motions should be regular, unless we suppose them
guided by some other Principle, which is endued with wisdom and understanding.

And indeed what a monstrous piece of the most stupid sottishness and madness
is it, instead of that fineness and subtlety to which these Philosophers
pretend, to ascribe all this orderly and comely Frame of things, all whose
Parts are so useful in themselves, so sitted to their Fellows, and so admirably
devised for the support and preservation of the whole, the regular and steady
motions of the greater Bodies, the accurate and subtle Frame and Contexture of
the lesser, whether in Plants or living Creatures, together with their exact
fitness to an infinite number of uses; so that all the wisdom and contrivance
in the World, could not have fitted them more exactly than they are, only to
the blind Uncertainty of chance or fortune with the Epicureans, or to the
Mechanical Powers of matter with Des Cartez? which matter being in it self
stupid and insensible, cannot possibly obey those pretended Laws, which this
Philosopher has prescribed to it, any further than they are perpetually
enforced by the presence of some principle, more noble and more active than it
self, and which if it do always concur to the producing such effects, as are so
exactly suited to such determinate Ends, what folly? what madness? what
stupidity is it to affirm that those ends were not designed? or what better
Argument can we expect for the existence of a God, by whom this Universe was
made and governed, than that which carried Galen, who was by no means a
superstitious Man, and must be acknowledged to have been a great Philosopher so
far beyond himself, into an ecstasy of joy and admiration, and filled his
mouth, not with poor, contemptible, mechanic Tales, but with a Magnificent
Hymn, to his Creator?

How long would it be before Letters, accidentally, and at all adventures
thrown and jumbled together, would light into a good Poem or an excellent
Oration? before Stone and Timber would of themselves conspire into a
Magnificent Palace or a stately building? and how much more unlikely is it,
that chance should be able to compose the whole Mass of matter into so comely,
so useful, and so regular a frame, that it should persist in it for so many
ages, and that those animals which were themselves at first produced by
accidental and fortuitous causes, should persevere to beget and continue one
another, by causes that are constant, regular and certain; for so long a course
and series of time, and yet this was no more, or at least no better, then what
Des Cartez himself was necestitated to do, having undertaken to make a world of
his own, without the assistance and concurrence of his Maker.

The next thing which I shall Instance in, as a plain indication, how
inclinable this Author was to banish the Notion of a God out of the World, is
his declining so industriously and so professedly as he does, upon all
occasions, to say any thing of infinites, though indeed his whole Philosophy be
nothing else but one continued harangue, concerning infinite Extention or
matter, and what is this but loudly proclaiming to all the World, that for
immaterial Substances, especially that which is pretended to be infinite, they
are strange unintelligible things, and that the best way is not to trouble our
heads about them?

In the next place, his boggling at the seeming inconsistency betwixt the
Divine praescience and Human freedom, under the same pretense of not meddling
with infinites, and yet granting the latter, and confessing plainly, that it is
this inconsistent according to Human faculties with the former, what is but to
say, if he were to speak openly the sense of his mind, that there is no such
thing as any such praescience in God, which is as much as to say, if he would
speak out, that there is no God at all.

For though Socinus and his followers will not allow God to have any
foreknowledge of contingent actions, that is to say, of those actions which
depend upon human freedom, because being contingent, and consequently
uncertain, they tell us, there is no foundation for a certain and determinate
knowledge, yet at the same time they grant, that he does certainly foreknow,
whatever has any certain and determinate causes, and is by that means an
object of cognoscibility, by which, though they may be thought to derogate from
the perfection of his Nature, yet his being in general they do expressly
acknowledge; but Des Cartez will not concern himself, whether such actions can
be foreknown or no, or whether the Divine foreknowledge being supposed in that
extent and latitude, with which it is usually maintained, would be any
obstruction to the liberty of inferior Agents, but he slubbers over the
business after his usual rate, saying, that the notion of a God includes in it
infinite perfection and therefore if it be possible for him to foreknow
contingent actions, he does foreknow them, that is, if it be possible there
should be a God, there is one, and he desires to be excused from affirming or
denying any thing any further, concerning God Almighty.

Neither is it sufficient to say in this case, that the Liberty of the Will,
which Des Carts manifestly grants, does undeniably prove an immaterial
substance, to which I do very frankly and heartily assent, but yet we know the
Old Epicureans did acknowledge it as well as Des Cartez, notwithstanding that
they referred it to a material cause, which however absurd and incapable it
was, of producing such an effect, yet why may not one Philosopher be absurd as
well as another? As all that dote upon Mechanism and matter, must run into
infinite absurdities, whether they will or no; and though we should suppose Des
Carts, not to have acquiesced in the solution of his old Masters, who yet were
Men, as considerable for their parts and wit, as any in their times, nor indeed
to have pitched upon any particular way, whereby to explain so difficult an
effect, yet we have no manner of security from him, that it was not his
opinion, that it might be owing to some particular disposition of the matter,
though what that disposition was he would not take upon him to determine.

For though he distinguishes indeed very nicely betwixt cogitation and
extention, yet it being true, that the several dispositions or modifications of
matter, are distinct from the matter it self, in the general considered, which
is capable of being altered and diversifyed infinite ways, and this being
joined to another great truth, that no substance can be conceived but what is
extended, I say, all this being true, what security can we have after all his
Philosophical parting of things and things from one another, but he did really
believe that cogitation in general, and all the several sorts and species of
it, were but so many several modes and dispositions of the universal matter?

That prodigious Doctrine of his, whereby he makes brute Beasts no better then
mere senseless Engines, begetting one another to the end of the Chapter, which
it is very pleasant for Engines to do, notwithstanding that they give so clear
and so convincing arguments, of sense, memory, experience, gratitude, love,
hatred, fear, hope, cunning, consideration and projection, was an attempt so
bold, that nothing but he, who had designed a secret war against all immaterial
substance, durst ever have gone about it, and for the same reason, if he durst,
he would have proceeded further, and would have made Men as very Images and
Puppits as the Beasts that perish, but then he was fearful his Philosophy would
have been exploded, and that instead of being courted and admired as he was, by
all the Learned Men of Europe, he should have his Book condemned to see no
other light, but what the Executioner kindled for its deserved ignominy and
utter extirpation, while himself underwent the unfortunate end of his Brother
in iniquity, that declared and professed Atheist, Vaninus, a worse Philosopher,
but a much better Man, because he dealt more frankly with the World.

Lastly, his no less ridiculous then impudent sham of the reciprocal motion,
and his attempt to explain the contradictious Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
are sufficient evidences what esteem he had for Religion or any thing belonging
to it, it being as much as to say, that he was loath to fall into the
Circumstances of Galilaeo or Vaninus, and he was mightily desirous to have his
Books read and his Philosophy entertained among Men, which it could not be if
the Romish Inquisitours were displeased, or the Authority of their Church
neglected, much less if he had as openly opposed Religion, as he did
industriously betray and undermine it.

SECT. VI. A further Proof of IMMATERIAL EXTENSION.
THus have I endeavored, which was the first thing proposed to be done, to
make a further Discovery of the Cartesian Arts, to introduce Atheism and
Infidelity into the World, and they all depend upon this one Principle, that
there neither is, nor can be, any thing extended, but matter, which though I
have already sufficiently disproved in a foregoing Discourse, yet that I may
further evince the unquestionable certainty of so important a Doctrine I will
now proceed, as I have promised in the second place to strengthen and confirm
it by some other considerations, which I will but just name.

First, therefore if Des Cartez be, as he pretends he is, really in earnest,
when he tells us there is a God, and that the matter of which this Universe
consists, was in the beginning of things created by him, then certainly it will
be granted, that he that created all things might, if he pleased, have created
only one solid Globe or Sphere, and he that might create one, might also if he
so pleased, have created two or three, and let these three come as nigh as they
can possibly together, yet they cannot touch one another in above one point; so
that there will unavoidably be a Triangular space between them, which must of
necessity be distinct from matter, because it is supposed that there is no more
matter in the world, then that of which these three Globes are composed.

Secondly, that a Creation of the matter out of nothing, but out of the
goodness and fruitfulness of the Divine being is a possible thing; I prove from
these three considerations; First, from the sluggish, insensible and unactive
nature of the matter it self, which it does not seem as if it were derived from
it self, or were capable of preserving it self in being, for one moment of time.

Secondly, from this, that the only reason that is pretended, why matter is
Eternal, or why it could never be Created is this, that no real nature or thing
can be produced out of nothing, which is capable of a two fold Answer, First,
that the Divine goodness and Power are not to be looked upon as nothing, they
being the greatest and the first realities of all, upon which all other things
have a necessary dependence, and it is out of the Eternal fruitfulness of these
that the matter is Created. And secondly, that motion is every whit as real a
thing and as sensible as matter, and produces every day abundance of very
strange and surprising effects in the world, and yet I have proved clearly in a
former discourse, beyond all possibility of doubt or scruple, that this may be,
and is actually Created and annihilated as occasion serves, and as it seems
good to the Divine wisdom and goodness.

But then thirdly and lastly, we must either say with the Epicureans, that all
this Harmony and wonderful contrivance, as it appears to be, was yet
notwithstanding nothing better than the effect of chance, that it is preserved
by an eternal good luck, as well as it was made at first without any design,
which is a most incredible and foolish thing to suppose, or else we must
acknowledge that there is one great and universal mind, by which the frame and
order af all things was contrived, which since it cannot be conceived to be
done any otherwise then by a bare act of his Will, it is every whit as easy to
conceive, how by the same means he should command the matter into Being, when
as yet it was not, as how by a mere thought, and an inward Decree and Ordinance
within himself, he should dispose and regulate it after so wonderful a manner,
or how by a continued and repeated act of the same goodness and mercy he should
continue that order and Establishment which he had made, for so many several
succeeding Generations.

But thirdly, in the motion of Bodies too and fro, it is necessary that there
should be a space, into which the bodies that are moved should be received,
otherwise there could be no motion at all, and yet several bodies succeeding
one another, and taking up exactly the same room, as in the motion of the Air,
or in the course of a River; or the like, it is a plain case there must be a
common extension or space, which is not matter, otherwise none of these bodies
could be received into it.

Fourthly, Des Carts being asked this question, suppose God had created
nothing in the beginning of things but only one hollow Vessel, what would you
say then? would there not in this case have been an extension, which was not
matter, to this question he returned for answer, that in this case the sides of
the Vessel would have come together, because there was nothing between them,
but this answer was absurd and foolish upon several accounts; first, because
the space we have been speaking of has been proved to be a real thing, and that
there is and must be supposed to be such a thing in the World. Secondly, that
this contradicts the great Principle of the Cartesian Philosophy, which is that
every thing will remain in the state wherein it is, except it be disturbed by
some external cause, and there being in this case no external cause, that
appears that should push the sides of the Vessel together, there is no reason,
why according to his own Principles it should not remain in the same condition
in which it was created.

But then in the third place, suppose the sides of such a Vessel should come
together, yet they could not come together, except they had been asunder
before; and that is sufficient to prove as much as is requisite for my purpose,
that there is, or may be a space, which is not matter.

Fifthly and Lastly, DesCartes being hardly pressed in an Epistle from a learned
man which has been published together with Des Carts his answer since the
death of that Philosoper, and seeing himself driven to this hard dilemma, that
either he must deny the existence of Immaterial Substances, or else he must
grant their extension: one of which he dare not, and the other he was very
loath to do, as a middle expedient between these two extremes: he made answer,
Spiritus extenduntur suo modo, Spirits or Immaterial Beings are extended after
a manner peculiar to themselves; which is all we contend for. For the extension
of matter is dead and passive, that of Spirits active and self-moving, the
extension of one is an insensible extension, and is only discerned by thought
and speculation, but that of the other may very frequently be seen and felt,
and is at least a possible Object of our corporeal senses, and this I think is
difference enough.

SECTION. VII. Of the advantages of this way of proving the DIVINE EXISTENCE.
AND so I come to the third thing proposed, which is concerning the advantages
which this way of proving the existence of a God, from the consideration of the
Divine extension has above all other ways of inferring it that have hitherto
been used. And those advantages, are these three which follow.

First, That it affords a sensible experiment that there is such a Being as a
God; for I have proved by sense, from every days experience, from the very
Being of motion in the World, without which there would be no sense or feeling
of any thing whatsoever without us; that there is infallibly a spac edistinct
from matter, and that this space is endued with all possible Wisdom, Goodness
and Power, which is all that is meant by God; and the same may be proved
likewise from the consistence of the more hard and solid Bodies, for since the
parts of them are not kept together merely by the fullness of the World, or
because all things are so crammed and stuffed that nothing can yield, since there
is a space, into which the dissipated and disunited parts may fly, that there
is any such thing as an hard or solid Body in the world, can be attributed to
nothing but a Divine Power by which the parts of the matter are kept together.

Secondly, as this way of proceeding gives the most certain account of the
Divine existence, so it serves the best to give an account of his Providence;
for it is impossible that an unextended substance should manage all things at
so strange a rate, as if he were every where actually present, and this is the
answer which Socrates gave to Aristodemus in Xenophon, when he objected the
impossibility of one Being, being able to manage all things by himself, God,
said Socrates, is so large a Being, that he can easily manage all things at
once, without any trouble or disturbance to himself.

Thirdly and lastly, there is this to be said for this Doctrine of the Divine
Extension that it has been the Catholic Doctrine of the World, and has been
universally owned by all that ever pretended to believe a God, till the
Schoolmen, under pretense of improving, began to corrupt Philosophy and
Religion, of the truth of which I am so very sure, that I do challenge any man
to produce one Instance in Antiquity to the contrary.

NOTES.
Epist. Ded. p. viii. So also for the Exposition of Ps. 45. 16. -- I know this
place is otherwise interpreted by St. Austin and St. Jerome, of Bishops
succeeding the Apostles in the Government of the Church, but whether this ought
to be looked upon for so much as a possible Interpretation; let the Learned
Judge, God be thanked we do not stand in need of such forced Interpretations, to
defend the Episcopal Government.

Ib. p. ix, x. A very fair Interpretation of that passage in the Prophet Esai.
-- I know this is interpreted by the Evangelist St. Mark, 15. 28. of our
Saviors being Crucified between two Thieves. And the Scripture was fulfilled,
which says, and he was numbered with the Transgressors. But this is not
inconsistent with that Interpretation which I have put upon it, and it is no
new thing, that the same Prophecy may have more Senses then one, as in that of
Mat. 8. v. 16, 17. He cast out the Spirits with his word, and healed all that
were sick, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet,
saying, himself took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses, though there is
no question but this place was likewise to be understood of his suffering for
us, and taking our sins upon him upon the Cross, and so it is expressly applied
by St. Peter. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body, on
the Tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto Righteousness, by whose
stripes ye were healed.

Ib. p. x. As they are related by the Evangelists themselves, etc. and by and
by -- although those Types and Prophecies have not been taken notice of by the
Evangelists themselves -- which two things may seem contradictory; but my
meaning is, that the matters of fact have been taken notice of, but their
Typical Relation has not, which may very well be, and so that Prophecy, he
was numbered with Transgressors, is indeed taken notice of by the Evangelists,
as relating to the Messiah, but not in the sense in which I have explained it:

Ib. p. xx. And how it came into the Doctour's head, etc. he had it from
Servetus and Socinus, and such other modern Anti-trinitarian Sticklers, and by
this you may know whose part the Doctor takes, when he tells you so
dogmatically, then must it needs follow, etc. For this was one-way by which
those Heretics were used to expose and ridicule the Trinity; they are the
words of Calvin, who translates needs must follow by stulte, as much as to say,
then must it needs not follow, Instit. Lib. 1. c. 13.. 25. Stulte etiam putant
se ex nostra sententia colligere quaternitatem stat^i, quia falso and
calumniose cerebri sui commentum nobis aseribunt, quasi derivative singamus
prodire ex una essentia tres personas: quam ex scriptis nostris liqueat non
abstra^ere nos personas ab essentia, sed quamvis in ipsa resideant,
distinctionem interponere, si separat^ essent ab essentia personae, probabilis
forte esset eorum ratio, sed hoc modo Trinitas esset Deorum non Personarum,
quas in se continet unus Deus, ita solvitur futilis eorum quaestio, concurrat
ne essentia ad conflandam Trinitat^m? quasi tres Deos ex illa descendere
Imaginemur. I leave the Doctor to construe this passage of Calvin at his
leisure, and I think the ground of his cavillation is sufficiently destroyed by
what I have said in the sequel of this Epistle, wherein I have shown plainly,
how the same Numerical Divine Substance concurs to the constituting of three
several Persons.

But here I cannot forbear doing Calvin a piece of Justice, the Rhemish
Annotators upon John c. 1. and c. 10. have accused him of making the Son, as
such, self-originated and independent of the Father, which is false, though
they have quoted places that may seem to favor and justify such a censure,
but Calvin distinguishes and explains himself in the same Paragraph, out of
which I have produced the former words: Deitatem absolute, says he, ex seipsa
esse dicimus, unde and sili^m, quat^nus Deus est, fatemur ex seipso esse,
sublato personae respectu: quatenus vero filius est, dicimus esse ex patre, ita
estentia ejus Principio caret: personae vero principium est ipse Deus, but it
is not equally true what he says a little above of God the Father or the Divine
substance, ad distinctionem (personarum) non concurrit ut pars vel membrum, for
I have shown that he does so in the two subordinate Persons, without which, the
one of them would not be so much as a Person, and the other would not be God,
but enough of this, by comparing this place of Mr. Calvin, with the needs must
Doctrine of the Intellectual System, we see who and who are together, which was
the thing I designed.

Ib. LXXV. of which I shall have occasion to say more hereafter, etc.) I have
pointed somewhat generally and obscurely at it p. 98. where I say that the
Marcellian Party among other Heresies, condemned those of the Manichees and the
Valentinians. For I reckon that the (...) which they have condemned and the
(...) of Valentinus were the same, as I have here declared, the words of
Epiphanius are (...), etc.

Ib. 91. (...), etc. By this Marcellus declares, that there is but One God
Almighty, or one Divine Substance which is nothing else, but God the Father,
who is peculiarly called (...) and this is all that I contend for.

Ib. p. 103. Three hundred and ten Bishops, etc.) the Council of Nice, long
after this consisted but of 318. unless you will take Eutychius his account,
who inlarges this number to an incredible proportion, so that whether we are to
understand this strictly, of 310. Diocesan Bishops, in those early times of the
Church, or whether the Chorepiscopi, or in general Presbyters are to be taken
in, I leave it to be considered, but the words of Ephiphanius will admit no
other safe interpretation, and the argument is every whit as strong, which way
soever you take it; and the same expedient may perhaps salve the credit of
Eutychius as to the number of Bishops assembled in the Council of Nice.

Ib. p. 162. Who though he disclaims it in one place of his system, etc. for p.
630. He says that the Arians were Formal Idolaters, though he will not allow
them to have been materially and really so.

Ib. and though he thanks God in another, etc.) p. 628. wherefore we cannot
says he, but take notice here of a wonderful Providence of Almighty God, that
that this Doctrine of a Trinity of Divine Hypostases should find such
admittance and entertainment in the Pagan World, and be received by the wisest
of all their Philosophers, before the times of Christianity, thereby to prepare
a more easy way for the reception of Christianity among the Learned Pagans --
Excellent shuffling and cutting upon my word, and shows if I am not mistaken,
by so many and so remarkable samples of his Sincerity, that he scarce believes
himself to have proved the existence of a God, when at the same time, when he
admires and adores Gods Providence; for preserving the notion of a Trinity of
Divine Persons, all along stirring in the Heathen World, yet notwithstanding in
defyance of that Providence, he has made it his business to baffle and expose
it.

Discourse concerning the Messiah p. 15. as much in Hebrew as to say, the
Beloved,) the same is the signification of the name Dido in Virgill, by reason
of the Beauty and Gracefulness of her Person, which from another root gave name
to her Sister Anna in the same Poet. The same was the reason why Solomon was
called Jedidiah, by Nathan the Prophet, for it is said, 2 Samuel 12. 24. that the
Lord loved him, and v. 25. He called his Name Jedidiah, because of the Lord,
and 2 Kings 22. 1. Josiahs Mother is called Jedidah, as I suppose, for the same
reason, or perhaps Jedidah, int his last instance is only the Feminine of
Jedid, which is as much as David or Dido, signifying Beloved, as Jedidiah is
Beloved of God by the addition of Jah.

Discourse of the Divine Extension p. 71. subtle matter of the Heavens is moved
in a Circle, etc,) or rather in an Eliptical or Parabolical Figure, because the
Phenomena to be explained, required such a construction of his Vortices, and
because there would of necessity have happened a vacuity between his vortices,
without it, otherwise I cannot see; the endeavor of the subtle matter, being
naturally equal, for ought appears to the contrary, to receed in all parts from
the Center, why all the vortices were not exactly circular, as is to be seen in
Whirl-pooles in the water, but the great reason why he built his vortices after
this manner, was not taken from nature but necessity; for without this, they
would not have filled a Space; they would have spoiled his notion of extension,
they would have been destroyed by flowing into the Triangular Spaces that in
this case must have been left between the vortices, they would not have salved
the Phenomenon, as they make a lame shift to do now; and after all how to place
three or four vortices together, so as notwithstanding their contiguity and
perpetual rubbing, they shall not obstruct each others motions, needs a wiser
man than Des Cartez to contrive. For he himself has not done it in my Opinion.

To be added to the Notes.
Discourse of the Messiah, p. 3. who carries envy and disobedience in his Name.
From Kin in Pihel, which signifies as much as invidere, aem^lari, as also
Zelotypum esse, Zelo affectum esse, Zelo prosequi vel commoveri, and from
hence, Simon who is called (...), had his Name, or as he is otherwise called
(...) corruptly for (...), the Cananite, for the Cannite, Matt. 10. 4.

Ib. Paulo post. which the present Masorethical Bibles do embrace. For the
seaventy translated, and consequently read it otherwise (...) See Mr. Seldom in
his de diis syris; but the sense is much what the same if the version of the 70
in this place have any sense at all.

Add to the Note upon page 15.
Jedid or Jadid is the Future tense in Hiphil, having the signification of the
present, then which nothing is more frequent in the Hebrew Language, from Doud,
which without question in the Ancient Hebrew signified as much as amabilem
esse, or esse in deliciis, and so Jedidiah is quem Deus amat, and other
instances there are of a like nature in proper names, as Jeremiah, from roum or
ram which signifies exhaltation, is quem Deus exaltat, Jechezchel or Ezekiel,
is quem Deus adjuva^t, from the Root Chazak, and Jerubbaal, from roub litigare,
is qui Baali dicam scribit, vel qui cum eodem bellum gerit, vel instituit
certamen.

Ib. p. 24. Alma in the Punic, etc. the words of St. Jerome are, Lingua Punica
quae de Hebreorum fontibus manare dicitur proprie virgo Alma appellatur.

Ib. p. 25. Isaac carries joy and gladness in his name) From the root Tsachak,
risit, arrisit; so where it is said, Genesis 8. That Abimelech looking out of his
window, saw Isaac sporting with his wife; in the Original it is, vehinneh
jitschak Metacheek, where Tsachak does without question signify (...) For by
this Abimelech knew her to be his wife -- And when Abraham made a great Feast
at the weaning of Isaac, it is said Genesis 21. 9. That Sarah saw the Son of Hagar
the Aegptian which she had born unto Abraham, mocking, in the Hebrew it is
Metsachek the 70, as if the name of Tsaac were alluded to, in this word, (...).
So where Sarah is said to have laughed within her self at the news that she
should be with Child in her old age; the word there also is Tsachak with
allusion to the name of Isaac that was to be born, three times repeated, Genesis
18. v. 13, 15.

Page 29. answers to the Hebrew Iachid) v. Bochart geog. sacr.

Ib. p. 30. signifying a Queen or Princess) Sarah is the Feminine of Sar
signifying a Prince or Lord; which is likewise the signification of Mar and
Maran in Syriack, whence Miriam the Prophetess had her name; which is in Greek
(...) and (...)

P. 31. By Sanchuniathon, Annobret, etc. Bochart. in geograph sacr.

P. 38. As Epiphanius has reported) I have not Epiphanius now at hand, but as
I remember, he makes Joseph to have been 70 or 80 years of age, when he was
Betrothed to the Blessed Virgin.

Spicilegium tertium.
Epist- Ded. p. 103. The Holy City that is, Jerusalem: So Jerusalem is
frequently called in many places, both of the Old and New Testament, which it
is needless to recite.

Epist. Ded. p. 117. Sun stand thou still in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the
Valley of Aijalon. I grant that these two, as is certain from diverse places in
Scripture, were real places in the land of Palestine, but yet the Sun could not
stand still in the midst of Heaven in Gibeon, but it must do equally so to all
places in the same Meridian, at the same time, and to all other places
whatsoever, that were in any other Meridian, at the same certain distance from
it, wherefore I take them rather in this place, to be technical Terms, Gibeon
is the Zenith of any place, (and of Gibeon it self in this instance,) from
Gabah altum, elatum esse, for it is said expressly, that the Sun stood still in
the midst of Heaven, that is, in the Zenith or Vertical Point, and the Valley
of Ajalon, being as proverbially famous for a low and hollow Valley, as the
other was for a mountanous and hilly place, signified the Nadir, or at the
least the depression of the Moon, somewhere beneath the Earth; for they had no
notion of the Antipodes. Viderint eruditi.

Discourse of the Messiah. p. 20. and by the writings of Daniel, they were
instructed in the time of his appearance, see Dan. 9. v. 25, 26.

Ib. p. 41. That the Messiah was expected by the Jews themselves, at the very
time when our Savior appeared:) John the Baptist did openly declare himself to
be the immediate forerunner of the Messiah that was to come, and he did
implicitly acknowledge at his Baptism, that our Jesus was the very Person, who,
according to his own Character, coming after him was to be preferred before
him, John 1. 27. for so he did actually prefer him before himself, Mat. 3. 14.
I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? nay, he acknowledges
still more expressly, that the Messiah was actually come, John 1. 6. I Baptize
with water, but there stands one among you whom ye know not, that is, the
Messiah, as he expresses himself more fully, Mat. 3. 11. I indeed baptize you
with water unto Repentance; but he that comes after me is mightier then I,
whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost
and with Fire, again John 1. 36. John looking upon Jesus as he walked, he
says, behold the Lamb of God. By which it is plain that he did at once
acknowledge him to be the Messiah, and that the Messiah was to be a Sacrifice
for the Sins of the World, that is, a suffering, not a triumphant Person, as
the Jews at that time generally expected, not excepting some of the Disciples
themselves, which was the reason of that ambitious request of the Mother of the
Sons of Zebedec, in behalf of her Children, that the one might sit on his right
hand, and the other on his left in his Kingdom, and that the Disciples of John,
who heard him understood him of the Messiah, is plain, by v. 37. 40, 41.
compard together, v. 37. and the two Disciples (that were with John v. 35.)
heard him speak, and they followed Jesus, and then v. 40, 41. One of the two
which heard John speak, was Andrew, Simon Peter's Brother, he first finds his
own brother Simon, and says unto him, we have found the Messiah, which is
being interpreted, the Christ. So Philip also acknowledges him to be the
Christ. v. 45. We have found him, of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets
did write, and Nathaniel. v. 49. Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the
King of Israel, but yet John the Baptist afterward being in Prison, and
hearing our Saviors miracles, seems to have doubted with himself, whether he
were really the Messiah that was expected, though he still might look upon
himself to be the forerunner of that Messiah, and might expect his appearance,
as about that time, notwithstanding he was not at that time fully assured, that
our Savior was indeed the very Person. Mat. 11. 2, 3. Now when John heard in
Prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his Disciples and said unto him, art
thou he that should come, or do we look for another? In answer to which our
Savior proves his unction, and undoubted defignation to the Messiasship, by
his miracles, and by the universal charity and good will, that appeared as
well in his miracles as his Doctrine. v. 4. 5. Jesus answered and said unto
them, go and show John those things which ye do hear and see, the Blind receive
their sight and the Lame walk; the Leapers are cleansed, and the Deaf hear, the
Dead are raised up, and the Poor have the Gospel preached to them, and then it
follows, v. 6. and blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me, that
is whosoever, upon the Testimony of those miracles which I daily work, and out
of a true relish and savor of that excellent Doctrine which I daily preach,
shall acknowledge me without scruple or hesitancy for the Messiah, and shall
believe in me and follow me as such.

Furthermore, that he was generally expected as well by Jews as Samaritans,
about the time when he appeared, is evident of the Jews, first by the message
which they sent from Jerusalem to John the Baptist. Jo. 1. 19, 20, 21. This is
the Record of John, when the Jews sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem, to
ask him who art thou? And he confessed and denied not, but confessed, I am not
the Christ; And they asked him, what then art thou Elias? And he says I am
not; Art thou that Prophet; And he answered no, Now these would have been very
impertinent questions, upon supposition that the Messiah or his forerunner
Elias, or some other great Prophet in the Spirit, and as it were the Mantle of
Elias, baring Testimony of him, and preparing the way for his immediate
reception, were not expected at that time.

Secondly, this appears again concerning the Jews, by that question of our
Savior to his Disciples, Matt. 16. v. 13. Whom do Men say that I the Son of
Man am? To which they answer v. 14. Some say thou art John the Baptist, some
Elias, and others Jeremias or one of the Prophets; which is as much as to say,
that the Jews were then generally of opinion, that it was necessary, just
before the coming of the Messiah, that Elias or some other of the Prophets
should rise from the dead, to bear Testimony to him, and that that time was now
come, our Savior by his miracles appearing to be such a Person, as they
thought; for the Scribes, that is, the more learned and knowing sort among the
Jews, expected two things concerning the Messiah (besides that, he was not to
be an afflicted but a triumphant and a glorious Person, the King of Israel, and
such a King, whose Kingdom was to be of this World) First, that he was to be of
the Lineage and Seed of David; as appears by our Saviors question, Mark. 12.
35. How say the Scribes, that Christ is the Son of David? And secondly, that
before his coming, Elias or some other Prophet was to rise from the dead to
give notice of it, as appears by another question of the Disciples to him, Mat.
17. 10. Why then say the Scribes, that Elias must first come? That is, Elias or
some other of the Prophers in the Spirit of Elias, and of equal dignity with
him, as appears by what has been said already, and as appears by our Saviors
answer, ver. 12. Elias is come already, and they knew him not; speaking of John
the Baptist as the Disciples themselves understood it, ver. 13. Which John the
Baptist did also declare of himself, that he was the forerunner of Christ in
the Spirit of Elias; but he was not believed, because he had not yet risen from
the dead, as he was conjectured afterward by Herod the Tetrarch to have done,
Mat. 14. 12. At that time Herod the Tetrarch heard of the Fame of Jesus, and
said unto his Servants, this is John the Baptist, he is risen from the dead,
and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him. And therefore?
wherefore? what merely because he was risen from the dead? no, but because he
was supposed to arise from the dead, for this end, to confirm by Miracles what
he had said before; that he was the Forerunuer of the Messiah that was to come.
For without this the Jews would not believe him to be the Elias or the
Preparatory Prophet that was expected; and upon this notion of the Jews, that
one risen from the dead was to prepare the way for the Messiah that was to
come, that circumstance in the parable of the Rich man was founded in the 16th
of St. Luke, where he beggs of Abraham, that he would send Lazarus to his
Fathers house, to give his Brethren warning, that they might not come into the
same place of Torment, verse 29. Abraham says unto him, they have Moses and
the Prophets, let them hear them; to which he answers in the next words -- ver.
30. nay, Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead they will
repent. And perhaps it was to humor this fancy of the Jews, which the
Disciples themselves as Jews, may reasonably be supposed to have entertained,
that Moses and Elias, met as it were at a conference or assignation with our
Savior in an high Mountain in the presence of Peter, James and John, three of
the most beloand highly favored Disciples, Mat. 17. 3.

Lastly, that the Samaritans had the same opinion with the Jews, that the
Messiah was expected at the time when our Savior appeared upon the Earth, may
be seen from the words of the Samaritan-woman, speaking of his coming as a
thing then in a manner present, a thing just at the door, and beginning
actually to be accomplished, John 4. 25. I know that Messiah comes, which is
called Christ; when he is come, he will tell us all things. And our Savior
assures her in the next verse, that he himself was the very person, but she not
so much relying upon that, as upon his Prophetical insight into the most
particular passages of her life, said unto the men of the City where she dwelt,
verse 29. Come see a man which told me all things that ever I did; is not this
the Christ? the Christ that was then expected, the Messiah that was then looked
upon as being just at the door.

And this was the reason why our Savior so frequently forewarned his Disciples
to beware of False Prophets, and False Christ's; because that being the time
when the Christ or the Messiah was expected, every pretense to the Messiasship
was the more dangerous, and the more apt to deceive. If you ask why they did
not receive him as the Christ, notwithstanding his Miracles, and the time so
exactly suiting with the received opinion of the Jews? the answer is fourfold.
First, they thought him to have been born in Nazareth of Galilee, from whence
no good could arise, as it was then proverbially said, not in Bethlem of Judah;
secondly they looked upon him as the Son of Joseph the Carpenter, whom they did
not look upon to be of the Lineage of David; not of the Virgin Mary only, by
the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, his opposing himself so much as
he did to the Hypocrisy and Formality of the Scribes and Pharisees, engaged a
strong and powerful Faction against him, who were resolved whatever came of it,
to decry him all they could, and blast his reputation to the utmost of their
power. Fourthly, they expected not a Suffering, but a Triumphant Messiah, who
should restore the Kingdom to Israel, and trample upon the necks of all their
enemies throughout the world, which was the reason of Herod's killing of all the
children, from two years old and under, as hoping to find the Christ among
them, whom he looked upon as a Temporal Prince, thinking by this means to
secure the Kingdom to himself.

Ib. p. 55. In several places of the New Testament, and in one of the old) Dan.
4. 26. Mat. 5. 34. and 21, 25. and 23. 22. Luke 15. 18, 21. James 5. 12. See my
discourse of the Tetragrammation.

Discourse of the Divine Extension, p. 97. having separated those things which
God and Nature have separated from one another, and joined those things and
notions, etc.) nay, tho we are in a mistake, the consequence is the same;
equally natural and easy, and equally certain; that nothing but an Immaterial
Being can so much as be mistaken or think amiss. Cogitation in general whether
true or false, whether of simple apprehension, proposition or inference, or of
what kind soever, being sufficient to infer the Existence of a Being, which is
not matter.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Epist. Ded.
PAge 18. l. 9, 10. for insinuated r. intimated. p. 26. l. 8, 9. ib. for
specially r. specifically. p. 29. l. 1. ib. for unconceived r. uncreated. p.
32. l. 12. ib. for sufficient r. sufficiently. p. 39. l. 22. for facundity r.
fecundity. p. 58. l. 13, 14, r. and moveable Circumference. p. 76. l. 12. for
this r. his. p. 90. l. 15. for divisible r. indivisible. p. 103. for out- r.
outward. p. 123. l. 2. after with, insert the. p. 124. l. 7. after so, insert
to. p. 142. l. 20. for foundation r. foundations. ib. l. 22. for employed r.
employed. ib. l. 25. for acceptable r. aspectable. p. 145. l. 3, 4. r without.
p. 152. l. 14, 15. for called r all. p. 156. as if in the first case, etc. ib.
l. 27. r. natures. p. 160. l. 13. for those r. the. p. 162. l. 16. for
destraction r. demonstration.

Discourse of the MESSIAH.
p. 2. l. 26. r. dispatched. p. 8. l. 22. for to r. too. p. 10. l. 25. for to
r. of. p. 25. l. 6. r. Rabbis. p. 31. l. 16. r. Sanchuniathon. ib. l. 17. r.
Annobret. p. 25. l. 27. r. Judah and Thamar. ib. dele and before Pharats. p.
36. l. 1. r. as well as. p. 36. l. 18. for another r, any other. In the
Appendix concerning the Divine Extension. p. 66. l. 7. after and insert that.
p. 74. l. 20. for notion r. motion, p. 79. l. penult. for (...). p. 83. l. 16.
for does r. do.


