A SERMON Preached at Epsom upon the 9th of September, Being the Day of
Thanksgiving Appointed by His MAJESTY for the Discovery and Disappointment OF
THE REPUBLICAN PLOT, And now made public to obviate false Reports.

By JOHN TVRNER, late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

Quem recitas meus est, O fidentine, libellus, Sed male dum recitas incipit
esse tuus.

Been agere and male pati Regium est and Regiorum.

LONDON, Printed for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1683.

Eccl. X. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. For a Bird of the Air
shall carry the Voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter.
WE are met together this day, not in a Conventicle, as the manner of some is,
to Whine against the Government in a melting Tone, and sanctify the Breach of
Law with Friday-Faces; to Worship God by Affronting his Vicegerent, and disobey
the King for Conscience sake, but in a Loyal and Dutiful Assembly, by the
King's express Appointment and Command, not to sow the Seeds of Sedition, nor
to reap an Harvest of Blood, but, as becomes good Christians and good Subjects,
to detest and abominate both one and the other.

And thanks be to God that we are met together this day, for it had like to
have fared much otherwise with us, it wanted but a little, and God, who for our
sins is wroth with his Inheritance, had utterly forsaken his Tabernacle of
Shilo, and the Tent which he had pitched among men, the Priests and the Young
men would have Fallen by the Sword, the Maidens would not have been given in
M^^riage, and there would have wanted Widows to make Lamentation.

This Church of England, the Joy of the whole earth, where God resides in a
peculiar manner, as once between the Cherubims within the Vail of the Temple;
this Church of England so Excellently placed between the two Extremes, of
Popery on the one hand, and Fanaticism on the other; so Pure, so Wholesome, so
Primitive in its Doctrines and in its Discipline, so just and wise; this Church
that stands upon the Rock of Ages, and bids defiance to the Gates of Hell, that
is Cemented by the Blood of Confessors and Martyrs, and was so lately purged by
the Fire of Tribulation, to make it more beautiful and more strong together,
yet for the Hypocrisy of some, and for the open profaneness of others in her
Communion, she was now a second time in danger of being lost, and the dreadful
Voice of Samuel once more hovered in the gloomy Sky; if ye shall still do
wickedly, ye shall be destroyed, both ye and your King.

For had the King been spared, who, as the People said of David, is worth ten
thousand of us, there might have been still some hope remaining, that this poor
Church, though once more weltring in a Sea of Blood, might have survived the
Calamity of her Sons. But the King and the Monarchy were to fall together, the
King and the Duke were both of them to die, the King and his Family were to be
extinguished, and it might have been said of the two Royal Brothers, as once of
Saul and Jonathan his Son, The King and the Duke were lovely and pleasant in
their lives, and in their deaths they were not divided, they were swifter than
Eagles, they were Stronger than Lions, how are the mighty Fallen, and the
weapons of war perished. Ye Mountains of Britain, let there be no dew, neither
let the rain descend upon you, for there the life of Charles was vilely cast
away, the life of Charles, as though he had not been Anointed with Oil. O let
it not be told in Gath, nor published in the Streets of Askelon, lest the
Daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the Daughters of the Uncircumcised
triumph; lest Papists, and Turks, and Infidels upbraid us that these are the
Effects of True Protestant Religion, the barbarous Attendants of a thorough
Reformation.

Let the Parisian Massacre from this time forward be silent, and let the Ghosts
of Ireland walk no more, for the Saints have outdone the Cruelties of the
Wicked, and Rome is Merciful in comparison of Geneva! Have the Papists found
out a Clement and a Ravillac that thought it a Pious and a Meritorious Work, to
lop the two Sparks of the Royal House of Bourbon; the Third and Fourth Henry
succeeding one another? And have not our Protestants had their Court of
Justice, where an hundred Clements and Ravillacs sat together to Murder a King
under pretext of Law, and would have made us believe they washed their hands of
the Guilt, at the same time when they washed their hands of the Guilt, at the
same time when they washed them in his Blood? And were not the same sort of
Protestants, whose Bible is of the Translation of Geneva, the men of Knoxe's
Principles, and the men after Calvin's own heart, were not they whetting the
Weapons of Destruction, to serve the Second Charles as they had served the
First, and make him the Inheritor of his Fathers Fate as well as of his Throne?
And as the Fathers death, whom the Indictment called Charles Stuart King of
England, was ushered in by that of a Pious and a Learned Prelate, the then
Archbishop and Primate of the English Clergy, so here the inhumane Butchery of
a Scotch Archbishop was, as it were, a Prologue to the intended Murder of the
Son, whom in derision they were used to call the King of Scots; although in
this indeed the Parallel does not hold, that a Civil War preceded the Martyrdom
of the Father, but a Massacre more Bloody was to follow that of the Son. For
the King was not to fall singly by himself, but more like a Tartar than a
Christian Prince, all his Faithful Servants and Dependants were to be made a
Sacrifice at his Tomb.

The Godly Treason was not satisfied
To kill the King, and quench its thirsty Pride,
By sucking at the Royal Orifice,
This was too mean, too little a Device,
But as when Wines from Traitorous Bourdeaux sent
Are stav'd, and flow thorough the gaping vent,
So the whole Kingdom would at once have bled,
And its whole Strength at one broad Wound have shed;
While Slaughter in her Purple Vest arrayed,
Her own fierce deeds with a wan look surveyed,
And feared those Terrors which her self had made.
These are they that separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, and
yet pretending to it almost as much as Christ and his Apostles. Good God! that
men that cannot get down a Ceremony, though they would never so fain, should be
able to swallow Treason and Rebellion! That they that change color at the
sight of a Surplice, should make no bones of Garments rolled in Blood! So that
the Prophet might have asked the same Question of every one of these Religious
Monsters, that quarrel with Motes, and yet dispense with Beams, which he asked
with his usual Eloquence upon anotheroccasion Who is this that comes from Edom,
with his Garments dyed from Bozra? Wherefore art thou red in thine Apparel, and
thy Garments like him that treads in the Wine Fat? When our Savior talked to
his Disciples of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, and that no man
could be his Disciple, that did not eat the one, and drink the other, they
understanding him in the literal and first sense, said among one another, This
is an hard saving, who can hear it? And the Evangelist tells us a very little
after, That from that time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more
with him. Nay, the twelve themselves were startled at the thing, and in some
doubt whether they also should forsake him or no, as appears by our Saviors
question immediately subjoyned; will ye also go away? So grievously were they
Scandalized and Offended at the very thought of eating Flesh, and drinking
Blood. But the religious Canibals of our times, make it a light matter to eat
the Flesh, and pick the Bones of a Nation; they exceed in Barbarity the
Sarmatians of old, who though they drank the Blood of Horses, yet could not
down with that of Men, this is a knack peculiar to the Sober Party, and yet
their Consciences are tender all this while; their Consciences are tender, but
their Bowels are hard, their Mercies are cruel, their Foreheads as impudent
and impenetrable as the Adamant it self, and they make amends for the softness
of their Heads, by Necks as stiff as the Obelisk at Rome, or the tall Monument
at the Bridge-Foot.

Who would ever believe that these were the very men that were wont to declaim
so loudly against the Popish Murders, that talked of nothing but Piedmont, and
the Fifth of November, and the Marian Days, and the invincible Armada, and the
Albigenses, the Persecutions of Hungary and France, the Churches of France,
that have been lately so perfidiously demolished, and the Ministers of Hungary
that were condemned to the Galleys, and used to quiet their Children when they
cried, with the Names of Stephen Gardener, and Bloody Bouner? but it is
nevertheless true for being strange; the Papist and Fanatic, the Dissenter and
the Jesuit, as bitter Enemies as they are to one another, yet they tend to a
Point, and move about a Center, they are like Simeon and Levi Brethren in
Iniquity, Instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitations, Cursed be their
anger for it is fierce, and their wrath for it is cruel: O my Soul come not
thou into their secret, unto their Assembly be not thou united. This Age stands
amazed at so horrid a Discovery, and the next would scarce believe that so much
Wickedness was designed in this; were it not that the Conspirators themselves
have all of them so unanimously confessed their Guilt; not the Witnesses only,
whom a suspicious Malice may pretend to have accused others, that they might
save themselves; but some have confessed the Treason by their Flight, even
before they were known to be accused; others have confessed it by practicing
those barbarous Cruelties upon their own Persons, which were designed to be
practiced upon ours; others have owned it at the Bar, and at the place of
Execution, where men do not use to tell lies against themselves; and he that
will not believe a Criminal, when he comes to dye, acknowledging his Guilt,
will remain still in a state of Infidelity, though he and all the Accomplices
of his Crime should arise together to vouch it from the Dead.

They have Conspired together in acknowledging the Treason, as well as in
committing it; and by that acknowledgment they have prevented themselves, and
we are delivered from the snares of Death: They have shown by so miraculous, so
seasonable a Confession, just almost at the very nick of time when the dismal
Tragedy was about to be acted, that there is a Providence presiding over Humane
Affairs, that will not suffer Disloyalty to prosper, and so much Wickedness to
go unpunished, that God will defend and prosper his Anointed, the Defender of
the Faith, and the Majestique Image of his Person, and make every Loyal Subject
take up the Song of David in his Mouth, Verily there is a reward for the
Righteous, surely there is a God that judges the Earth: They have verified the
English Observation, that Treason and Murder will never fail to come out, and
justified the Counsel of Solomon in my Text, Curse not the King, no not in thy
thought; for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has Wings
shall tell the matter.

Upon occasion of which words, I shall do these following things.

First, I will demonstrate to you that Resistance against the King, or the
Supreme Power, is in all Cases unlawful; Curse not the King, no not in thy
thought.

Secondly, I shall apply that general Theory to the particular Circumstances of
this Conspiracy, which was an horrid Complication of the most barbarous
Cruelty, the most perfidious Treachery, and the most vile Ingratitude together.

Thirdly, I shall reflect upon the Fatal Consequences that would have happened,
if the intended Wickedness had taken effect.

Fourthly, I shall observe that there is a secret Providence running through
all things, and watching over all the Affairs of humane Life, that will not
suffer such execrable Villainy to escape either undetected or unpunished, For a
bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the
matter.

Fifthly, and Lastly, You shall give me leave to exhort you, as my Duty is, and
as yours requires of you upon this Solemn occasion, that you would lift up your
Hearts with Joy and Thankfulness to God, who has done so great things for us,
and has wrought so great Deliverance for the King and his People, to whose
especial Providence and Watchful Goodness we can only ascribe it, that we are
not at this day in the same Condition with some of the Conspirators themselves,
who have deservedly suffered for their Crime, that we have not been given over
as a prey to our Enemies, as for our manifold Iniquities and crying Sins we
have very well deserved to be; that the Sword has not been drunk with the
blood of the slain, and surfeited with the fat of the Mighty; and that the same
voice is not heard howling and shrieking in our Streets, that was of old heard
in Ramah of Galilee; The voice of lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning:
Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they are
not.

Of all these in their order. And First, I say, That Resistance against the
King, or the Supreme Power, is in all Cases unlawful: Curse not the King, no
not in thy thought: Now the reason why Resistance is in all Cases, and in all
its Degrees and Circumstances absolutely unlawful, is in short this, That it
supposes an Appeal of the People from the King to themselves, and makes them
Judges of their own Cause, which if it be allowed in one Instance, there is no
avoiding it, but it must be granted in all, and by that means the Government is
not only very dangerously assaulted, but utterly overthrown, and the People
will obey no longer, nor no further than they please themselves, which, what
Confusion and Disorder it would immediately bring upon the Affairs of Mankind,
how giddy, how uncertain, how tumultuous, how dangerous and troublesome they
would be to one another, you may more easily conceive within your selves, than
I can find words to express; the Consequence of it would be nothing but Anarchy
and Riots, and Eternal dashing of one Man, or one Parties Humor or Interest
against another.

For to place the Sovereignty, or the last Appeal in all the People together is
perfect Nonsense, for this Reason, because all the People will never be of a
Mind so long as the World indures, and if they were, there would be no need of
Magistrates, or of Government: To place it in a Majority of the whole Body,
though it be no less than Treason in the Eye of the Law, yet I will be so Civil
as rather to be Guilty of Misprision my self, than to turn Informer at this
time, only I will observe, that such a Supposition as this does effectually
grant all that I contend for, that there is somewhere an absolute and
unaccountable Power, which can in no case be resisted or opposed; for if it
may, then it is no longer the Sovereign Power. But since it has been proved
already, that the Sovereignty cannot be in the whole Body or Collection of the
People taken together, if it be not in a Majority neither, then either it is in
the Minor part of the People, so as if a Nation were to come to a Poll, the
Minor part shall have a right of prescribing to the Major, and the fewer Voices
shall carry it, which is contrary to the Reason of things, and to the Practice
of all Ages in popular Elections and Debates; and besides, if it be granted,
yet it supposes a Supreme and Sovereign Power, which cannot lawfully be
resisted or opposed: Or else, Lastly, If the Sovereignty be neither in all the
People, nor in the Major, nor in the Minor part, nor in the Prince, or the
Established Government, which the Doctrine of Resistance supposes it is not,
then either it is no where at all, that is, there is no such thing to be met
with as a Supreme and unaccountable Power, or every private Man is a Prince by
himself, accountable to none but God, as Sovereign Princes are, and his
Dominions extend as far as his Person or his single Power or Policy can reach;
so that at this rate all Society would be immediately dissolved: And what a
blessed posture of Affairs this would infallibly and unavoidably produce, I
take no delight in recounting with my self, but leave it to you to determine at
your leisure, if any of you have leisure enough to consider all the Calamities
and Mischiefs that would follow.

God Almighty expects nothing from us for his own sake, but only for ours; and
therefore all the Duties, as well of Revealed as Natural Religion, are so
ordered, that they are exactly Calculated and Proportioned to the Peace and
Welfare of Mankind; he commands us to be Chaste and Temperate in our Lives,
just in our Dealings, affable and gentle in our Conversations, Merciful to such
as are in want, patient in Adversity, humble and equal in our prosperous
Condition, ready to forgive our Enemies, and to be heartily reconciled to such
as have injured or offended us, to be Affectionate and Dutiful to our Parents,
kind to our Relations, Faithful to our Friends, Careful of our Families,
Obedient to our Superiors; but the true reason why he expects all this from
us, is not that he reaps any thing of Advantage by it, who is entirely blessed
and happy in himself, but only because the practice of these Duties is of so
great and manifest importance to the good of humane Life, to make us healthful
and cheerful in our particular Persons, to make us most acceptable to others,
as well as most easy to our selves, to keep the World in a state of Peace and
Friendship, and make men live quietly and comfortably together.

And the same is true likewise of those Duties which have a more immediate
Relation to God himself as their Object; he commands us to love and praise him,
to meditate and fix our thoughts upon him, to pray to him in our necessity, to
trust in him in our wants, to fly to him as our last Refuge in the time of
danger, to acknowledge our perpetual obligation to him and our perpetual
dependence upon him, and to humble our selves at the Footstool of his Mercy
with Sorrow and Contrition, and with resolutions of a better Life, at the
consideration of the Sins we have committed aginst him. The true reason of all
which is, not that God gets any thing by our Prayers, or that he is any loser,
when we do not humble our selves before him for our Sins, but because a
constant sense of the Existence and Being of a God, and of his Presence in the
midst of us, as a Witness and Spectator of all our thoughts and actions;
wherever we be, and whatsoever we are doing, or designing to do; a serious
Reflection upon that Power and Justice which nothing can resist or bribe, that
Knowledge from which nothing can possibly be concealed, that Goodness to which
we are so infinitely obliged, and upon which we have every moment an entire
dependence, is apt to keep our minds waking with a perpetual sense of our Duty,
to make us endeavor after Virtue, and study to conform our selves to the
likeness and resemblance of so excellent a Being, to desire to please him by
the practice of those Duties which have the greatest Congruity and Agreement
with the Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of his Nature, and which Reason and
Religion do both of them equally call for at our han^s.

It is unreasonable to praise and magnify the Name of God, for the Works of
his Hands, or for the Administrations of his Providence, unless we do also
endeavor to imitate those Perfections which we pretend so highly to approve;
it is a contradiction to pretend to trust in him in our wants, or fly to him
for succor in a dangerous time, and yet at the same time to be guilty of any
base Design, or to use any unworthy or dishonorable means to free our selves
from want, or to deliver our selves from danger; when we pray to him, we do it
upon supposition of his Goodness, that he is ready to forgive, and easy to be
entreated, and that he is as able as he is willing to help us; but now it would
not only be unreasonable and unjust, but it would also be impudent and impious
into the bargain, to expect that God should be kind and merciful to us, when we
our selves are unmerciful to such as are in want, unjust to those with whom we
Correspond or Traffic, inflexible and inexorable to such as have offended; and
lastly, when he injoyns us to repent us of our Sins, and to acknowledge and
bewail them in his presence, to make him the Confessor of all our actions, who
is a Witness to them, and will one day sit in Judgment upon them and us; the
meaning of it is, that we may not be hardened in an obstinate course of sin, but
that our minds by Confession and Repentance may preserve or produce in
themselves a tenderness for Virtue, a shame for the past enormities of our
Lives, and a steady purpose and resolution for the Future to behave our selves
so as is most for our own truest Interest, and for the Peace and quiet of the
World.

Nay, when in Scripture he is so severe and terrible in his Menaces against
Idolatry, when he commands us so frequently and so expressly not to worship any
strange God, or any Creature like our selves, or any painted Image, or carved
Representation, not to fall down to Stocks and Stones, to Silver Shrines, or
Wooden Crucifixes, or to the Garlic and Onions of Egypt, when he is so jealous
of his Glory, and will by no means give his Honor to another; the meaning of
all this at the very bottom, is, not that God stands in need of our Worship,
that we can add any thing to him by our Praises or our Prayers; or that when we
are guilty of Spiritual Fornication, by going a Whoring after strange Gods, or
by placing the incommunicable Acts of Worship upon any other Object besides
himself, he suffers or loses any thing by the bargain, for he cannot be more or
less happy than he is, he was happy and perfect in the Sense and Contemplation
of his own Blessed Nature for Millions of Ages before the World was made; and
he may say to us, as he did out of the Whirlewind to his Servant Job, Where
wast thou when I laid the Foundations of the Earth, when the morning stars sang
together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy? He reaps no advantage from
our Worship, or our Sacrifice; and if he were an hungry he would not tell us,
for he is all-sufficient in himself, and all the beasts of the Forest are his,
and so are the Cattle upon a thousand Hills, he knows all the Fowls of the
Mountains, and the wild Beasts of the Field are in his sight. What is the
Reason therefore why God is so jealous of his Honor? so zealous for the
incommunicable Respect which is due to him from all his Rational Creatures?
Why, the true and only Reason is, That God himself is the most Noble Object our
thoughts can possibly entertain themselves upon, and we shall always find our
selves most happy in the ravishing Contemplation of so bright, so lovely, so
beautiful a Being; the consideration of his Attributes will produce in us large
and generous Thoughts, a perfect hatred of every thing that is Wicked, and a
contempt of every thing that is Sordid and Mean; and, in a word, it will create
in us, together with a Love and Admiration of him, a Breathing after him, and a
desire to be like him.

But on the contrary, the Reason why Idolatry and Superstition are so severely
prohibited and forbidden, is because they are apt to produce quite contrary
Effects upon the Lives and Manners of Men. For the practice of Idolatry is
either owing to an Opinion that God himself is pent up in some remote corner of
the World, but is not always present in the midst of us; that he is not
intimately twisted into our most secret thoughts, and a Witness to our darkest
and most concealed retirements, otherwise we should have no need to worship him
by any Representation, when he is present himself; or else it is founded in a
supposition that God of himself will not at all times do for us whatever is
best and most reasonable to be done, but that he relies in a manner upon the
advice of others, and that he is an easy Being, governed by Court-Favourites
and Minions that are about his Person, otherwise it would be very foolish,
though they could hear and answer us, which they cannot do, to have recourse to
the interest and intercession either of Saints or Angels: It consists on both
sides in a poor and pitiful Opinion of the Divine Nature, which must needs
produce a proportionable Coldness and Indifference in us, to resemble so easy
and so little a Being. It estranges us from the Life of God, by making us
strangers to his Attributes and his Nature, and by fixing our Thoughts and our
Worship upon finite, fading, and corporeal Objects, instead of an Immortal,
Infinite, and Immaterial Being.

If we do not believe God to be always present wherever we are, and whatever we
are doing, we shall have the less regard to submit to his Will, or to obey his
Laws, when he is either so remote that he cannot see us, or that he cannot come
at us to punish us, if he do; and if we do believe him to be really present,
what an affront is it, instead of being a Duty, to Worship any thing but
himself in his Presence? Nay, we must not only believe him to be present, but
we must constantly attend to this Belief, we must frequently pause and meditate
upon it, that it may have the more powerful influence upon our Conversations,
and therefore this is the Character which the Psalmist somewhere gives of a
Wicked and Unregenerate man, that he has not God in all his thoughts. Again,
If we believe God to be so easy a Being, that he is not governed so much by
the Equity of things, by the Reasonableness of our Requests, or by the
Constancy of our Obedience, or by the Sincerity of our Repentance, as by the
Interest of Favorites, the Entreaties of those whom he is pleased to call his
Friends, and the Importunity of those about him; if we are once persuaded that
the Prayer of one Saint, and the Supererogation of another, drawn out of the
imaginary Treasury of the Church, will serve instead of Repentance and
Obedience on our parts, this must needs produce in the generality of Men, a
coldness and indifference in the performance of their Duty, and give great
strength to the assaults of those Temptations by which Humane Nature is
continually surrounded.

And what has been said of Idolatry, is true in a very great proportion of
Superstition likewise. The Essence of Idolatry consists in the Worship of a
false Object; that of Superstition in false and injurious Notions, concerning
the true one, which has been usually done by one of these two several ways.

First, When Men look upon him as such an easy Being, that he will accept of
little Expiations, or of certain Rites or Ceremonies, whether of their own
inventing, or of his appointment, instead of Repentance, Obedience, and
Amendment of Life; whereas God who is infinitely concerned for the happiness of
Mankind, will accept of nothing but our reasonable Service, and of those Acts
of Duty and Religion, which have a manifest tendency to the good of Humane
Life, and to the comfort of Societies, and particular Persons. He will not eat
the Flesh of Bulls, nor drink the Blood of Goats, but he requires that we
should offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay our vows unto the most high. To
obey, in his esteem, is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken, than the fat of
Roms; and he has solemnly declared, That the Sacrifice of the Wicked is an
abomination to him, that his Soul hates it; and that he cannot away with the
Sabbaths, and the New Moons, and the Solemn Assemblies, though of his own
appointment, when joined with the practice of Intemperance and Injustice, to
the damage and detriment, either of our selves or others.

The second sort of Superstition is, when Men look upon God under the Notion of
a touchy and uncertain Being, that is angry for nothing, and pleased with as
little; and therefore they worship him with ridiculous Rites, and childish
Expiations, to procure his Favor, and to avert his Displeasure, and try almost
as many, and as extravagant Remedies against the anger of Heaven, as if it were
the Toothache, or a Tertian-Ague. And the Evil of this sort of Superstition
consists in this, That it destroys the Quiet and Tranquillity of Humane Life,
by frighting it with causeless Fears, and imaginary Dangers, by making men
perpetually solicitous, continually out of tune, and by producing in the habit
of their minds, a Peevish, Fretful, Suspicious, Dissatisfied, Unsociable, and
Unfriendly Temper.

To conclude this matter, Not only the practical Doctrines of the Gospel, as
well as of Natural Religion, are founded in the interest of Mankind; but also
the Articles of Belief, and the Miracles by which those Articles were confirmed.

The Articles of Belief, which I shall mention, are these two. First, the
Doctrine of the Trinity; and Secondly, that of the Resurrection.

For the Doctrine of the Trinity, as puzling as it is, though after all the
Scoffs of the Arians of old time, and of the Socinian Heretics of late, I do
not despair to make it out as clearly, as any Proposition that is never so
certain; I say, as puzling as it is, and upon Supposition that it were in it
self every whit as unintelligible, as it is pretended to be, yet thus much we
know for certain, that God being an Infinite, and by Consequence an
Incomprehensible Being, there may be some Propositions true concerning him,
whose truth we that have only finite Understandings cannot possibly comprehend;
for nothing certainly can understand or comprehend the whole extent and
latitude of the Divine Nature, but the Divinity it self; and therefore in this
case the Counsel of Joseph Scaliger is excellently good,

Ne tu semper audax quaere causas omnium,
Quaecunque libris vis prophet arum edidit,
Afflata caelo, plena veraci Deo,
Operta sacri supparo silentii,
Vel tange parcus vel pudenter praeteri:
Nescire velle quae Magister maximus
Docere non vult, erudita inscitia est.
But now if this Doctrine were not only unintelligible in it self, but also of
no use in common Life, to what purpose should it be revealed? For certainly God
does not design in the Scripture to puzzle and confound his Creatures to no
purpose, but only to teach and inform them for their benefit and advantage; and
therefore though the Doctrine of the Trinity, by reason that it is conversant
about an Infinite Subject, cannot so easily be made out by a Finite
Understanding; yet if we can show any use of it, for the Benefit of Life, this
is an argument to us of its truth, though it be not the Object of our
Comprehension. And the use that is to be made of it in life, is this, That if
we are verily persuaded of the truth of this Doctrine, if we believe that Jesus
Christ was not only sent by God, but that he is really and truly God himself;
this ought certainly to possess the Hearts of all his true Disciples, with the
greater Reverence and Esteem for his Laws: and if we believe the Holy Ghost,
not only to be an Effect or Emanation of the Divine Power, which is all that
the Socinians understand by it, but that he is really and truly a Divine
Person, that he is not barely an Attribute of God; or an Effect of the Divine
Power and Will, but that he is really and truly God himself, we shall then
certainly give the greater heed to all the good Motions, and all the Virtuous
Inclinations of our minds, for fear of quenching and doing despite to the
Spirit of Grace, of doing violence to the God within us, whose Temples in
Scripture our Bodies are said to be.

And this by the way, among other very good Arguments that have been urged
against it, is a very good Argument of the falsity of the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which, besides that it is a contradiction to our Faculties
and our Senses, besides that it is conversant about an Object, of which we may
pretend to be Competent Judges, that is, about an Humane Body; I say, besides
this, though we should suppose it to be true, we can assign no use of it for
the bettering our Lives, or for the interest of Mankind; but on the contrary it
would be much better for us, that it should be as it is, a false and absurd
Doctrine, because the belief of it puts so many Indignities upon the Person of
Christ, and by consequence weakens the Authority of his Gospel; as, that the
Body of God should be eaten, not only by Men, but sometimes by Rats and Mice,
and other Vermin; that in the Visitation of the Sick, the Priest shall carry
God Almighty in his Pocket, together with his Snuff Box, his Tooth-pick, and
his Tabaco; that he is champed between the Teeth, that he descends into the
Stomach and the Bowels, and from thence into the Draught, and other very
reproachful and ignominious Circumstances, which it is a shame to mention; and
yet this is one of the great reasons of all the Romish Persecutions, because we
cannot persuade our selves to believe so impious and so absurd a Doctrine as
this.

Quod panem aut furfur, similamve aut dona Lyaei
Nolumus esse Deos, summaque in sede locare
Mystica quae sacris adhibent ur pocula mensis,
Quaeque salutiferas fundunt bellaria vires;
Quod non foetenti Drvinum stercus ab alvo
Ejicitur salsumque perennat ab inguine Numen;
Quod Servatores nostros non tradimus Orco,
Christophagi cives, and Christicida Sacerdos.
For the Doctrine of the Resurrection, though it cannot be denied but there are
Difficulties in it, though they are not so great neither, but that they are
capable of being explained, as I have endeavored to do upon another occasion;
yet this is certain, that the belief of it must needs have a very potent
influence upon the manners of the World, and that it is an equal Argument of
the truth of this Doctrine, and of the goodness of God together, that he has
made the performance of those Duties, the Conditions of a Blessed Immortality
in the World to come, which are our truest Interest, and our highest Wisdom in
this.

Lastly, For the Miracles by which the Gospel was confirmed, they are all of
them placed in some Event or other, that was for the advantage and benefit of
the World; our Savior went about continually doing of Good, he healed
Diseases, and cast out Devils, he cleansed the Lepers, he restored the Lame and
Blind to the use of their Feet, and of their Sight, he stopped running Issues
that had been of long continuance, he bid the Sick of the Palsy rise and walk,
and he raised the very Dead out of their Graves, to come and give Testimony to
the truth of his Doctrine; though it might have been perhaps an equal
Confirmation of it, to have removed Mountains, or to have called the Sun out of
the Firmament, or to have torn the hardest Rocks in sunder; but this was not so
suitable to the Nature of the Doctrine it self, which was all of it Calculated,
as I have largely shown, to promote the Interest and Welfare of the World.

So that it being so undeniably clear that all the Duties, whether of Natural
or of Revealed Religion, are placed in the Welfare and Happiness of Mankind;
give me leave to show you that this is no Digression, by applying it to the
Subject we are engaged in, concerning Passive Obedience, or Non-resistance to
the Supreme Power; and if the Mischiefs of Resistance shall appear to be
greater, upon a just and impartial Survey of the whole Matter than those of
Arbitrary Power, and in any other case there is no need of Resistance, then it
follows plainly, that Resistance is in all Cases unlawful. Wherefore to make
short work of the matter, If any Man will show me, or will so much as dare to
show his Face, and look as if he would pretend to show me, that ever a quarter
of so much Blood was split, so many Properties invaded, so many Estates
confiscate, by the Arbitrary Power and Humor of any Lawful Prince, as in the
memory of many that are here present, in the last Civil War, then I will be
content to laugh for company with Julian the Apostate, and scoff at Passive
Obedience, as much as he has done.

Caiaphas being High Priest uttered a Prophetic saying, as it seems in virtue
of his Office, That it was expedient that one man should dye for the People.
For so St. John tells us, Joh. XI. from 49th to the 51st. Caiaphas being the
High Priest that year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all, nor consider
that it is expedient for us, that one man should dye for the People, and that
the whole Nation perish not. And this spoke he not of himself, but being
High Priest that year he prophesied that Jesus should dye for that nation.
Which words though in their Prophetic meaning, they did refer to the Expiatory
Sacrifice of the Blessed Jesus upon the Cross for our Sins; yet it is plain
that the reason of them is grounded upon this Maxim, that the Interest of a
Nation is to be preferred before the Interest or Welfare of one man. It is
expedient for us that one Man should dye for the People, and that the whole
nation perish not. So that we have here a sure word of Prophecy, that is the
Testimony of God himself, that a greater Interest of Mankind is to be preferred
before a lesser; for what is here affirmed of one Man, with relatition to the
whole People of the Jews, the same holds in its proportion, and in the Reason
of it of any lesser number, with reference to a greater. From whence it follows
plainly, though I am by no means a Friend to Arbitrary Government, and though,
God be thanked, under so Merciful and Just a Prince, whose Goodness is the only
thing that is excessive in him, we have no manner of occasion to defend it; I
say, from hence it follows plainly, that it is unlawful, because a few Men
suffer in their Fortunes or their Lives, by the Cruelty and Injustice of an
Arbitrary Power, for the People to take up Arms, to protect themselves against
it; because the Cruelties and Desolations of War are incomparably greater than
those of an unjust or an unmerciful Prince: And therefore, if God Almighty may
be allowed to be a more competent Judge in the Case, than the Author of Julian
the Apostate, it is much better for the People to be quiet.

I know, the barbarous Persecutions of the Primitive Christians will be urged
in this Case, they being so numerous as they were, so cruelly persecuted, so
barbarously tormented, and for so good a Cause, merely for Believing and
Embracing that Doctrine which taught nothing but what was for the good of the
Persecutors themselves; and because the just and full stating of this matter,
is a thing of great importance to the true deciding of the Question under
Debate,

Therefore, I shall consider in the First Place, the matter of Fact; and,

Secondly, The Behavior of the Christians under it: and,

Thirdly, The Reason upon which that Behavior was founded.

First, For the Matter of Fact, it is unquestionably certain, That the
Persecution upon the Christians, for many Ages, was very heavy and cruel, which
our Savior foresaw before he left the World, and therefore took care to arm
them by his Doctrine against it, bidding them not fear those that could kill
the Body, and pronouncing a Blessing upon all those that suffered Persecution
for Righteousness sake: And Pliny himself, who was Proconsul of Bithynia, in
the Reign of Trajan, confesses, in a Letter to his Master upon that occasion,
which is still extant, that he was weary of tormenting them; but yet after all,
I love to give the Devil his due: and because I would not so much as imply or
insinuate any thing merely to defend a Cause which is not true, therefore I
shall presume to say, That the Persecution of the Primitive Christians was
neither so great, nor so unjust, as it is commonly represented. And First, I
say, it was not so great, and I give these Reasons for my Opinion:

First, That the Writers of those times, who have given us the accounts we have
of those Persecutions, have certainly exaggerated and aggravated the matter
beyond the truth of things; and this among others was the peculiar Fault of
Gregory Nazianzen, with Relation to Julian the Apostate, rather to show his
Wit, and to expose a Passionate and Ungovernable mind, than that Julian
deserved such usage at his hands, who, bating that he was no Christian, was
otherwise as Wise and Virtuous, and in all points as Gallant and as excellent a
Prince as ever wielded Scepter, or sat upon a Throne.

Another thing is, That the Romans at the first were so little acquainted with
the Christians, that they frequently called them by the name of Jews, so says
Suetonius, Judaeos impulsore Chresto tumultuantes; where by In Vit. Claud^.
Judaei, or the Jews, it is manifest the Followers of Christ were understood,
so that the Christians were looked upon only as a Sect or Faction among the
Jews, of which Christ was the head. Nay, so little were the Romans acquainted
with the Doctrine of Christ, that they did not so much as know his Name; for in
this very Citation they call him Chrestus, which is as much as to say, the
Good, instead of Christus, which is as much as the Anointed, and answers to the
Hebrew Mashiach, or the Messiah; and so little did they See my Lord of Chester
in his Book upon the Creed, upon the Article, And in Jesus Christ,
understand the Religion of the Jews, that it was commonly believed among them,
that the Jews worshipped an Asses Head, and that Pompey sound nothing else when
he presumed to enter into the Holy of Holies; and yet why they should persecute
the Jews for this, any more than they did the Egyptians for the Worship of the
Ibis and the Crocodile, and such like Monsters, I do not understand; and it is
certain that the Egyptians did Worship these Creatures, in Domitians time, if
we will believe Juvenal who wrote in it; for so he tells us,

-- Nescis Volusi Bithynice, qualia demens
Aegyptus Portenta colit? Crocodilon adorat
Pars haec, illa colit saturam serpentibus Ibin.
But the true Reason why the Jews were Persecuted, was not because of their
Religion, but because they were looked upon as a Rebellious People, as indeed
they were; and so are their Brother Sabbatarians now adays; and the Christians
being looked upon only as a Sect or Faction among the Jews, they were accounted
as Enemies to the Empire, and all that sided with them, or espoused the Cause
and Interest of Christianity, were looked upon as taking part with their
Enemies: Nay, the Jews themselves represented the Christians as Enemies to
Casar; and therefore St. Peter advises them to remove this Scandal, and let the
World see how much the Christians had been misrepresented, by Patience and
Obedience. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are
sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well: For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men. So that it is plain upon the whole matter, that
the Jews and Christians were not at first distinguished from one another by the
Romans; that the Christians were persecuted under the notion of Jews, and that
the Jews were oppressed as Enemies to the State, not upon a Religious but a
Political account: Nay, they were so far from being prohibited the exercise of
their Religion, that in Domitian's time there were places appointed for their
Public Worship, as is evident by this passage of Juvenal;

Hic, ubi Nocturnae Numa constituebat amicae,
Nunc sacri fontis nemus and delubra locantur
Judaeis. Quorum Cophinus foenumque supellex.
But yet at this very time they were oppressed and kept under by the Romans to
that degree, that all the Nation were in a manner Beggars; for so it follows in
the very next words of that Poet,

Omnis eim populo mercedem pendere Jussa est
Arbor and ejectis mendicat sylva camoenis.
And in another place, Arcanam Judaea tremens mendicat in aurem,
And in another, Ede ubi consistas, in qua te quaero proseucha?
They were Vagabonds and Straglers all over the Empire, and got their living in
a great measure by playing the Gypsies, and by telling of Fortunes; from whence
the word Chaldaeus, which denotes any Inhabitant of Palestine or Assyria, is
used by the Roman Authors, for a Cunning man, or a Fortune Tellers; and the
Oracle uses (...) and (...) for the same sort of Men, (...).
(...).
Nay, after the reception of Christianity in it, they were still looked upon as
dangerous to the Empire, as appears by several Laws against them, still extant
in the Theodosian Code, under the Title de Judaeis, Coelicolis, and
Samaritanis; and besides that they were a stubborn and rebellious People, they
were looked upon as a very vicious People likewise, as appears by a passage of
Martial, who at once lays Perjury, and another small fault of Salamanca, to the
charge of a Jew:

Paedicas puerum, verpe poeta, meum:
Ecce, negas, jurasque mihi per templa Tonantis;
Non credo, jura, verpe, per Anchialum.
Nay, they were under so great Hatred and Detestation all over the Roman
Empire, that to conceal themselves they used several tricks to repair the
Defects that Circumcision had made: And as from their being Circumcised they
were called Verpi; so from this new Device, which several Laws were enacted to
prohibit, they were called recutiti; and so Martial uses recutita colla boum;
for the Necks of Oxen that had been skinned over again, after they had been
galled by the Yoke; and St. Paul alludes to this Custom, in the 7th Chapter of
the First to the Corinthians, in these words: Is any man called being
circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised.

To conclude this matter, if we consider the famous Testimony of Tertullian,
which is usually produced to justify the Meekness and Patience of the
Primitive Christians, where he tells the Roman Emperors, omnia vestra
implevimus, That the Court and Camp, the Cities, Towns, and Villages, the
Markets and Exchanges, and Courts of Judicature, were all of them full of
Christians; if we reflect upon that passage in the Life of Jovian, where when
he refused to be the Emperor of Pagans, the Roman Army, after the Death of
Julian, all of them unanimously declared themselves to be Christians; if we
survey the Vaults and Places under Ground, that are at this day to be seen at
Rome, the description of which was published, not long ago, by the Writers of
the Roma Subterranea, where v. Romans subterr. L. 1. c. 2. s. 17. and in
Monumento Sepule brali Alex. Martyris, in Coemet^rio Callisti.
the Christians buried their Dead, and where, it is certain, they were used to
Assemble; these places could neither be built without public notice, neither
was it possible for the Christians to meet together in them so privately, as
not to be discerned. All which are very strong Arguments that Christianity,
though it were oppressed at some times, yet it had its lucid intervals, and was
connived at at others; and that at the same time when it was Persecuted and
Oppressed, yet there were many that lived quietly in the Profession of it, and
enjoyed places of Honor and Profit into the Bargain; but yet I do not deny
that at some times especially the Persecution was very Bloody, and that the
Patience and Courage of the Christians seemed to vye for Mastery with the
Barbarity and Fierceness of their Tormentors, insomuch that the Governors of
the Church themselves were forced to make Laws on purpose to restrain the too
forward Zeal of such as were Ambitious and Covetous of being Martyrs.

But in the Second place, as the Roman Persecutions were not altogether so
great, so neither were they altogether so unreasonable or unjust, as they have
been usually but falsely represented. I do not mean that any Power on Earth has
a right of Persecuting the true Religion, and a Religion that is so plainly
founded in the Interest of Mankind; but the thing was this:

The People that professed Christianity increased so fast, and withdrew
themselves in so great Numbers from the public Assemblies, into private
Meetings by themselves, that this was looked upon, as it deserved, by the Roman
Government, with a very suspicious Eye, as a matter of very dangerous
Consequence to the Imperial Eagles, whose Wings were like to be clipped by the
prevailing Interest of a growing Party, who withdrew themselves from the
Public into Corners, and what they did there, could not certainly be known by
any but themselves: and though they made never so large professions of Patience
and Humility, and of their embracing the Doctrine of Non-resistance; yet this
was no security to the Roman Emperors, if ever they should be strong enough to
set up for themselves. For we may talk what we please; and though the Doctrine
of Non-resistance be a very wholesome and a very reasonable Doctrine, yet when a
Party gets Power into their hands, it is hardly to be supposed but they will
certainly use it to the endangering the Rights of Princes, and the Peace of the
State.

If you ask, why the Roman Emperors did not rather turn Christians in this
Case, that so they might secure this growing Party to themselves? To this it is
to be answered, That besides the Prejudices which they had imbibed from their
Education in the Pagan Superstition, it was at first against the Interest of
the State to do it, because the Pagan Party was more numerous; so that in
probability by declaring for Christianity, they must have lost their Empire,
and their lives together; but afterward when Christianity got to such an head,
that the torrent was no longer to be resisted or stem'd; then Constantine,
rather out of Reason of State, than for the sake of the Fabulous Apparition of
the Cross, found himself obliged to turn a Christian.

Another very great inconvenience that always goes along with any Party that
^^parates from the Government, is this, That though the Principles of a Party
be never so peaceable, yet this is certain, they love themselves better than
those that are of another Persuasion, and they have a kindness for any man that
sides with them, and takes their part, and therefore they are commonly made use
of by Discontented and Ambitious Men, to work their Designs upon the State,
under Religious Pretenses, which bad men do easily make, and weak men do as
easily embrace, when there is an appearance of strength, that they are like to
go through with their business. From whence it follows plainly, that all
Separation from the public Worship, is absolutely unlawful, unless in such
Cases where the Government imposes such terms of Communion, as are inconsistent
with the Honor of God, and the Happiness of Men, which I have shown already to
be the Case of Idolatry; and by consequence, the Primitive Christians are
excused, though the Dissenters of our times are not, and therefore it is more
just to make and execute laws against them, than it was against the Primitive
Christians of old; and we may take it for granted, for it is certainly true,
that the Separation from the Church of England was the true cause of that late
horrid and lamentable Plot, with which the Government was in so great danger of
being overturned; for the Conspirators would never have dared to lay so
detestable and wicked a Design, had they not known there was a numerous Party
that would have stood by them when they had done; and though I am not so
foolishly uncharitable to believe, but that most of the Dissenters knew nothing
of the Design, yet it is certain, that had it taken Effect, they would have
sided with the Conspirators against the Laws, the Monarchy, and the Church of
England, by which they think themselves to be Oppressed, and this without
question was the great encouragement to the Conspirators, as well to enter upon
the Design at first, as to proceed so far in it as they did; and I am really of
Opinion we shall never be free from a Plot in some proportion; if not against
the Life of the King, yet against the Peace and Honor of his Government, so
long as there is one Conventicle in England remaining.

Another thing, which though it cannot make the Persecution of good men, and of
a good Religion Lawful, yet it may in part excuse, and justify the Roman
Emperors for what they did, is, That the Christians were represented to them
as a sort of Lewd, Vicious, and Debauched People, that in their Assemblies they
practiced a promiscuous Lust, and polluted themselves with incestuous
Copulations, which though it were most scandalously false of such as were truly
and in reallity Christians, yet it was but too true of many that were accounted
of the number, such as the Gnostics were, and the lewd Followers of Basilides,
and Valentinus, of whom it is enough to make a Man's Ears tingle, and his Hair
stand an end, to read those lewd Stories which Ephiphanius and Ireneus have
reported; and it is certain, that the Roman Laws were not more severe against
any thing, than against the practice of unlawful Lust, insomuch that by the old
Laws and Usages of the Empire, all the degrees prohibited in Marriage, which,
by the Mosaic and the Roman Law, seem to me Authen. Col. h. 9. tit. 36. l.
154. Mosaic, and Romans Leg. 1. Collat. tit de in^eslis Nupt. p. 90. C. Theod. l.
3. tit. 12. l. 14.
to have been exactly the same, were punished with Death; and this was the
Sanction of a Novel of Justinian, still extant, and directed to the Inhabitants
of Osdroena and Mesopotamia, and of another of Dioeletian and Maximinian, in
the Fragments of Pythaeus; and it appears by a Law of Arcadius, and Honorius,
in the Theodosian Code, whereby the Marriage of Cousin Germans, is dispensed
with, that the punishment for the said Marriages, in the time of Theodosius,
was no less than ignium and proscriptionis, both the Parties were to be burnt
alive, and their Estates to be Confiscate; so that upon supposition that they
did really believe such horrid Impieties to have been practiced amongst them,
as they were among some that went under the notion of Christians, it is no
wonder that the Roman Laws were so severe against them.

Another thing, which though it cannot justify the Persecution of the
Christians, yet it may render it somewhat less Barbarous and Unjust, than
otherwise it would appear to be, is, That their over-forward, and overheated
Zeal was such, that they were not content according to their Duty, barely to
stick to the profession of Christianity, without affronting and reviling the
Pagan Superstition and Idolatry, upon all occasions; and though I know not what
others may think, yet I am of this Opinion till I am better informed, that if I
should take a Voyage to Constantinople, to pick a quarrel with the Grand
Seignior, and revile Mahomet for an Impostor; or to Rome, to take his Holiness
by the Beard, and call him Antichrist, and Scarlet Whore, and if for my pains I
should be condemned by the one to the Galleys, or by the oother to the
Inquisition, it would be very idle in this case for me to complain of
Persecution, or to comfort my self with suffering for Righteousness sake; for
God that has given us express leave, if we be Persecuted in one City, to flee
to another, gives us no warrant to expose our Persons to unnecessary Dangers;
and besides, the Religion of a Nation, though it be false, is a Sacred thing,
and ought not to be affronted and rudely set at naught, nor to be opposed by
any thing, but by Argument and Reason.

To all which it is to be added, That the Roman Emperors, though they were
indeed, especially some of them, very Cruel and Inhumane toward their
Christian Subjects, yet all the Cruelties and Indignities which they suffered,
are not to be imputed to the Emperors and the Laws, but to the Rage and Fury
of Idolatrous Bigots, and of an incensed Rabble: As for Example, It is Death by
the Laws of this Nation, for a Popish Priest to be seen upon English ground,
and it would be very well if it were so for a Nonconforming one too; but yet,
if a man in the Streets being taken or suspected for a Romish Priest, shall
without the formality of a Legal Process be torn in pieces by the Rabble, this
is not to be imputed to the King and the Laws, when they could not have
prevented it, though they would never so fain.

To sum up all that I have to say upon this point; As for the last Persecution
under Julian the Apostate, if it may be called a Persecution, for it was but
very gentle in comparison of the others; to speak a plain Truth, the Christians
of those times, who were very turbulent, though not altogether so bad as our
True Protestants are now a days, may thank themselves for putting the Emperor
upon an apparent necessity, if he would sit safe upon the Throne, to oppress
them; for the encouragement and countenance given to Christianity by the two
last Emperors, Constantine, and his Son Constantius, had very mischievous
Effects upon the World, instead of doing a Service to it, which it is the
Design of the Christian Religion to do; but by the Passions and interfering
Interests and Designs of men, it so happened, that the Factions between the
Orthodox, and the Arians, and Donatists grew so high, that they shook the
Empire, and threatened to tear the World in pieces; and Julian, who had before
espoused the Interest of Christianity, and it is probable would not have
relinquisht it for no reason, saw no humane means so likely to settle and
establish Peace in the Empire, as by discountenancing all the several Factions,
and endeavoring to reduce again the Catholic Unity of the Pagan Superstition;
and this, if I am not mistaken, is the great mystery of the Romish Religion at
this day, it was designed and calculated to compound the business betwixt the
Christians and the Pagans, to make all quiet, and to bring them both under the
Popes Jurisdiction. For it is manifest that in that Religion there are many
Rites and Practices that are of the growth of Paganism, and notwithstanding the
footing which Christianity had gotten in the World, the Pagan Faction was
powerful in the Empire, as low as Justinian's Linden. brog. Cod. l. l. Antiq.
p. 938.
and in the Capitulars of Charlemaine, which are a great deal later, there are
Laws against Paganism, and against the eating of things sacrificed to Idols,
still to be met with; which Laws would not only have been needless, but
ridiculous also, upon supposition that Paganism had been no where to be found
in his Dominions.

But let that be as it will, I am very confident that the account of Julian's
Persecution, is wholly to be ascribed to the Cause I have mentioned; and to the
shame, not of Christianity, but of such as called themselves Christians, be it
spoken, that as their Divisions shook the Empire in the time of Constantine,
Constantius, and Julian, so afterward they broke it utterly in pieces, they
brought in the Goths, and other barbarous Nations into Italy and Spain, the
Turks and Saracens into Greece; and we are as much obliged to the True
Protestants of old for the Siege first of Constantinople, and at this present
time of Vienna, as we are to those that are now, for their good Wishes, and
pious Ejaculations, that the strongest Bulwark of Christendom may be taken.

And so I have done with the First Point, the matter of Fact, as to the
Persecution of the Primitive Christians: I shall not have time to finish all
the particulars which I proposed to my self to discourse upon, and therefore I
shall only beg upon this solemn occasion, that you would give me so much of
your Patience, that I may finish this point of Non-resistance, that so you may
see the more plainly, what your Duty is, and by the practice of it express your
thankfulness to God for your Deliverance.

The Second thing to be considered is, how the Christians behaved themselves
under the Persecutions which they suffered. And to this I shall only answer in
short, That they submitted to the greatest severities that could be used
against them, that they submitted to them all with an unshaken Constancy, and a
miraculous Patience; that they were so far from resisting the Emperors, that
they prayed for them, for the Health and Welfare of their Persons, for the
success of their Affairs, for peace within their Walls, and plenteousness
within their Palaces, and for the victorious Issue of all their Warlike
Enterprises, and Achievements; they drew their Swords for their Defense and
Honor, and served in their Armies, and were so numerous in them, that they had
the Empire in a manner at their disposal, and yet never offered to lift up an
hand against them, after all the Provocations, Cruelties, and Indignities that
had been put upon them; but because the late Writer of Julian the Apostate
makes it a different Case in Julian's time, from what it was before, and that
the Christians might then have lawfully stood up in the defense of themselves,
though they could not do it before; and because he endeavors to bring the
parallel home to our own Doors, therefore you shall give me leave, as becomes a
good Subject, and a Faithful Member of the Church of England, and as the
Solemnity of this occasion requires, to lay the impudence and unskilfulness of
that profligate Wretch, and mercenary Scribler, very briefly, and yet very
plainly before you.

The difference of the Case which he makes to have been betwixt the Christians
in Julian's time, and those that lived before him, is this, That in Julian's
time, his two immediate Predecessors, Constantine and Constantius, had
established Christianity in the Empire, and consequently the Laws of the Empire
were on the Christians side, so that they could not be persecuted but against
Law, and by consequence might lawfully defend themselves.

This is the stress of his Argument fairly represented; and in my Answer to it,
I shall consider:

First, Whether the thing it self, which he lays down, and takes for granted,
is true, that the Laws of the Empire in Julian's time were on the Christians
side.

And, Secondly, I shall, as he does, bring the matter home, and consider the
Case of altering the Succession, and of Obedience to a Popish Successor, if any
such, for for the sins of this Nation, should by Gods just Judgment be allowed
to reign over us.

And first, I do absolutely and positively deny that the Laws of the Empire
were or could be on the Christians side, when Julian himself was against them;
the reason is, because the Roman Government was absolute, and consequently the
Will of the present Emperor was the only Law they had: Therefore the Roman
Emperors were sometimes called in Greek, (...), and at other times, (...),
both of which terms do signify an absolute Lord; and there is an Appendix to
the Code and Pandects of Justinian, which is for that reason entitled the
Authentiques, that is to say, the Laws or Edicts of an Arbitrary and
Uncontrollable Prince.

The Body of the Civil-Law, which was published by Justinian, consists wholly
either of the Opinions of such as were accounted the best Roman Lawyers, which
had their Force and Obligation from the Imperial Sanction, or of the Rescripts
or Letters of the Roman Emperors to the Governors of Provinces and of Cities,
and to the Pretors or Judges of the Law, and a decision of any Case under the
Emperors hand, was every whit as good and indisputable Law, as an Act of
Parliament is amongst us; nay, the Senate were so far from having any share in
the Government with him, that they are exposed by the Roman C. Th. lib 6. tit.
^. l, 14. and ib tit. 4. l. 11. etc. v. etia^^ novel. Theod. tit. 1. and 2.
etc. Theodos. l. 1. tit. 4. l. de responsis pru^entum, and l. 2. tit, 1. l 12.
and l. 4. tit. 11. l 2.
Satyristfor their Servility and Slavery to the Caesar's; and I remember
particularly in the Theodosian Code, there are several Laws directed to the
Senate, and the time when they were read publicly amongst them, in order to
their being obeyed, was entered down in the Registers or Memoires of the House,
which were as exact as the Journals of our Parliaments are now adays. And one
of the first things in the Volume of Justinian, is to assert and vindicate the
Imperial Authority, both in the making of Laws, and in the interpretation of
them if any doubt v. Praesat. Cod. de no^o lodice ^aciendo.
should arise, which he decrees by virtue of his Arbitrary and Supreme
Authority to be wholly locked up in the Breast of the Emperor.

Lastly, It is plain that there were three several Reviewals of the Roman Law,
by the command of the Emperors, v. Jac. Gorthrofred prolegom in C. Th.
and the Volumes that were published received their Authority wholly and
entirely from the Imperial Sanction or Decree; the first of these Reviewals was
in the time of Adrian the Successor of Trajan, the second in that of Theodosius
the younger, and the third in that of Justinian.

And now let any man judge what truth there is in the bold Affirmation of this
unskilful Dabler in the Civil Law, that the Laws of the Empire were on the
Christians side, at the same time when the Emperor himself was against them,
and when the Will of the Emperor was the only Law of the Empire; it would be
easy to prove, and it has been done to excellent purpose already, not only
that he is no more a good Civilian, than he is a good Subject, or an honest
Man, but that he has studied Magna Charta, and Bracton, and Fleta, and Cook
upon v. Dr. Hicks in his Jovian.
Littleton, and the Judges Reports, and Ruled Cases, to as little purpose as he
has done his Bible.

If Julian were a Persecutor of Christianty, so were his Officers, and the
Governors of the Provinces likewise, which they could neither do nor justify
without Authority from him, which Authority was conveyed without Question in
the usual manner by the Imperial Rescripts, or Letters, and if there are none
of them extant at this day, this is no Argument that there never were any such
Laws, but only that afterward they were repealed, and therefore in those
Collections of the Civil Law, which were published afterward by Theodosius and
Justinian, they were omitted as useless, or rather they could not be inserted
without remaining still to the prejudice of Christianity in their former Force
and Obligation.

And after all, the behavior of the Christians toward Julian, though it were,
^s it seems, more mutinous and disorderly than in former times, yet nothing
appears that ever they did actually Conspire against him, much less that they
spoke the Epilogue to Julian the Apostate, as our True Protestants were about
to do; for whether the Author designed it or no, the Book was exactly fitted to
prepare the minds of the People for the Rebellion that was to follow, and they
that set him on work, did certainly intend it for that purpo^e.

And what is it, I beseech you, that he produces to justify the matter of
Fact, that the Christians were less Obedient to Julian than to former
Emperors; why he produces several Witnesses for it, and very fine Witnesses
indeed they are; there was a passionate Old Gentleman Gregory Nazianzen's
Father, there were three or four angry Women that sat talking together at their
Needlewo^k in a Window, there were the Antiochians, who were got into the way
of Pafquils and Lampoons, and were very much degenerated from their
Predecessors, among whom the Scripture tells us the Believers were first called
Christians; and there was Gregory Nazianzen himself, who brings up the rear
with a bun^le of Greek Decla^ations made alter J^l^^^ was ou^ o^ hearing,
wherein he had a mind at once to show the gre^^ness of his Wit, and the
smallness of his Dis^^^tion together, and all that th^se People did, was only
that they murmured and r^pln^d, and gave the Emperor (...) Language and Ill
Wishes, but they went no further, only the Old ^^an was on^^ about, as it
should seem, to kick his Royal Master, which of an Old Man was couraglously
meant, and some body had so little wit to tell Posterity the Story, by which he
did at once expose the Bishop, and magnify the Virtue and the Patience of the
Emperor, who could put up such Indignities in the midest of his Idolatry with
a Christian temper, and without that just revenge which they deserved.

But does it appear that ever the Christians of that Age resisted him, or took
up Arms against him, or that the generality of them, when we have set aside, a
few passionate and Seditious Fellows, did talk so lewdly and so scandalously
concerning him? No; but on the contrary it appears, that in his last Expedition
the generality of his Army were Christians; and it cannot be supposed
otherwise, if the Christians were so numerous in Tertullians time, but that
after the Encouragement given to Christianity by two several Emperors
succeeding one another, they were still more powerful and formidable than
before, and yet we know of no Sword that was ever drawn in the Quarrel, or so
much as intended to be drawn.

And so much concerning the nature of the Roman Government, and the behavior
of the Christians under it in the time of Julian; let us now briefly apply this
to the Bill of Exclusion, and the Point of a Popish Successor to the Imperial
Crown of these Kingdoms.

As for the Bill of Exclusion I shall not reflect upon the Persons that were
chiesly concerned in it; this Desperate Conspiracy has I hope opened the Eyes
of some of those Gentlemen that were Zealous for it; and there are others
partly at the call of Nature, and partly by the stroke of Justice, that are
gone to their own place; and I shall not insult over any man's Calamity, or go
about to disturb the Ashes of the Dead, but let all the Kings Enemies be as
they are, unless they will Repent, and become Friends to themselves as well as
to their Prince, and upon that condition, let them all be forgiven and
forgotten.

But as for the Bill which they preferred in Parliament, though I do not meddle
with the Statute of Queen Elizabeth so much talked of about the Succession, I
do conceive that it was naturally unlawful for the King to pass it, and that
for these two Reasons,

First, because a Successive Monarchy is without all question the best Form of
Government upon the Face of the Earth, it being easy to show, if the time
would allow it, and if it would not be too long a digression, that this sort of
Polity is the least exposed to Factions, and by consequence is the best fitted
to procure the Peace and Happiness of the World; and the King who is
accountable to God for the good of his People, has no natural right to alter,
or to consent to the alteration of the Establishment from a better Form of
Government to a worse, and yet this in all probability would have been the
Consequence if that Bill had passed.

For if an Heir may be Excluded upon one Pretense, he may also upon another,
and they that are Enemies to Monarchy will never want Pretenses till all the
Line be Excluded, and the Monarchy it self utterly subverted.

But then, Secondly, supposing a successive Monarchy to be but of equal
advantage to the World with any other Form of Government whatsoever, or let us
suppose it to be a little worss, which is as much as our Adversaries in reason
can desire; yet the present Establishment, merely for that reason, because it
is the present, is the best, because of the Dangers and Animosities, the Strife
and War, and Bloodshed to which all Altera^ions in Government are exposed; and
therefore it was excellently well advised of Solomon in the 24th at the
Proverbs at the 21st Verse; My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with them that are givan to change: For which he gives this admirable
Reason in the very next Verse, For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the Ruin of them both. And this ought in all Ages hereafter to be
remembered to the Kings Honor, that the Dangerous and threatening importunity
of a restless Faction was never able to move the Scale of Justice out of its
Royal Balance, or prevail with him to consent to any thing, though in never so
great Straits and Exigences of his Affairs, which was like to be of so
Dangerous Consequence to the Good of the People, as well as to the Rights of
the Crown and the Royal Prerogatives which himself and the Kings and Queens of
England his Ancestors have enjoyed.

May he still continue to defend himself and us against the wicked
Encroachments and Designs of Men much more Arbitrary than the Government they
complain of, and as often as they Conspire against his Interest, his Honor, or
his Life, so often let them be detected and exemplarily punished, and let the
King^ rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, exceeding glad let him be of thy
Salvation.

For the business of Obedience to a Popish Sucessour, if God in his anger
should send us such an one, I shall now immediately have occasion to consider
it under the third and last head, in which I will be very brief, and in which I
have promised to show the Reasons upon which the passive behavior of the
Primitive Christians was founded, which I have in part considered already, and
showed you that the Reason why Obedience, even to a Persecuting Prince, is of
necessity required at our hands, is, Because it is better for the Peace of the
World, and for the Happiness of Humane Life, that the Prince should be
Arbitrary, than that the Subjects should be Judges in their own Cause, which
they are of necessity supposed to be in all the cases of Resistance that can be
supposed.

I shall now only strengthen what I have said already, by some other Arguments
which are more properly of Theological consideration.

And first, There was the Command of our Savior, who Commanded his Disciples
in those times of Persecution by no means to resist their Enemies and Opposers
in his Sermon on the Mount.

And secondly, This Doctrine of Obedience was over and over inculcated by the
Apostles; St. Paul is strangely express to this purpose in the 13th to the
Romans, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, for there is no Power
but of God; the Powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation; for Rulers are not a Terror to Good works,
but to the Evil; will thou then not be afraid of the Power, do that which is
good and thou shall have praise of the same, for he is the Minister of God to
thee for good: But if thou do that which is evil be afraid, for he bears not
the Sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute Wrath
upon him that does Evil. Wherefore you must needs be subject, not only for
Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. Not only for Wrath, that is, not only out
of a Principle of fear, but also for Conscience sake; that is, out of a
Principle of Duty; which Duty I have shown to be founded in the Peace and Quiet
of the World, and in the Interest and Happiness of Humane Life; and therefore
when he tells us that he is the Minister of God to us for Good, we must allow
him in the Exercise of his Government, to judge for himself what that Good and
Evil is, otherwise he will unavoidably bear the Sword in vain, and we shall
never be punished but when we please our selves. So also St. Peter argues in the
words that have been already produced, submit your selves to every Ordinance of
Man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto
Governors as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishmen^ of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well; but now if we be allowed in all Cases
to determine for our selves when we do well or ill, so as they shall have no
power to punish or reward, but with our own consent, then it is we that are the
Kings and the Governors, and not they.

Thirdly, The Doctrine of Non resistance is still further inferred and pressed
upon us, by considering the Example of our Savior and those Miraculous Powers
for the Discipline of the Church, which were given to the Apostles and first
Preachers of the Gospel.

As for our Savior, though he could at any time have destroyed his Enemies by
a word of his Mouth, or a motion of his Finger, or by the least act or
intention of his Will, and though he could have called down so many Legions of
destroying Angels to his assistance, yet he chose rather to be an Example of
Meekness and Humility, of Patience and Obedience to the Powers he lived under,
than of Resistance against them.

And for the Apostles and their Successors, it is well known that St. Peter,
with the Sentence of Excommunication denounced against them, struck Ananias and
Sapphira dead; and St. Paul, threatened with the like or some such usage
Hymeneus and Alexander, and the incestuous Corinthian, and others; and it is
commonly supposed by Learned Men, that this Power remained in the Church, of
inflicting Death and Diseases after a Miraculous way, till the Empire took
Christianity into its Protection, and then the Secular Sword was sufficient to
back the Ecclesiastical Censures; but now they never had a Power of inflicting
the like Plagues or Calamities upon any that were not of their own Body, which
was as much as to say, that God expected that they should practice the Doctrine
of passive Obedience, or Non-resistance, with respect to their Superiors,
though they had a Power of Discipline among themselves.

Fourthly and la^^^^, God himself did ordain and constitute an Arbitrary
^overnment, when he appointed first Judges, and then Kings of Israel, that were
invested with it; as appears from this, that there is no where any mention made
of any Senate, or any number of Men that had a Power of limiting and
controuling them, from the strange Enormities of the Sons of Eli, from whence
notwithstanding no Rebellion; followed, from David's killing the Amalekite
without any Legal Process, as Solomon was about to serve the Child that he was
going to divide, and from the Deaths of Joab and Shimei, who were both of them
put to death with no other Process or Formality than the Kings Command; and
lastly, from the Answer of Rehoboham to the Children of Israel before the
Division of the two Kingdoms.

The Fathers of Families, who were the first Kings, had an unaccountable Power
of Life and Death over their Children and Slaves, all over the East, and also
by the Old Roman Law; and I do not speak this as if I had any fancy to be a
Slave, but this was mostly the Government in the East, and so it continues to
be to this Day; and God by appointing it in some Cases, has shown undeniably
that it is more suitable to the Will of God, and to the Happiness of Men, that a
Government should be Arbitrary, than that every Man should do that which is
right in his own Eyes; as it was with the Israelites after the Death of Samson,
when the Scripture tells us there was no King in Israel, for a King and a Judge
were in Authority the same, only the one was Hereditary, and the other was not.

And now to apply all this to a Popish, Successor, or on^ that is reputed a
Papist, which the disturbers of o^r Peace pretend so much to fear; it is true,
that the Laws of the Land are against Popery, but yet it is every whit as true,
that the Laws of Nature, and the Practice of Christianity in all Ages, are
against a Rebellion; and the Laws of the Land cannot warrant us to do that
which the Laws of Nature forbid; it is true likewise, that we live in a
tempered Monarchy, and that the People, though they have not the executive
Power, nor any share in the Administration, yet they have a right of consenting
to those Laws by which they ought in Justice to be governed; but if the King
will exceed his-bounds, a Civil War is as dangerous and destructive in one sort
of Government as another, and consequently Resistance is in all Governments
equally unlawful.

I shall conclude with bogging your Pardon for the length of this Discourse,
and with desiring you, since I have not time, to reflect within your selves
upon the detestable blackness of the Crime of which the Kings Enemies and yours
are Guilty, upon the Horrid Consequences that would have attended the success
of it, and to adore that Providence that has Delivered you from it, and pay
your thanks to God by Obedience to the King, Obedience in your Thoughts,
Obedience in your Actions, Obedience in your Principles, and always to be
mindful of the advice of Solomon, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought,
for a Bird of the Air shall carry the Voice, and that which has Wings shall
tell the Matter.

FINIS.

