Second Representation OF THE HOSPITALLER OF St. Thomas Southwark's CASE In an
Humble ADDRESS To the Right HONORABLE Sir THOMAS PILKINTON, Lord Mayor OF THE
CITY of LONDON.

By J. T.

Printed in the Year, M DC LXXXIX.

MY LORD,
I Am extremely sorry it so happens through that unhappy posture of my Affairs,
to which the Importunities of an unjust and barbarous Antagonist have reduced
me, that I must be forced to run so great an hazard of incurring your
Lordship's and the Courts displeasure, by this my repeated Vindication of my
self against the ill practices of so bad a Man; because I am sensible I cannot
do it without calling in question the Validity and Obligation of those several
Orders which have been made by you in his behalf; for if those Orders are as
valid and binding upon me, as they are Categorical and positive in themselves,
I must be guilty in not paying them the Obedience they deserve of a most
unpardonable Contempt, for which no Censure of offended Justice, no Instance of
your Lordship's Indignation and Resentment could be too great or heavy. But, my
Lord, I beg your Lordship would consider, that tho there have been three
several Orders passed for my Ejectment, the first only general, and equally
respecting all the several Members and Officers of this House, that were
ejected out of it by the late Commission, together with us, that by the same
Authority were substituted and appointed in their room; the other two
particularly directed against me, which as yet I have not been able to persuade
my self, that I am bound in Duty to comply with them; yet this was not done out
of any stiff, or disobedient Humor, which is a thing I am as far from as any
Man living, being so thoroughly convinced of its pernicious tendency to the
disturbance of Peace and Order amongst Men. But it was upon this Consideration,
that the whole proceeding seemed to me, upon the best and most impartial
Judgment I was capable of making to be grounded; First, upon a wrong bottom of
the Restitution of the Charter, and Secondly, upon a defective Jurisdiction,
which could not legally extend it self so far as to the making or passing any
Order of this nature.

As to the business of the Charter's being restored, that it has no necessary
influence upon the Affairs or Officers of our House; That this Regulation might
have been made tho the Charter had stood, and that it is not at all affected by
its Restitution, tho the whole matter had been referred to your Lordship, and
your worthy Brethren, without any Interposition of an higher Power, or any
appeal thereunto; I hope I have demonstrated beyond all Exception in my former
Paper addressed to your Lordship and the Court; and in this I have not spoken
only my own fence, but that of the best Lawyers this Kingdom affords, whose
Opinions, and the Reasons of them I have at large transcribed from an
Authentic Copy, the Original of which, if required, we are ready to produce;
and we doubt not in the least but those learned Gentlemen, the just Pride and
Ornament of the Long-Robe, whose Opinions seldom want the authority and effect
of Laws, will firmly abide and stand by what they have written, and what they
have so unanimously conspired and consented in, led by the force of Truth,
which is every where the same, without consulting with or borrowing from each
other.

Now, my Lord, with your Lordships good leave, by this it plainly appears, that
neither Mr. Hughes, nor any other of those Gentlemen that have been restored by
your Order, had any legal Pretention to their places, by the mere force and
virtue of the Charters Restitution, and upon supposition that they had had any,
the Charters being restored would have restored them ipso facto together with
it self, and they might have compelled us by Law to relinquish our Places,
without any Order of Court; which could have no authority, and which pretends
to none but from the Restitution of the Charter, which was, it seems,
sufficient of it self to have ejected us without it, and to have put them in
possession of their several Places.

So that Mr. Hughes having no pretention in Law, by virtue of any right annexed
to his Person by the return of the Charter; yet supposing the Cognizance of
that whole Matter to have layn before your Lordship, and the Court of Aldermen,
as I humbly conceive it did not, though you might have ejected me, and put him
into my Place by virtue of that legally arbitrary and unaccountable Power, that
was lodged and vested in you; yet it would have been highly for the Reputation
and Honor of your Court, which I do sincerely prefer in my own private
thoughts before any advantage or interest of my own, when all things were equal
betwixt Mr. Hughes and me, as to any strict Property, or legal Right, which
neither of us could with any justice claim, to have considered which of us two
had the most equitable things to be said in our behalfs; and here tho all other
things had been alike between us, yet it is, and has always been taken as a
Maxim, in equali jure melior est conditio possidentis, that is, If a
Controversy shall arise or happen between two about a matter of Right, if both
of the Pretenders appear to have equal Right, or if neither have any, that is
strictly legal; the considerations of equity being equal betwixt them, and the
one being in possession, the other not, the decision ought to be in favor of
the Possessor, and your Lordship knows we have a Proverb to the same purpose in
our English Tongue, That Possession is eleven Points of the Law, so that
according to this Maxim; I being in Possession, and all other Circumstances ex
Hypothesi admitted to be equal and alike between us, the Right, if there be
any, is mine, and not Mr. Hughes's, because I am in Possession, which he is not.

In the second place, my Lord, I have another advantage, and that a very great
one above him, in that I am so nearly related to the City, I am my self a
Citizen at the first remove, and with Submission to your Lordship, and the
Honorable Court, I do affirm that it is your unquestionable Duty to favor me
before Mr. Hughes, supposing all other Circumstances to be but equal between
us, and to do otherwise falls but little short of a Breach of that Trust that
is reposed in you, for the good of the City and Citizens, and their Children.

But things are so far from being equal between us, that it appears he never
had any Title to this Place, even when he was formerly in Possession of it;
because for the first three years he was not in Holy Orders according to the
usage of the Church of England, he never had any Episcopal Ordination, neither
did he ever conform for all that space of time, which in Construction of Law is
near one half of a Life, to the Discipline and Ceremonies of the Established
Church; and Sir Simon Degg speaking of Donatives, as this Chapel is, affirms
expressly upon good authority, besides what I Parson's Councellor, par. 1. o.
13. p. 164.
have already represented in my former Paper, that the Patron, (who is in this
Case the King, or Court of Aldermen, or Governors acting under them) cannot
collate a Layman, as some have thought, but a Spiritual Person in Holy Orders;
and to this it is still further to be added, that this Hospital being founded
by the Piety and Royal Bounty of Edward VI. who was in some sense likewise the
Founder and Establisher of the Church of England, there being but very little
difference between his Reformation and ours, as it stands improved and
Rectified at this day; the design of which Reformation was on the one hand to
abolish and extirpate Popery, with all its gross Idolatries and Superstitions;
and on the other, to prevent Schism and Disorder from tearing and rending the
Seamless Coat of Christ, and shattering the Church by infinite Separations, it
was an affront to the Memory of that Glorious King, to put a Man into his
House, and feed him with his Bread, who was as great an Enemy to his
Establishment, as to Popery it self; and thought himself obliged in Conscience,
if his Heart and his outward Profession went together, to pull down one Church
as well as the other. For in this Case, that Will of King Edward, which in
distinction to written, and nuncupatory Wills, may be called his Testamentum
implicitum, his Will or Testament by implication, or by way of innuendo, was
manifestly and foully violated and broken, to allow a Dissenting Minister in
his own House, that would ruin and destroy the Reformation he had made, by
endeavoring to spread and encourage a departure from it, and all this at his
proper Cost and Charge, out of the public Revenue, being certainly as much
against the true meaning and intention of that Prince, and of those good Men
under him, who put him upon this Charitable design, and were themselves great
Instruments in the Reformation; as if a Mass Priest, or Popish Monk or Friar
had been placed here at the same time, for the Medium perfectly by being what
it is, has a natural aversion for both of the extremes, and cannot comply with
or reconcile it self to either of them, without quitting its Station and
forseiting its Nature; so that I cannot understand how Mr. Hughes could be
placed here, without a plain Contradiction to the certain, though implicit Will
of our Royal Founder, neither can I comprehend how the living discharge their
Trust, by violating and affronting the Will of the dead, especially when the
Laws, which are always supposed to speak the King's Mind, continue still the
same as they were before.

For I grant, that in the late Times the Case was otherwise, and that it was
perhaps better to have a Dissenting Minister in this House, than no Minister at
all; and that in such case such a Dissenting Preacher ought in justice to
receive the Wages of the House, though he did not do all the work, that the
Founder himself, had he been living, would have expected from him, or that the
Laws put in Execution would have exacted, and this was much more true of other
Officers belonging to this Place, that it was more eligible, so they were but
honest, and fit for their Stations, that Dissenters should be trusted, than
that so useful and so great a Charity should be, disappointed.

I grant still further, my Lord, that even at this time, or at any other before
it, when the Laws were most rigorously put in Execution, yet no man more than
usually eminent in the Profession of Physic, or in the skill of Surgery, or in
the dexterity of manual Operation, belonging or appertaining to it, ought to be
or to have been discarded from his Employment, merely for his dissent; because
this were to do an injury to the House, and to deprive it of that benefit which
it receives by them; but where Men equally or perhaps more skilful and diligent
in their Employments may be had that conform to the Establishment, as it is
settled by Law, there it is more agreeable to the Will of our Royal Founder, and
to the Intention of the Law it self, which in no case designs to encourage or
reward Disobedience, as such, that Persons fully qualified by their Conformity
to it, should be retained in every public Service, and receive the Pentions
and Salaries of the State.

And it is still more eminently and universally true, that in the Patients
themselves, who are the objects of this Charity, the Persons intended to be
relieved and succored by it, and for whose sake all Officers and Ministers are
employed and paid; no Consideration so much as that of Necessity and Want, the
greater or lesser need that one or other may have of the assistance of this
House, ought to discriminate one Person from another, without any regard to a
Religious Persuasion, which it would be the worst and most inexcuseable sort of
Persecution in such a Case to consider.

But none of all this was Mr. Hughes his Case, the Law allowing no Preacher but
a Conformist, and much less rewarding him for such his Service out of the
public Revenue, and without having recourse to the Implicit will of our Royal
Patron and Founder King Edward VI. (though that be so manifest, by Indications
that cannot deceive, that there can be no longer doubt of the matter) by the
plain, explicit and positive Institution of his Royal Charter, It is ordained
among other things, that he shall be a Priest or a Person qualified, not only
to Preach or Pray, but also to administer the Sacrament upon occasion, and this
is an Office which none but a Priest rightly qualified and ordained according
to the Constitution of the Church of England can legally perform; so that Mr.
Hughes was unqualified, not only according to the Laws of this Land, and the
implicit Will, but according to the express and positive Institution of that
blessed King, who had certainly the greatest and most unquestionable Right, to
impose what lawful terms he pleased upon his Servants, and they are all lawful
Conditions, when we speak in a civil and political Sense, that are Conditions
according to Law; for I do not enter into the merits of the Cause betwixt the
Dissenters and us.

Your Lordship, I hope, will pardon me, that I suggest so many things in this
my second Paper, that have been already representin my first; you may perceive
Sir, that I do it in a some what different Method from what I did before,
leaving out those Reflections in this short review, which however true and
certain in themselves, afforded but too much occasion for Offense, and starting
new matter for Remark and Observation as I go along; it being my design to set
all things as near as I can in a somewhat clearer light, and to contract the
whole into a shorter compass, that so your Lordship may consider it with the
lesser trouble, and at a nearer view, without so much disturbance to the great
Affairs that are the Employment of those busy hours, of which the Public
neither must nor will be defrauded.

My Lord, all that Mr. Hughes has to urge in his own defense, when he is
charged with Nonconformity for three years together, while as a Minister he
received the Wages of this House, is this, he does not deny, nay, not so much
as extenuate or excuse the thing, but all is well, says he, that ends well; he
was in Orders for a twelve Month or thereabouts, before he left the Place; and
this he thinks was a Confirmation without a new Choice, and that his
continuance in the House for so long after his aforesaid Ordination, amounted
to as much as if after Resignation he had been formally elected by a Majority
of those that had a Right to do it, but besides what I have said already upon
this occasion, which, I hope, your Lordship in Justice to me, will, at your
leisure consider, Mr. Hughes either never knew or is not willing to remember,
that it is a Maxim in the Civil Law, which in this is founded on the highest
Reason; Quod ab initio non valet tractu temporis non convalescit: That title
which is defective and faulty in its beginning, cannot be strengthened by
continuance, usance, or by length of Time; and the learned Lawyer whom I have
above cited in the Case of Donatives, alleging this very Reason, puts this
Case in the business of Pluralities, which I have a little enquired into for
Mr. Hughes's Part 1. c. 4. p. 28.
sake. If the eldest Son of a Duke, Marquess, etc. retain Chaplains in the
lifetime of his Father, who after dies, and the Honor descends upon such Son,
yet this retainer will not qualify his Chaplains to have Pluralities within
the Statute, (by which a Duke, Marquess, etc. may qualify their Chaplains to
hold Pluralities at the same time,) because at the time of the retainer he was
not capable to qualify them, Et quod ab initio non valet tractu temporis non
convalescit. From whence the Application is easy to our present Case; for if a
Clerk being Chaplain to the Son of a Duke or Marquess, who as such cannot
qualify his Chaplain for a Plurality, shall yet notwithstanding under this
pretense possess and occupy two Livings at the same time, and this without
control till the death of his Patrons Father, when he, becoming Duke or
Marquess himself, has a legal Title to qualify his Chaplain; and the said
Chaplain by his being such, is in a legal capacity of being qualified by him;
but yet notwithstanding this, he shall not hold both of those Spiritual
Preferments together, by virtue of his former retainer: but upon Information
exhibited against him, he shall be obliged to surrender the first of his
Preferments, which became void in Law at the very moment of his being fully and
peaceably possessed of the latter, and has continued in Law to be void ever
since that time: Then the Case is clear in Opposition to Mr. Hughes, that his
possession being illegal, and his Election void in Law at the very instant when
he was chosen, though he were afterward in a Capacity to be legally elected,
yet without an actual Resignation on his part, and an actual Re-election on the
part of those that chose him, or of others fitly qualified to appoint and choose
him; no connivance or sufferance was sufficient for his purpose in this Case,
any more than in the other; for the Rule is equally applicable to both Cases;
quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis non convalescit; That title which is
vicious and faulty in the beginning, cannot be mended afterward by length of
Time, which is not to be understood in Prejudice to Prescription, which is a
legal Title; but of those lesser periods of time that are confined within the
narrow compass of a few years, or wherein one Man's Life or Possession is
concerned.

If the Clerk in the first Case resigning his Living, shall afterward obtain a
new Presentation to it from the Patron, which in this Case must generally be
the Bishop or the King, the Living being supposed to be lapsed for want of a
legal Incumbent; he may then by application to the Duke or Marquess or other
qualifying Personage that retains him, obtain a legal qualification for the
re-enjoyment of it, together with his other Preferment, but not else: And by
the same reason Mr. Hughes having actually resigned, and being actually
rechosen, might have pretended something of a Title to his last years
Possession of this Place; but his first choice being void, and no new choice
being made, no connivance or sufferance can avail him any thing in this affair,
any more than it would in the other; so that it is plain he never had any
Title, and if to this we add his gross and foul neglect in the Execution of his
pretended Charge, from which he can never purge and vindicate himself. I
presume it will be granted by all Men, that a weaker Cause never had the Honor
of so great a Patronage, as that of your Lordship, and those other Gentlemen,
that through misinformation in the true State of Mr. Hughes his Case, have been
so unfortunately Charitable to believe, and so injuriously kind as to protect
him.

This is the third Consideration, by which it may appear not only that Mr.
Hughes has no such legal Right as he pretends to, but that in Equity I have
much the advantage of him, upon Supposition that my first appointment and
mission to this Place was legal, (which his was not) of which I shall say more
hereafter; and I think two Talleys or Indentures cannot strike more exactly
than the Case of Mr. Hughes does with that other above mentioned, which, it
seems, is a ruled Case, and therefore concludes the more strongly against his
Pretenses; let him wash his Hands of it as he can.

A fourth Consideration in Equity, is this, That Mr. Hughes shortly after his
Ejection out of this Place, had another bestowed upon him of double the value;
and a Freehold instead of an arbitrary Dependence; for which no Man would give
a years Purchase if it were to be sold, considering how ticklish and uncertain
words durante beneplacito are usually found to be; whereas a Freehold in common
acceptance is, for one Life, worth seven; and the intrinsic Value is the same
in Spiritual Preferments, though they are neither to bought or sold: So that
admitting Mr. Hughes his Living to be double the value of his late Preferment
here, which is the lowest account it can be computed at; the advantage he has
gotten by his remove from this to that, is in the proportion of fourteen to
one; an exchange for which I think he ought to be thankful to the kind
Providence that ejected him from hence, without endeavoring to reinstate
himself against so many and great reasons as contend against him, and which he
can answer with nothing but an hard forehead, which is proof against
Conviction, and is placed above the bashful Region where modesty and blushes
dwell; nay, suppose that placing a Curate in his Country-Living, for I take it
for granted your Lordship will not endure a Non-resident in this Place, he can
after all secure twenty Pound per annum de claro to himself, yet this according
to our former Computation, is an advantage no greater than one in Forty Two;
and what sort of Creature, or rather Monster of Covetousness and Envy must this
Mr. Hughes be, who will eject me out of two thirds to gain one to himself, and
that one but the two and fortieth part in common Estimation, of what I was the
contingent occasion of his getting, by being substituted in his room in this
House?

His Living, my Lord, as I have been informed is at a place called Little
Stoughton in the County of Bedford, and he lets it at this time for an hundred
and ten pounds a year, and by that its true value should be about sevenscore,
that is, about twenty or thirty pound per annum more then his Tenant pays; for
no Man will take the trouble of farming it upon him, without a prospect of
advantage amounting to thus much at least; now being resident upon the place,
he may if he pleases take his Tithes as they arise in kind, without injury or
so much as inconvenience to any, for the Farmer will be sure to make all the
advantage, which he himself might lawfully have done; but if he be
non-resident, as he must be in this case, if your Lordship and the Court
persist in your resolution of bestowing the Hospital upon him, and he in his of
accepting what you offer, it will then be his best way to set the profits of
his Living to Farm, but then nothing is more clear than that at the foot of the
account he will not get one farthing ^y the bargain, and will you, my Lord, do
me so great an injury who am a Citizens Son, for the sake of an Alien, a
Foreiner, and an ill Man, who can get nothing by it, but the gratification of a
groundless malice and prejudice against me, a passion which it ill becomes the
honor and justice of your Court, to countenance and encourage in any Man
whatsoever, and much more in one of Mr. Hughes his Character and profession.
Mr. Hughes indeed is pleased to say betwixt jest and earnest; for it looks like
a jest, though it be spoken seriously, that this Living was not given him in
consideration of the Hospital which he lost, but for some other reason, God
knows what, but I am so bold to affirm that I have proved plainly from the
nature of the gift it self, compared with the small Preferment he was deprived
of, that it was for this very reason, and that it could be for no other. And
besides this, I have appealed to the sacred testimony of a right noble and
right Reverend Prelate of our Church, together with several other eminent and
learned Persons of the greatest repute and Authority belonging to it, before
whom Mr. Hughes dare not show his hypocritical and dishonest face, out of a
sense of the ingratitude and baseness of this pretense, which is so great a
diminution to the kindness and humanity they showed him at that time, and
includes moreover an arrogant and proud assuming to himself, as if his merit
and not their compassion had extorted and snatched that generous benefaction
from them.

I never heard any thing urged to palliate so gross and palpable a falsehood,
but that the consideration was not given him by the same Persons that ejected
him from hence, and therefore they conclude and argue like themselves, who
understand neither Premises nor Conclusions as they ought to do, that one was
not given him in lieu of the other: but those Gentlemen know best upon what
motive they did it, and to them I make my humble, but yet confident Appeal,
which Mr. Hughes with all his impudence dare not do, and I do really resent the
injury, and affront which is done to the City and the Court of Aldermen by such
a barefaced Lie, insinuated with all the seeming sincerity and address, which
is only natural to truth, and very ill becomes that Falsehood and disguise,
which incapable of a modest and just asseveration, needs a meretricious and
feigned one to support it. One worthy Member of the honorable Court was
pleased to tell me in the Court it self, that Mr. Hughes his Living was not
given him in consideration of his loss, to which with all humility I replied,
That though I had several other things to urge against him, yet I was very
willing to put the Issue of the whole matter upon this single Point, and I
continue still firmly in the same resolution, notwithstanding he cannot answer
or vindicate himself from any one thing that I have urged against him, and if
there were nothing else but this to be considered, by this you may see my Lord,
what manner of Man it is that pretends and would be thought to fly to you for
Refuge; but has indeed no other but only in shams and evasions: I shall wonder
very much, upon so fair a detection, if your Lordship and the Court shall
patronize him any longer, who has abused and imposed upon the Charity and
goodness of the Bench you sit on, at so unmannerly and so vile a rate. I refer
my self very willingly to your Honor and Judgment, whether that Man ought to be
entrusted with the Consciences of others, who discovers so plainly that he has
none of his own? who pimps and prostitutes his Word and Soul upon no other
conceivable advantage, but only the gratification of an unchristian Malice,
very disagreeable to a Man of his Cloth and Function, and the fruitless
purgation of an inexhaustible Spleen, which renews it self by wasting, like the
Widows Cruize, and knows neither end nor measure? nay, I cannot choose but smile
within my self, at such an extremely pleasant and surprising Notion, that
nothing could be given him in lieu of what he had lost; unless it had been
given him by the same hands that deprived him of his ill-gotten and
ill-deserved Possession in this House; which yet it is manifest they could not
do without a disowning of their own Act, and an implicit acknowledgment that
they had done him wrong; whereas it is but too apparent, with shame for Mr.
Hughes I speak it, because he seems to have none left for himself, that they
proceeded but upon too just and justifiable grounds.

In the fifth place, let me entreat your Lordship to consider, that this
intended Preferment or Restitution of Mr. Hughes, added to the Country Living
already in his Possession, makes him in Conscience a Pluralist, whatever he be
in Law: and this with respect to him is argumentum ad hominem; It is a Weapon
of his own making, drawn against himself; he being a professed and printed Enemy
to Pluralities and Non residence, and if he has either Shame, Conscience or
Honesty left about him, he must either relinquish one of these two Places, or
give some public Reasons in defense of a Practice, which he formerly exploded,
that we may be satisfied upon what Grounds this strange and avowed Alteration
of his Opinion depends. It is not only a Plurality in Reason and in Conscience,
but it is likewise a Plurality So also in Attic. Regin. Eliz. 1584. and 1597.
in the Canons of 1571. the difference is but twenty six Miles.
out of distance, thirty Miles being the farthest that the Canon of K. James I.
in that behalf allows, Can. 41. whereas these two Places are forty Miles apart,
that is, ten Miles more than the Canon permits to Persons qualified by Law for
two Benefices with cure of Souls, which I conceive Mr. Hughes is not; and the
Reason against Pluralities, which is the very same upon which our Law proceeds,
is alleged by Sir Simon Degg out of an ancient Council in these words, Res
ipsa loquitur plura Beneficia, potissimum quibus cura Parson's Councellor. part
1. p. 18.
animarum submissa est, non sine gravi Ecclesiarum damro ab uno obtineri; cum
unus in pluribus Ecclesiis rite officia persolvere, aut rebus earum necessariam
curam impendere nequeat; That is, the thing speaks very plainly for it self;
that two Benefices, especially with cure of Souls, cannot be enjoyed or
occupied by one Person without great damage and detriment to the Church,
because one and the same Person cannot attend so particularly as he ought to do
in several Churches, to the necessary and indispenseable Duties that are
incumbent upon him, and if this cannot well be done at thirty Miles distance,
which is the utmost distance that our Law allows, it can much less at forty,
which is Mr. Hughes's Case; and though the Hospital do not require Institution
from the Bishop, which is the thing that makes a strict and legal Plurality;
yet the Conscience of the Case does perhaps sit more closely upon him, than it
would do in a legal Benefice at the same distance, because of the number of
sick that are always in this Place, and the Personal attendance that is
required upon them: to say nothing of the lewd lives of so many of the Patients
before their admission into this House for cure: So that tho the letter of the
Statute do not press him, yet the Conscience and the Reason of it, which to
every honest Man ought to be more sacred and obligatory than the other, can
never be shaken off by any Man that has a Conscience, and much less by him
that has written so expressly, not to say so passionately against this practice
in others; therefore he can do no less in common Honesty and Justice, before he
accepts this kindness from your Lordship and the Court, than satisfy the World
what Reasons have induced him to alter his Opinion, for without this, I am
sure, he can never justify so foul a Practice. And, my Lord, I beg of your
Lordship to take notice, that it has been resolved by the Judges, as my
Parson's Councellor informs me, That the King himself cannot dispense with this
Statute against Pluralities, where the Statute it self Ib. p. 29.
does not dispense with them, of which there are several instances to be met
with in it, though in some Particulars, and to some Persons, and in some
certain Circumstances, the Lawyers have agreed, whether right or wrong is none
of my business to determine, that the King may dispense; and how then can your
Lordship and the Honorable Court, by giving Mr, Hughes the Hospital at this
time, dispense with the Reason and Conscience of a Statute, when the King
himself, because of the apparent Equity upon which it is founded, cannot
dispense so much as with the letter of it? Though the first be much more Sacred
than the latter, for the Law, as merely written, is positive and changeable,
but as founded upon Reasons of common and unchangeable good; it is essential,
unalterable, and eternal.

These things, my Lord, are so very plain and strong upon Mr. Hughes, and he
begins as thick and impenetrable as his Skull is (as hard almost as his heart
and conscience themselves) to be so sensible of it, that I have been well
informed by those that have it from his Confidents and Friends, that he now
gives it out as a Secret in trust, to be whispered abroad, as there shall be a
fit occasion; that he designs not to hold both of these Places together, but
that upon his restitution to this house, he will immediately relinquish it
again and leave the Governors to a new choice, and if they were left to it, I
should be very sorry it should appear I had behaved my self so, as that I
should not deserve the favor of their Votes against any other Pretender,
however the Court of Aldermen, without giving me a fair and equal hearing, and
without discovering the reasons upon which they did it, have been pleased to
carry it against me.

This account given by Mr. Hughes and his Friends of his expedition out of the
Land of Bedford, into that of Middlesex and Surrey, has at first sight a very
malicious and spiteful aspect upon me, and I doubt not after all, but it is
more than a Copy of his countenance, it shows the true face and feature of his
design, though he was not willing to venture it abroad without a Masque to
conceal it from every common view, and make it walk incognito about the streets
under the disguise of better and more specious Names. The reason given out by
him, as I have really been told and am ready to produce a much honester Man
than ever Mr. Hughes was or will be for my witness, is, that he came out of
tenderness to the poor and sick of this House, about whom he has been
strangely sollicitous for these five years past, though it is well known they
were never more slende^ly r^garded, than when he himself was here, and it must
be confessed, my Lord, to be very frank and generous in him, and without any
mixture of Interest or self-design, that he is so very watchful and jealous for
the Souls of other People, with which he has not so immediately to do, and for
which he is to give no account, when he is at the same time so lavish of his
own, as if it were good for nothing but to be lost and thrown away. He says, I
am unfit for my Employment; and I confess it; For (...); who is sufficient for
these things? but if all Men that are unworthy of their Employments must be
turned out of what they legally enjoy, because there may be others upon the
comparison more worthy, what will become of Mr. Hughes himself? Or would it not
have been better for him to have staid, as he might have done quietly at home,
than to have come so far to draw up an invidious impeachment against me, which
reflects back again from whence it came, with much more severity and justice
upon himself? For if the account I have given your Lordship and the Court in my
former Paper be true, and I will be answerable for the truth of it, however
mean and unworthy I may be in my self, yet upon a fair hearing of the matter
between both Parties, upon a true representation of the management of this
House, so far as the spiritual Province is concerned, in Mr. Hughes his time
and mine, I doubt not, nay, I am very well assured, though he were to pack and
pick a Panel of his own Friends to try the Issue betwixt us, that the Verdict
would and must be very much to my advantage, and Mr. Hughes may see, if he will
cast his Eye that way, That I am no such lazy, unperforming Creature as he
would represent me, by this my double Apology for my self, and defense of my
most just and righteous Cause, against the injustice and barbarity of his,
which he will never be able to answer while he lives, and by not answering,
confesses that he has done me wrong, and that he puts your Lordship and the
Honorable Bench upon doing those things in his favor, by the mist which he
has cast before the Truth of the matter, which he himself cannot justify to
himself or you.

My Lord, I am very sensible that Mr. Hughes values himself very much upon his
Preaching, and that it is some defect of mine in this part of my Employment,
which is the ground and root of that unfitness, for which he would eject me,
and will most certainly if ever he be advanced, to the formidable style and
dignity of a tryer; but in the mean time, my Lord, let us play a Prize of
Preaching if you please upon a Text and Subject whch your Lordship shall
assign, and if I do not pass upon the comparison for a pretty midling Divine,
and Mr. Hughes for the same Tub-preacher that ever he was, then he shall eject
me, and do what else he pleases to gratify this Christian zeal of his, though
he can get nothing but infamy by the bargain.

My Lord, I do not pretend to great things, but plain Sermons among plain
People are best, and several such I have preached; if Mr. Hughes after a long
course of Hypocrisy and time, have arrived to a greater Perfection than simple
Men pretend to in the two great Accomplishments of Cant and Grimace, I can as
little help and do as little envy his Seize, as I am Master of them: but
true Edification, if I take it right, is only to be had from sober sense, from
plain and instructive Discourses, otherwise Men may edify, that is, they may
without question work themselves into a serious and devout temper, by
worshipping of Images and Relics, by sprinkling with holy Water, or whipping
with a Cat of Nine-Tails, and by many other extravagancies of the Church of
Rome: but a Man is not edified every time he thinks or vainly conceits he is,
upon grounds of mere Fancy and Imagination; but when he understands his Duty
and the reasons of it, and upon this is excited to a Manly Repentance, and to a
wise resolution of amendment; but after all the good that is attained by one
Man's affected Tone, or by another Gesture and Phrase, though it may possibly
have an wholesome influence upon the lives and manners of some men, yet in it
self it is an edg-tool dangerous to meddle with, it is the method by which all
religious madness and Enthusiasm proceeds, and he that affixes Edification or
Salvation to any such Whimsies as these, for in very truth and reality they are
no better, after all his bitter Invectives against Popery, is himself nothing
else but a worshipper of Idols.

It is very strange to me how Mr. Hughes should bring so much Conscience with
him out of the Country when he carried so little with him thither: one great
reason of his ejectment from hence, and by consequence of what followed after
it, his going into the Country, was, because of his gross neglect in the
discharge of his Duty, and now he would be thought to return because of mine;
and how very likely it is that the neglect of my Duty, if any such there were,
should go so near his Heart, when for four years together, he never had any
sense of his own; I leave it to your Lordship and to all Mankind to determine.

How little sense of Religion, and even of common Honesty, Mr. Hughes carried
down with him to his Country Living, for an Example to the Flock committed to
his care, may be gessed from his usage of the Reverend Incumbent to whom he
succeeded in it, whom he had the Grace to Persecute; and it is thought would
have prosecuted for dilapidations, notwithstanding he resigned a considerable
time, and quitted all Profits before he need to have done it, to Mr. Hughes his
incomparably greater benefit and advantage; for the sum he demanded was no more
than fifteen Pounds; though this is the more remarkable by what has happened
since, that this was the very same Sum which the other day he had the
confidence to demand of mine, it being my last Quarters Salary for this House,
which I earned every penny without any assistance of his. And our Savior
himself tells us, applying what he says to our very Function and Business,
That the Labourer is worthy of his hire. He did not so much as put in his claim
to my Place till two thirds or more of the Quarter were expired, and he may
remember My Order was dated, November 13. 1683. that is six weeks before
Quarter day, tho I did not enter upon the Place so soon.
, that upon his own Resignation, which was somewhat above a Fortnight before
the Quarter day, he had the whole Salary of that Quarter allowed him, though
about fifty Shillings of it in strictness would have been mine; and now he
would have all my Salary for doing nothing, which was so far from the usage
that I have offered others, that upon the late Incumbent of St. Thomas's Death,
I allowed the whole Salary of the next Quarter to the Widow, as I thought in
custom and civility I ought to do, he dying somewhat after Quarter day, though
I took care of that whole Quarter my self, and paid the Curate out of my own
Pocket.

I am not ignorant he pretends an Order of Court, and for ought I know he does
but pretend it, for the Original I never saw, nor any Copy well attested, for
his excuse in this matter; but I am so well satisfied of the Honor of that
Illustrious Body, notwithstanding they have been very much imposed upon by
false Representations, and through multitiplicity of Business at this time,
have not had the leisure to enter into the merits of so inconsiderable a Cause
as this is; I say, I am so well satisfied, that I am sure they would not have
passed an Order of this nature, but only for these two Reasons: First, That
they thought upon the mistaken Suggestions that had been made to them; that the
undoubted Right was in Mr. Hughes, and therefore they gave this Order in
terrorem, that so his Right might take place, and I be compelled, or at least
very strongly inclined to pay an Obedience to it, out of a prospect of
advantage on the one hand, or else of punishment for my Contempt on the other,
not that they intended this Order should ever be executed in its literal
strictness and severity; but it was by way of Experiment or by way of valeat
quantum valere potest, to try what I would do upon the Advertisement I received
of it; and indeed I had submitted to it, and I should still be very willing to
do the same, but only for these two Considerations, first, That by so doing I
should seem to allow that the Authority that made this Order, for the Quarters
salary becoming due at the Feast of the Annunciation last past, which I had
earned with my Labors in this House, might with equal Reason make another to
entitle him to all the mean Profits for these five years together, which I must
either obey or go to Prison for not doing it, if such an Order had been good in
Law, which tho I did not believe that ever it would be done, yet not to dispute
this Order, was in effect to acknowledge the Legality of that, and to call my
self by those names which Mr. Hughes only deserves, for having unjustly
received the Wages of this House for so many years together, neither would it
be prudent or advisable in any Man in the World, out of a too profuse respect
and deference to any limited Authority whatsoever, to run the hazard of the
minutest possibility of such a fatal Consequence as this.

That your Lordship and the Court did not intend to use all that extremity of
Rigor with me, which such an Order at first view might seem to threaten me
with, appears very plain and evident to me by this, that Mr. Hughes was denied
his Money when he came for it; and Mr. Hughes by claiming it, so contrary to
Sense and Justice, has pronounced a greater Satyr against himself than it is
possible for Wit and Indignation in confederacy together to write or invent
against him; and your Lordship, I hope, will be pleased for the future, having
made this Experiment of Mr. Hughes as well as me, not to hearken too much to
his clamorous Pretenses of a legal Claim, when you see so plainly, that all is
Fish with him that comes to Net; and that his legal Claims have no other bound
or measure, than the Arbitrary Dependences of the French King, that is, every
thing is his, and legally too by the general Law that runs through all his
designs, and equally justifies every thing he does, which he can grasp or come
at, at the instigation of a will, that admits no practical Conscience for its
guide, and by the help of all the little Power he is Master of, and all the
crafty, circumventing Arts he can use.

The second thing, besides the uncertainty of the Order it self, which does not
yet appear to me to be authentic, why I neither did nor could pay it that
submission, which otherwise no Man should have done more cheerfully than my
self, was that it seemed to me to be too hard measure while I am under the
apprehension that my Possession is legal, for me to submit to an Order, which
with all humble Duty and submission I must affirm, I cannot believe to be so,
which would be for me to justify by my own act of consent, and in a manner to
acknowledge the legality of a proceeding against my Conscience and my Interest
together, which is too great an hardship even for Slaves and Vassals to endure;
but if the Law will eject me, currat lex, I desire no other favor than what
the Law will afford me; but in all other things I am and shall always be ready
to pay my lawful Superiors all possible obedience, so far as is consistent
with my honest Interest, in conjunction with my unquestionable Duty; For, my
Lord, I have a Family to provide for besides my self, and it is therefore my
duty to assert any lawful Interest that may tend to our common support, but in
any other case where my Duty and my present advantage cut upon and interfere
with one another, I hope I shall always have the grace to look to the peace of
my Conscience, the honor of my Profession, the reputation of my Name among
good Men, and so to consider my whole interest together, which my Antagonist
does not seem to do, as not to forfeit my Title to a blessed immortality, and
my prospect of seeing the face of God with comfort, for the sake of any
perishing and momentany advantage.

May it please your Lordship, when I began this my humble Representation and
Address, which I did not intend to spin out to so great a length, in the midst
of so great importunities of public business, as every moment solicit and
invite your care; I mentioned these two considerations as the reasons, why I
did not pay that deference to the Orders of the Honorable Court for my
Ejectment, which was expected from me; The first, That the said Orders
proceeded upon a wrong bottom of the restitution of the Charter; And secondly,
upon a defective Jurisdiction, which could not legally extend it self so far,
as to the making or passing any Order of this nature.

The first of these, after all that has been said upon it, is, I presume, so
clear, if there be any such thing as Law or Reason in the World, that, I hope,
your Lordship and the Court will be thoroughly satisfied as to that point, that
Mr. Hughes has no legal Right naturally accruing to and devolving upon him by
this new and happy settlement of Affairs upon their ancient Basis and
Foundation, so that so far as your Lordship and the Court of Aldermens
Jurisdiction is concerned, if there were no Superior Authority, no higher
Appeal, it is a matter of Equity that lies before you, betwixt Mr. Hughes and
my self, whether he should be restored or I continued in the Possession I have;
and I am willing to refer my self after a due Reflection upon what I have here
humbly represented to your Lordship, to Mr. Hughes himself, who shall be Judge
and Party in his own Cause, whether all the equitable Pretensions are not mine,
or whether it be possible in point of Equity, which is the Law of Conscience,
the Light of Nature, the blessed result of Goodness and Justice together, for
any Cause to have more to be said in its defense than mine has, or more to be
said against it than his.

As to the second point of defective Jurisdiction, I must again take the
Liberty, and I hope I shall do it without Offense to your Lordship, any just
and unprovoked Occasion of which I am naturally very tender of giving, to
assert the Kings Title in opposition to that of any subordinate Authority
acting under it, and to say that what the supreme Power has lawfully
established, that no inferior can disanull, unless upon emergent Necessity, or
apparent Reason, without unhinging of Government, and inverting the Nature and
the Order of things. I grant indeed though the first Orders proceeded upon the
Supposition of the Restitution of the Charter, (for the last of the three has
made no mention of it) which said supposition was plainly mistaken and
ungrounded; yet if the sole, entire and absolute Disposal of this matter had
layn properly before you, without any further Appeal, which, (when the King
has already determined) it does not; that in such Case the mistaken ground
would not have evacuated the Order that was built upon it, unless you should
please to recall it, or to let it fall of it self, because absolute Power is
under no Obligation to assign a Reason; it may act without giving a Reason, as
well as with it, and a bad Reason can never disanull that Order, merely because
it cannot justify it self, whose true Authority consists in the sufficient
Promulgation of the Will of the ordaining Power, which Will if it continues,
the Order is valid to all Intents and Purposes, tho the Reason, upon which it
is or may be built, be never so weak and infirm: But in this Case where the
will of the Ordainer does not extend so far, the Order is invalid by defect of
Jurisdiction.

Sir Simon Degg, who is my Counsel, tells me, that the King may give a License
to a Subject to erect, or found P. C. part. 1. c. 13. p. 164.
a Church or Chapel donative, and exempt it from the Ordinaries Visitation;
and the Patron may in such Case, visit by his own Commissioners: And shall not
the King, My Lord, be allowed to do that legally by his own immediate Power,
that is, to visit, by his own Commissioners, in his own House and Chapel,
which, at the same time, he may empower and privilege any private Patron to do
in his or her proper Gift, without Remedy or Appeal? And as to the Union of the
two places, the same Author tells us, that the Canonists allow even of
Pluralities in p. 18. ib.
six Cases, of which one is the smalness of each Living by it self, and another
where two Churches are united (he must mean either by Contiguity or Authority,
one of which is a natural, the other a legal Union) or depend the one upon
another. And in another Place he says, the uniting of Churches ought p. 170.
ib.
to be, causa utilitatis five necessitatis, as Vicinity, Paucity of
Inhabitants, Smalness of the Livings, etc. and the Persons that must concur to
the Union, are the King, the Ordinary, and the Patron, and if any of the Places
be full, the Consent p. 169. ib.
of the Incumbent likewise is necessary to it; of my Consent to my own
advantage, I suppose no body will make a Question, especially when I am
pleading for the Continuance of it, and the King, the Ordinary and Patron,
being in this Case all of them the same, it is impossible there should be a
stronger Consent, or by consequence a firmer and more inseparable Union, so far
as my Person is concerned, (for it extends no farther) than this is.

It is no Contempt of any Court, whatsoever not to submit to its Decrees in a
matter of Right, if any Party think himself aggrieved, or if there be any legal
Remedy, or any further Appeal; for even the King frequently suffers himself in
such Matters to be cast and overruled in his own Courts of Justice, and the
Subject may try a Matter of Right with the Prince, without any diminution to
his Majesty and Greatness, and without so much as incurring the least Tittle of
Displeasure: for the King who is the great Fountain of Justice, as well as
Honor, is always supposed to desire that Right may be done, though it be
against himself, who is and ought to be content with the Enjoyment of his own
just Regalities, Prerogatives and Rights, without invading the Property of his
Subjects, which by his Trust and Character he is obliged to protect; and the
Case though in a lesser Proportion is the same, in every subordinate Magistrate
whatsoever, who are what they are for this Intent and Purpose, that Right may
be done in their respective Spheres, and that the Peace of the whole may be
preserved by the honorable, just, and candid Administration of all the several
Parts, of which it consists; and they ought to be so far from taking it ill,
that (...) any of their Orders or Determinations are at any time disputed, by a
fair Representation, or by an higher Appeal, that it concerns them in point of
Justice to favor it, and to review impartially and heartily what they have
done; unless it be in such Cases where the Representation is manifestly
litigious, without any color of Justice to support it, which when it is so, it
is easy to discern: but if there be a specious Pretense, and the Law allows a
farther enquiry and research into the matter, though perhaps at the long run it
will not be able to justify it self; in this Case it is for the Honor and
Vindication of Justice, that the whole Cause should be brought under a new
Examination; and for this Reason it is that our Law suffers so many Suits to be
commenced, that in their Commencement have a quarrelsome and vexatious Face, a
litigious appearance, and a frivolous or a false Pretense, and in their issue
prove to be no better, because it is so very tender of denying Justice to any,
and therefore in pursuance of this its great Design, it must submit to many
troublesome and impertinent things, to prevent the least hazard or shadow of
doing wrong, though it always takes care by what is past, to prevent the like
vexations to it self and the Subject for the Future, by bringing those Persons
to Punishment, or branding them with Shame; and by that means disabling them
from the like Practices and Designs in time to come, who are the Authors of
such Mischief and Inquietude to their Neighbors, by promoting Strife and
Variance among them, or by seeking causes of Action and Complaint upon every
slight or else upon no occasion or upon false or frivolous Accusations. But my
Case, my Lord, is still more favorable than any of these things, for either
Mr. Hughes insists upon his (...) real or pretended Right, which he says
returns again with the Restitution of the Charter; or else taking it for
granted, that you may put in and put out whom you please, he depends upon your
Order in the nature of a legal Presentation, as I do upon that of the
Commissioners, with the King's particular Knowledge and Consent, granted in my
behalf; and I am willing and ready at any time to bring either or both of these
Points to a fair Trial with him.

First, Whether he be restored upon the Restitution of the Charter, and in that
Case he may claim without any Order of your Lordship and the Court, and for
ought I know, may sue for and recover the mean Profits for these five years
last past.

Secondly, Whether the King's Order, which is in some sort his Presentation, or
yours be Superior, or whether your Order can cancel or evacuate his. I beseeeh
your Lordship to consider and apply it favorably to my particular Case, that
when two several Patrons have presented to the same Living two several Clerks;
it is never accounted any rudeness or indignity in either of them in the
asserting of Right, which is much more sacred than the Authority of any Person,
and more inviolable than the respect that is due to him: I say, it is never
accounted any affront or injury in this Case, for either of these Clerks to
dispute the Right and Title of that Patron by whom his Competitors Pretentions
are supported; and it is always left to the Clerks to fight it out at Law
between themselves, without any offense to the Patrons on either side, who must
not take it ill that the Law has its course, or that a Person who thinks
himself injured seeks for Justice, as in bounden Duty to his own Welfare and
Safety he is obliged to do, much less then, my Lord, have you and your worthy
Brethren any Reason to take it ill, that I assert the King's Title and my own,
which is founded upon it, in Opposition to yours, and that, I say, his legal
Order cannot be reversed by any Authority inferior to it self.

If you leave Mr. Hughes and me to the Law, as in fairness, I humbly conceive,
you ought to do, this being an Argument that you pretend to no Power, but what
in Justice you may, then I doubt not in the least of an Event suitable to the
manifest Honor and Equity of my Cause.

If you apply to the King and Queen, you acknowledge by so doing, that the
ordinary Methods of Law will not decide it to Mr. Hughes his advantage; and
that your Orders are not founded upon Justice but only upon Will and Power, and
yet when all is done, I humby hope their Majesty's will be graciously pleased
to consider in my Favor, that it is their Title I assert as well as my own;
that very individual Power being now lodged in them, which was formerly in
Charles and James the Second, and that the legal Acts of those two preceding
Princes, cannot be reversed without the Consent of the Present, and ought not
to be rescinded without a Reason, though they are the Judges whether there be
Reason or no; and to their Royal Wisdom and Goodness, I submit it with all the
Cheerfulness and Resignation that becomes me.

I know their Sacred Majesty's will graciously consider the Engagements they
have been pleased so lately to condescend to, to maintain this poor Church of
England, and to protect its Bishops and its Clergy in all their just and legal
Rights; and I have great Ground to hope and to believe, though I am not
arrogantly to prescribe to Princes; and cannot see so far as my Sovereign Lord
and Lady, who are as the Angels of God, to discern betwixt Good and Evil, Just
and Unjust, Right and Wrong, so far consider my Title to this small Pteferment,
not worth the noise and dust that has been raised about it, as to assert and
vindicate their own, and so far blend the Exercise of their Sovereign Power,
with the more God-like Attributes of Wisdom, Justice and Goodness, without
which the Divinity it self would be all thunderbolt, and his Omnipotence would
be feared and hated, instead of being humbly worshipped and adored; as to
reflect a little, if so mean a care can find entertainment in a Royal Breast,
upon the different Circumstances betwixt my Antagonist and me, and let them
decide the Controversy between us.

I rely upon the Royal Assurances they have given, not only the Church in
general, but every individual Clergyman belonging to it, with a Divine Faith,
as knowing they are God's Vicegerents, that have spoken it, whose word is as
firm and as immovable as the Pillars of Heaven from whence good Princes come,
or the Foundations of the Earth committed to their Charge; the Scepter of whose
Kingdom is a right Scepter; and because they have loved Righteousness and hated
Iniquity, therefore God, even their God, has anointed them with the Oil of
Gladness above their fellows.

To eject without Reason, out of a just and legal, though Arbitrary Possession,
with all profound Reverence and Duty be it spoken, is not that Protection,
which their Majesty's have promised; which we their joyful and exultant
Subjects expect, and which all that are not perfect Strangers to the Fame and
Brightness of their Princely Virtues, whose Line is gone out through all the
Earth, and their words to the end of the World, are satisfied and well assured
they intend. The Globe of Majesty put into their hands, was an Emblem of the
firmness and stability of their Councels; and of that immovable center of
Magnanimity and Justice, from whence all the Lines of Action and Administration
are drawn, all equi-distant from their Sacred Head, and preserving an
inviolable Harmony and Agreement, a fixed and unchangeable Proportion with each
other; and the Scepter never moves to bruise, or to oppress, but as a sign of
Condescension, and a mark of Grace; and we are blessed with Princes made by
Heaven for Empire, that are not only as Auspicious, and Fortunate as Augustus,
but as Good and Virtuous, as Trajan.

His Majesty did not only declare at his first happy landing upon English
ground, that the great and only designs of that Glorious Expedition, were to
assert the liberty of the Subject, and to vindicate the oppressed, and every
day more and more endangered Rights of the Church of England, but of his
continued resolution to do both of these, he has given us many fresh
assurances, and to remove more effectually all sort of doubt or scruple out of
the minds of the most jealous and dissatisfied Men, who because they have been
once deceived, are for ever after very difficult of entertaining belief, to the
most solemn and serious asseverations that can be made, he has bound himself
and the illustrious Consort of his Throne and Bed under the sacred Obligation
of an Oath, and the Parliament have unanimously addressed and thanked him for
these his gracious purposes and resolutions so solemnly made and so frequently
repeated; so that being legally put into this Place, being now in the actual
Possession of the same, and having no reason, that I know of, lying so hard
upon me as to eject me from it, especially for the sake of Mr. Hughes, who has
no color of a legal Claim, I have the Promise of their Majesty's Protection,
and the concurrence of that great Assembly with them, and I do as little doubt,
upon a farther inspection into this little Affair, when those of greater moment
will give you leave; but your Lordship and the Court of Aldermen will likewise
think fit to confirm me in a Possession that has some small share in the
Parliaments Address of thanks, and lays so just a Claim to the Assurances their
Majesty's have given, and which in its root I take to be as legal, and almost
as firm, as any other Possession whatsoever.

For though the tenure of a Man's Employment be only durante beneplacito, as
mine indeed is with respect to a Power Superior to yours, yet the general Law
of Equity in all Possessions is, that all Persons actually possessed and
capable of their respective Employments, and not misdemeaning themselves,
should continue in the Possession they are in: for all Possessions by nature
are primi occupantis, they belong to the first Possessor and to his Assigns
after him; all legal Possessions, as there is no just one in a Government but
what is so, if they are not limited to a certain time, are in reason
inseparable from the present actual Possessor, unless he shall voluntarily
resign it up, or shall incur some legal forfeiture or disability, though the
tenure be never so expressly during pleasure. It is true, a Master may turn away
his Servant, as he pleases; but if this Servant have behaved himself well, if
the Master cannot serve himself better of another, and if besides all this he
have a desire and ambition to continue in the Service, then there is an
Obligation of some sort of gratitude, as well as of the fundamental equity of
all Possessions, not to deprive such a Servant of his Employment for no Reason:
acting without Reason being the first step to Arbitrary Government in private
or in public Affairs, and the very next to acting against it; for he that acts
without Reason, that is, without the impulse and guidance of his Understanding,
does manifestly yield too much to the blind and fantastic motions of his will,
and this if we give it an Inch, will very soon take an Ell, it will act first
without the leave o^ the Understanding and Conscience, and then in a direct
opposition to them both, which is the height of Tyranny and Usurpation, the
root, stock and branch of Arbitrary Power, whose fruits are almost as fatal and
destructive as those of the forbidden Tree it self, that bring us to the
knowledge of Good by the want, of Evil by the deplorable experience of it, and
intercept the way to Paradise with a Flaming Sword, branded by the Arm of a
despotick Cherub to hinder us from coming any more at the Tree of Liberty and
Life; not but that an Arbitrary dependence is what it is, and a Man may without
remedy be ejected out of it, though no reason be given, nor any shadow of a
reason can be afforded; but then in this case the saying holds good, that
summum jus est summa injuria, especially if the Person thus displaced be
destitute of any other equal or proportionable Subsistence, to that of which he
is deprived, and has not any Provision of the same, or near the same value to
betake himself unto, and much more when he that is substituted in his room can
get little or nothing by supplanting the other, but only the gratification of
an unchristian, uncharitable and indefensible Spleen; both of which are Mr.
Hughes's Case with reference to me, so that my Ejection out of this Service, by
the Authority that has ordained it, though it could be supported by the utmost
Rigor of the Law, which I am well assured it can never be, yet would that
Rigor be unjust, if not barbarous in it self; and it would be an Offense,
though not against the dry and dead letter of the Law, yet against that Soul
and Life that gives the true Sanction and Authority to it; and that is the
Conscience and the Equity upon which it proceeds; it would be an Offense
against that universal Reason by which all and all manner of Possessions are
ensured; and that is founded in nothing else, but a just Possession, without
Injury or Oppression to any other, a Performance of those Conditions which are
required respectively to the peaceable Enjoyment of this or that Advantage, and
an equitable Consent in the Overseers of the Trust, which is derived from
both; for even a Freehold may be forfeited upon some Reasons, and where there
are no Reasons moving to the contrary, but only Will and Pleasure; there Will
and Pleasure ought not in Justice and Conscience to take place, but even the
most Arbitrary Dependence ought to be secure.

The sacred and strict regard that is always had to an honest and just
Possession in the Law, is the Reason why a Tenant, tho without a Lease, cannot
be ejected at pleasure, and much less with it, by a concurrent Lease, to take
place at the exspiration of the term of the former, the said Tenant paying and
doing as by the Bargain and mutual Agreement he is obliged to do, and the same
Reason holds in all manner of Rights, Possessions and Ejoyments, if in all
Cases it were equally attended to, as in strict Justice and Conscience it ought
to be.

But of all sorts of Possessions, there are none more Sacred than those that
belong to the Function that is so, and so it has been always taken from the
highest and most remote Antiquity of former Ages, down to this very moment in
which I am writing. By the Law of Moses there was a Proportion set apart out of
every Man's Offering, every Man's Estate, for the maintenance of the
Priesthood; which could not be alienated or converted to any other Use upon any
pretense whatsoever; and this depended upon a Reason of Equity, which is
certainly of Divine and Eternal Right, that they that attend upon the Altar
should also live upon it, and that the Thoughts of those that ministered in the
holy things belonging to the Sanctuary, should not be perplexed and troubled
with any Secular Cares, and by that means hindered in the awful, reverent and
decent Performance of their Duty, which ought not and can never be performed,
as it should be, with a distracted Mind: the Reason of which holds still more
strongly under the Gospel Dispensation, which is much more internal and
thoughtful than the other, and differs as much as the Religion of a Philosopher
from that of a Mechanic, or the noble and refined Operations of the Mind, (all
which the study of an useful and instructive Divinity will employ) from the
gross and external Services of the Body: It is a Religion which consists not in
so poor a thing as Sacrifice, which very little Manual Operation may perform,
but in Obedience, in Virtue, in Praise, Admiration and Instruction, in the
Exercise, Exaltation and Improvement of those best Faculties belonging to our
Natures, by which we are Men, and by which we resemble God, and by which alone
we can be rendered capable of an happy Fruition and Enjoyment of him, of seeing
and knowing him, not through a Glass, darkly, but in some competent measure, as
he is in himself, full of his own Excellence, and discerned by his own Light,
by transcribing and transplanting into the habit of our Minds, the Image of
those Attributes and Perfections we adore.

And in pursuance of the Reason of this Levitical Institution, it was, That in
all Christian Nations, from an high and remote Antiquity to this time, there
has been a standing and immovable Provision for the Clergy, out of the Lands,
Profits and Demesns of Secular and Lay Persons, by such and such stated
Proportions, which may be demanded, sued for, and recovered by Law as a Due;
and which are settled upon the respective Incumbents for their Lives, if they
do not of themselves relinquish their said Preferments, or are not guilty of
such scandalous and repeated Crimes, as to incur Suspension a Beneficio, or
absolute Deprivation from the exercise of their Office, and from the Profits
and Emoluments accruing by it; they are provided for with a present
Subsistence, that they may not be diverted by the importunity of emergent Cares
from a present actual Attendance upon their Duty, and this Subsistence of
theirs was made perpetual, (and was much more competent in the smallest Livings
in former Times than it is now) that so they might be rendered easy in their
Minds, and void of an anxious Solicitude for the future, which though not so
great an impediment to the discharge of their Office, as present want and
indigence must in Reason be, yet in some lesser Proportion it will always be a
Thorn of Vexation in their sides; it will affect them more or less, according
to the different Persons they have to do with, and upon whom their dependence
relies, it will have a great Influence upon some Tempers, beyond what it will
have upon others; and lastly it will be a means of an unreasonable Subjection
of the Clergy to the Laity, and the occasion of many base Arts, and most
unworthy Compliances with the Humors and Interests of unreasonable People,
whereby to reprieve themselves from an impending Ruin, and get some further
momentany, uncertain and despicable Respite in a slavish and arbitrary
Dependence, fit for none but such wretches as are capable of being molded into
all shapes, and of receiving all sorts of servile and mean Impressions from ill
Men, instead of being the happy Instruments of Amendment and Reformation to
them, by good ones of their own, made boldly and frankly without Fear or
Favor, though not without a becoming Modesty and Discretion, upon every fit
and suitable Occasion.

Now the Reason upon which all those Laws were made, is every whit as
applicable to my own Case, though in outward form and appearance I hold by
another Tenure, as it is to the rest of my Brethren of the Clergy, who have a
legal Freehold in what they enjoy; for Tithes were no otherwise of Divine
Right, than as they were ordained by God upon an equitable and eternal Reason,
and are still continued by Men upon the same, as to the substantial meaning of
the Institution, which was the support and maintenance of the Clergy, or of
that Order of Men, (as such there ought to be in every Nation) that were
dedicated and devoted to the Service of God, though as to the minute Proportion
of such a Maintenance as that is, and as to the ways of Levying, Collecting or
Distributing the same, it may admit of Change and Variation in different Times
and Places. The Law of Tithes obliges not so much by virtue of that Humane
Authority, no, nor of that Divine Authority neither, that first established it,
either among the Jews or in any other Nation, for both of these Authorities, as
sacred as they are, and especially the latter of them, yet separate from Nature
and eternal Reason, they are at best but positive and changeable things; but
that which gives those Laws, in the general considered, which are made for the
support and subsistence of the Clergy, an intrinsic and essential Character of
Obligation, is the apparent Reasonableness, Equity and Justice of them, and
that Equity appears as much in making the support perpetual, as in giving it at
all, because the design of the one, for Reasons that have been given, would be
defeated and disappointed without the other: and if this be equally the Case of
all Ecclesiastical Preferments whatsoever, where a Subsistence for a Clergy man
is appointed in Consideration of a Duty to be done; the Tenure by which I hold,
though it be only durante beneplacito, will not evacuate the general Equity of
the Case, but all Men that have a Reverence to the Laws, a due regard to
Religion, and the Ministers of it, or a due sense of the great and fundamental
Reasons upon which Bodies Politic and Societies are built, and by which equal
Justice is administered to all, will never do any thing deliberately, and of set
purpose against the manifest Equity upon which those Laws are built, whose
Obligation they will and ought always to acknowledge to be valid and binding
upon them, even where the positive Letter does not oblige.

If a Man keep a Chaplain in his House, as his Domestic, he may discard him
when he pleases for no Reason at all, unless it be that of retrenching his
Expenses, because the Law does not oblige him to retain such a Person in his
House, but yet it must be confessed to be very hard, and by Consequence next
kin to unjust, to turn a Man of that Character out of doors, without any other
competent Provision, after he had deserved well of the Family and his Patron
for several years together; but where the Public has allowed a Maintenance
out of the public Revenue, there the Case and the Equity arising from it, is
plainly as strong and as clearly indispensible in one Ecclesiastical Promotion
as in another: all which if your Lordship will please heartily and impartially
to apply to Mr. Hughes his Circumstances and mine, that he was legally ejected
for many and great Causes, and that I was legally substituted in his Place,
that he can get nothing by his Restitution, and that he has as little Right to
it, as he can get profit or advantage by it, and that I must only be a great
and unreasonable Looser, with little or no profit accruing and redounding to
him, besides many other Reasons, which, I hope, your Lordship will some time or
other take the leisure to consider; I doubt not but you will recall the
Sentence, you have past, and think it more for the Reputation and Interest of
your Court to discard Mr. Hughes than to protect him any longer; but if this be
the meaning of an Arbitrary Dependence, (and such I acknowledge mine in some
sense to be, though, by Reason of my Character and Function, it be the least
Arbitrary of any in this House) that it is a dependence so perfectly and
entirely holding of unaccountable Will and Pleasure, that a Man may be ejected
out of it for no reason and against a great many, and all by those who are not
the proper and immediate Judges, to whom the determination of his Cause
belongs, I see not but a Tenure from the Wind and Weather, may be every whit as
certain and as firm as this, and I perceive I was mistaken when I valued it at
a Years Purchase, when in reality it is not worth one day.

Suppose, my Lord, that the Living of St. Thomas's had not been united to the
Hospital in my Person, would you then have stripped me of this my only dependence
for the sake of so small an advantage to Mr. Hughes, as it is so plainly
demonstrable this will amount to? And yet if in strict Justice you had been
obliged to do it, you would have been equally obliged in that Case, as you are
in this; but if you are not obliged in strict Justice to deal with me after
this manner, then, I hope, you will reflect upon the Reasons of Equity which I
have offered on my behalf; and upon the many Arguments that strike with so much
force, and unanimity against his Pretensions, and show so plainly beyond all
Exception, that there is nothing but Injustice and Malice on his part, nothing
but Fairness and Honesty on mine.

Besides, that he cannot be resident upon both Places at once; if he supplies
this Place by a Curate, as I am just now informed he is about to do, and I know
the Person who it is, One that cannot attend the Hospital at any time but on
Sunday.
that I hope you will not, and I am very sure in so inconsiderable a
Preferment, but yet requiring so great and constant attendance as this does,
you ought not to allow; Sisters and Cooks, and Butlers Helpers have been heard
of in this House, but the Hospitallers Helper, and that in his absence too was
never heard of before; but if he resides here, which I am morally certain he
will never do, and puts a Curate into his other Place; this is directly
opposite to the Law against Pluralities, which will not permit a Man to be
absent and resiant forty Miles from any of his Cures.

Let us suppose again, my Lord, I beg your Lordship to excuse the plainness of
the Comparison, that at the time when you were pleased to make an Order for me
to resign up my Place to Mr. Hughes, and as I have been informed, in case of
Non-obedience to the said Order on my part, that Mr. Hughes should have all
past Arrears, and all growing Profits, becoming due for the future, that you
had further ordained, that I should deliver up my Books, and whatsoever else I
had in my Possession to him. Would it in this Case have been interpreted a
Contempt to the Court of Aldermen, if I should refuse to do as that Order
appointed? No certainly, but all Men would purge and vindicate me by saying,
that your Lordship's and the Courts Jurisdiction did not extend so far, and
that it was no Contempt of a lawful Authority, not to obey an Order that was
illegal and ^^ceeded the just bounds and measures of the Court, from whence it
proceeded; so that to apply this matter to the purpose: I beseech your Lordship
and the rest of the worthy Gentlemen concerned, to consider first seriously
whether your Order be legal, and within the Jurisdiction to which you may
justly pretend, before you accuse me of a rude Contempt, or affronting
Disobedience to so great and honorable a Court, a thing which I will never be
guilty of to any of my Superiors, to the best of my Understanding, so long as
I live, and upon this one point, my Lord, the whole Controversy turns, whether
your said Order, which I cannot help saying, is very far equitable; be so much
as strictly legal or no.

And to all this it is still further to be added, that Mr. Hughes having
received his just doom of ejection from above, made his actual Resignation
before a general Court, and I at the same time was actually substituted in his
Room and Place, and he afterward made a Sale of the Furniture of his Chamber
to me; which I accordingly paid him for: So that here were all the Signs and
Indications of a voluntary Resignation on his Part, who did not stand it out,
as thinking himself injured, as I have done, and all the Formalities of a legal
and orderly Possession on mine, which Possession I am still desirous to keep
till I am legally ejected from it.

Another thing which in point of Argument I shall insist upon, shall be taken
from an Act of Parliament 25. Car. 2. and entitled, an Act for preventing
Dangers, which may happen from Popish Recusants, and in the Preface of the said
Act, the design of it is said to be, for quieting the minds of his Majesty's
good Subjects, by which Act it is ordained and enacted that all and every
Person or Persons, as well Peers as Commoners, that shall bear any Office or
Offices Civil or Military, or shall receive any Pay, Salary, Fee or Wages, by
reason of any Patent or Grant from his Majesty; or shall have Command or place
of Trust, from or under his Majesty, or from any of his Majesty's Predecessors,
or by his or their Authority, or by Authority derived from him or them, within
the Realm of England, etc. or shall be of the Household, or in the Service or
Employment of his Majesty, etc. should within a time limited, be obliged to
take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and also to receive the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, according to the usage of the Church of England, publicly
on a Lords day, commonly called Sunday, immediately after divine Service and
Sermon, within a certain and prefixed time; and further at the making and
taking of the Oaths aforesaid, they should likewise make and subscribe a
Declaration in Manner and Form, as by the said Act is ordained, under the same
Penalties and Forfeitures as are appointed by it; which said Penalties and
Forfeitures were twofold.

First, that all and every the Person or Persons aforesaid, that do or shall
neglect or refuse to take the said Oaths and Sacrament, in the said Courts and
Places, and at the respective times aforesaid, shall be ipso facto adjudged
incapable, and disabled in Law, to all Inrents and Purposes whatsoever, to
have, occupy, or enjoy the said Office or Offices, Employment or Employments,
which shall be void, and are hereby adjudged void.

Secondly, it is further enacted, that all and every such Person or Persons
that shall neglect or refuse to take the said Oaths, or the Sacrament as
aforesaid, within the Times and in the Places aforesaid, and in the manner
aforesaid, and yet after such Neglect and Refusal shall exercise any of the
said Offices and Employments after the said times expired, wherein he or they
ought to have taken the same; and being thereupon lawfully convicted, etc.
every such Person or Persons shall be disabled from thenceforth to sue or use
any Action, Plaint, Bill or Information in Course of Law, or to prosecute any
Writ, in any Court of Equity, or to be Guardian of any Child, or Executor, or
Administrator of any Person, or capable of any Legacy or deed of Gift, or to
bear any Office within this Realm of England, etc. and shall forfeit five
hundred Pounds, to be recovered by him, or them that shall sue for the same,
etc.

From which brief Summary of the aforesaid Act of Parliament, I shall make
these following Observations.

First that Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Persons, considered purely as such,
are exempted from the Obligations and Penalties of the same; and that for
several Reasons.

First, because the Act mentions no other Employments, but only Civil and
Military, and by consequence the Ecclesiastical by not being taken Notice of,
are excluded.

Secondly, it is a Maxim among Naturalists, Natura nihil facit frustra; and so
it is also in Reason, frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora: And
for this cause it was not designed that this Act should extend to Clergymen,
or Spiritual Persons, as such; because they were sufficiently secured to the
Protestant Interest before; as far as Oaths or Declarations, or any other
outward Significations of an inward meaning could do it; for there is no
Clergyman, nay, no Graduate in either of the Universities, but as often as he
has taken any Degree whatsoever, has taken, as a necessary Adjunct and
Appendix to it, the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; he is bound to recognize
the Kings Supremacy, as well in sacred as in civil Causes, by the express
Institution of that Directory for Prayer before Sermon, which the Canon has
enjoined, and it is thought that the Forms of bidding Prayer in the injunctions
of Ed. 6. and Q. Elizabeth, were enjoined for nothing more (and some say only
for that, it seeming otherwise unnecessary after the morning Service,) but only
to extort this repeated Recognition of the King or Queens Supremacy in all
Causes, as often as ever he either preached himself, or read an appointed
Homily to the People. Furthermore, every beneficed Clergyman is obliged by his
Office and Duty, as he is such; at least thrice every year, besides what
private Occasions there may be, in the Visitation of the Sick, which he cannot
refuse, both to take and give the Sacrament, according to the usage of the
Church of England: He subscribes to the 39 Articles where Transubstantiation is
expressly condemned, and to the Homilies wherein the Charge of the most gross
Idolatry is pathetically and elaborately laid, in three excellent Discourses to
the Church of Rome, and in the Office of Consecration of the Elements of Bread
and Wine, which he that Administers must always recite, otherwise there can be
no Consecration of them, according to the usage of the Church of England, they
are expressly called, These thy Creatures of Bread and Wine, even after the said
Consecration is over, for there is no Perception or Communication of or in them
before that time, and yet these are the very words of the Consecrating Prayer,
at the end of the Communion Service; Hear us, O merciful Father, we most humbly
beseech thee, and grant that we receiving these thy Creatures of Bread and
Wine, etc. Now we cannot receive the Creatures of Bread and Wine, if after the
words of Consecration pronounced by the Priest, they do not continue to be
such, as well as they were before; and therefore this is a plain Declaration of
the Consecrating Priest, that the said Elements do still remain to be what they
were, before the Office of Consecration began, in Opposition to the Popish
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as any thing can be imagined. So that, I think,
it is plain from all this, not only that Spiritual Persons as such, are not
mentioned in this Act, but that they were under such very strict Antecedent
Obligations before it, that it was impossible for them to give any further
Satisfaction, than by Law they were already obliged to do: and that only Civil
or Military Officers, and those receiving Wages, Fee or Salary from the King,
or by Authority derived from him, were intended, appears to me very plain by a
Proviso, which is the last Clause of this Act, wherein it is provided, with all
the particularity and Caution that can be imagined, that this Act or any thing
therein contained, shall not extend to the Office of any High Constable,
Petty-Constable, Tithing-man, Head borough, Over-seer of the Poor,
Churchwarden, Surveyor of the Highways, or any like inferior civil Office,
(inferior, because not receiving Wages or Salary from the Public and excepted
out of this Act likewise for another Reason, because the Government of Parishes
being every where in Protestant hands; there was little or no danger of any
Papists creeping into any of the aforementioned Places of inferior Trust or
to any Office of Forrester, or Keeper of any Park, Chase, Warren or Game, or of
Bailiff of any Manor or Lands, or to any like private Offices, which are here
called private, because not receiving Wages or Salary from the King; not but
that the Clergy have taken and do still generally take this Test, as well as
other Men; but this I conceive to be a Protestant Work of Supererrogation,
unless it be done for Example to the People, which I confess to be a Reason of
Prudence, though it be none of Obligation.

Secondly, The second Observation I shall make, shall be, that the Lemma or
Title of this Act, being; An Act for preventing Dangers that may happen from
Popish Recusants; and the declared Intention of it in the Preface of the Act,
being, For the quieting the Minds of his Majesty's good Subjects: It is
certain, that it ought to be interpreted in particular Cases, in all the
reasonable latitude that can be imagined; the Act it self being made out of
extreme caution, after many other antecedent Provisions, that had been made
against Popery in former times, and it being impossible, as all good
Protestants will very readily grant, to be too sollicitous and careful, for
preventing the dangers that may happen from Popish Recusants, or as all good
Patriots and good Men will say, to take too great Care for preserving of the
Peace, (which by Fears and Jealousies is in danger of being disturbed) and for
the quieting the Minds of his Majesty's good Subjects.

And how very careful the makers of this Act were, for the avoiding the dangers
that were intended to be prevented and obviated by it, besides the general
Scope, and declared Intention of the same, and besides that this is but one Act
amongst, and after many that were then in force, to root out the Fears and
Dangers of Popery from amongst us, and to quash all attempts of introducing it
any more, will further appear by these three Clauses to be met with in it.

The first is, p. 145, 146. a Clause concerning a married Woman, or Person
under the Age of eighteen years or beyond or upon the Seas or found by the
lawful Oaths of twelve Men to be non compos mentis, and it is provided with
particularities needless to my purpose to be here recited, that no such Person
shall by virtue of this Act lose or forfeit any such his or her Office, (other
than such married Woman during the Life of her Husband only) for any neglect or
refusal of taking the Oaths, and doing the other things required by this Act to
be done by Persons having Offices, etc. where (to omit Minors and Persons that
are not of a sound Mind, who may have civil Offices by inheritance; or by
virtue of some grant before the time of their falling into Distraction) when
even Women are here mentioned, and are obliged to take the Oaths, and do other
things required, as appears immediately after, within four Months after the
death of the Husband; this shows that civil Offices in the true intent and
meaning of this Act, must needs be taken in a very large and comprehensive
Sense, and that any Employment is a civil Office, if it be neither Military nor
Ecclesiastical, which receives Salary and Wages from the King.

Secondly, p. 146, 147. of the said Act there is another Proviso, that nothing
in that Act contained shall extend to make any forfeiture, disability, or
incapacity, in, by, or upon any Non-commission Officer of Officers, in his
Majesty's Navy, if such Officer or Officers shall only subscribe the
Declaration therein required, in manner as the same is directed.

Now by this Clause, it appears, that the Master and his Mate in a King's Ship,
who, I have been informed, are not Commission Officers, and who are indeed in
no other quality on board of a Man of War, than the same Persons with the same
Titles, would have been on board of a Merchant, are to take this Test, as to
the substance and fundamental point thereof, which is the renouncing the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, by a written Declaration or Subscription under
their respective Hands; and all this though they have no immediate Commission
from the King, and are not so much as Military Officers, only because they
receive a certain Salary or Wages from him; so that this is another very plain
indication in how great latitude the term of civil Office is in this Act of
Parliament to be understood, as in the King's Household every respective
Domestic, though of never so inferior quality, and though in any other Family,
being in the same Employments, they would be under no Obligation to take this
Test by virtue of this Act, yet being of his Majesty's own proper Family,
(though a Porter, a Cook, a Butler, a Launderer, etc. be Officers rather to be
called Oeconomical than Civil) merely by virtue of their receiving Salary and
Wages from the King, and being in an Employment of what nature soever under
him, they shall be obliged to take the Oaths, and make the Declaration in
manner and form, as by that Act is prescribed.

The third thing I intended, to prove the great extent and latitude in which
this Act is to be understood, is what has been said already of
High-Constables, Tithing men, and other Officers of Parishes, or Hundreds, who
are excepted out of it; first because there is no great danger of such being
Popish Recusants, they being generally so well known to their Neighbors before
their entrance into their respective Charges and Employments, and secondly,
because they do not act immediately by the King's Commission, neither, thirdly
and lastly, do they receive any Fee, Salary or Wages from him; but then
exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis, in those Places or Offices, that are
not here excepted, in those Offices where there may be danger from Popish
Recusants, acting by the King's Commission, or by Authority derived from him or
his Predecessors, and receiving the King's Pay, or which is all one a Salary,
Fee or Wages out of the Public Revenue; the Obligation of this Act is still so
much the stronger, and is supposed to extend the more indispensably to them;
and though in this Clause the Office of Forrester, or Keeper of any Park,
Chase, Warren, etc. be likewise excepted, yet this I conceive is to be
understood only of the Parks, etc. of the Nobility and Gentry, and that the
Lord-warden of the Forests, or the Ranger of any of the King's Parks,
receiving Wages or Perquisites from under the King, by virtue of their Places,
shall not be exempted by virtue of this Clause, or any thing therein contained.

My Lord, I humbly beg your Pardon, that I am thus tedious and importunate to
your Lordship, but I must not be wanting to my necessary defense, and must
rather choose, (though it be an hard necessity, and such a dilemma as I could be
very glad to have been freed from both its Parts,) to be rude and troublesome
to your Lordships Leisure, which has so many things of greater Consequence to
employ it self about, than fail in the first and most essential Duty belonging
to humane Life, which is called self-preservation, so far and no farther, as
that end may be compassed by Means that are good and lawful.

Therefore as a third general Head of Observation, arising from the Act of
Parliament abovementioned, your Lordship may be pleased to take Notice, not
only that to avoid any too nice Dispute about what are Military, Civil, or
Oeconomical Employments, any Service or Employment of His Majesty, receiving
Salary and Wages from him (For that is always to be understood) is liable and
obnoxious to the Obligation and Penalty of this Law, p. 136. but that it is
sufficient as is declared in the Words immediately foregoing, if it be an
Employment holding from any of his Majesty's Predecessors, or by his or their
Authority, or by Authority derived from him or them, within the Realm of
England, etc. and so having made these general Observations, with your
Lordships good Leave, I shall apply these Preliminaries to Mr. Hughes's Case,
and see how far he is concerned in this Parliamentary Act, and in the Penalties
and Forfeitures accruing by it, and redounding from it, in Case of Disobedience
to what it enjoins.

First then, Mr. Hughes's Office is manifestly an Office receivving Wages or
Salary, by Virtue of a Grant or Patent from his Majesty's Royal Predecessor
King Edward VI.

Secondly, admitting that it was an Employment purely Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, yet Mr. Hughes at his admission into it, and for some years
after, was no spiritual Person in any legal Construction, so that receiving
Wages from the King, for the discharge of an Office which could not be
spiritual, unless the Person discharging it had been so, he was obliged to give
that Security, which this Act requires, that he was no popish Recusant, and for
default of so doing he was legally ejected, and was, and is still obnoxious to
all the Penalties and Forfeitures of the said Act.

His being at the same time a nonconforming Minister, bound the Obligation of
taking this Paliamentary Test, still the more indispensably upon him, for they
are many times (without disparagement to any honest Man of any dissenting
Persuasion) Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, the very first beginnings of Separation
and Division from the Church of England, were from the Church of Rome, as your
Lordship may be satisfied, by the Perusal of a little but very useful Book,
entitled Foxes and Firebrands, wherein this is made out by undeniable Matters
of Fact, that will not bear any Shadow of Dispute.

The Congregation de propaganda fide at Rome, have determined this to be the
most effectual Way to restore the pretended Catholic Religion, to sow
Divisions and Animosities among those that have separated from it, and have
forsaken that Superstitious and Idolatrous Communion, and the late Project of
an universal Toleration endeavored first by Coleman, as appears by his Letters
that were produced at his Trial, and owned by himself, and since published, and
afterward put in practice by others of the same Party, for the same reasons,
is a sensible demonstration, of which we are all Witnesses, that in the
Judgment of the Papists themselves, the Protestant Religion in general is
highly endangered, by the disagreements of Protestants among themselves, and
that not only by those Feuds and Animosities, which do but too naturally arise
from a religious dissent, through the heat and zeal of the contending Parties,
but also by the secret practices of Seminaries and Popish Priests, who appear
in all shapes, and have their Incendiaries every where to blow up every coal,
wheresoever they see any thing of combustible Matter that has but never so
faint a possibility of being improved into an actual Flame.

I do not say, neither do I indeed believe it, that Mr. Hughes is a Papist or
so much as Popishly affected, though such Tools as he may drive on Popish
Designs without so much as knowing that they do so. But this I say, my Lord,
that this Act being made expressly, after many other Provisions of a like
nature, for the preventing of dangers that may happen from Popish Recusants,
and for the quieting the Minds of his Majesty's good Subjects, and the only
Reason why Clergy men, or Ecclesiastics, or Spiritual Persons in the legal
sense are not, as such, obliged by this Act to give the security required by
it, in manner and form as is prescribed, being that they were beforehand with
the Act it self, and were all of them under very strong antecedent Obligations,
to give undoubted satisfaction, so far as Oaths and Subscriptions can oblige
Men, of their firm adherence to the Protestant Religion and Interest. It
follows unavoidably, that Mr. Hughes, who received a Salary from the King for
the discharge of a Trust, having never given that security which the Government
required from all that were so trusted, and so paid, and being besides a
suspicious Person, upon account of his dissent, there having been several such
that were Priests and Seminaries of the Church of Rome; I say, it follows
inevitably that he must needs come within the reach of this Act, for the
preventing of dangers that may happen from Popish Recusants, and for the
quieting the minds of his Majesty's Good Subjects, and that for not doing as
that Act required, he has incurred the forfeitures and disabilities arising
from the Breach and Violation of it.

I take it, that all the Officers belonging to this House, receiving Wages or
Salary by virtue of a Grant or Patent from their Majesty's Royal Predecessor,
and by Authority derived from it, were obliged to take this Test, and for not
doing it, all Mr. Hughes his Colleagues, as well as himself, were legally
incapacitated to hold their respective Employments; but this, for the Reasons
that have been mentioned, concerns Mr. Hughes much more than it does any other.
For it is plain the makers of this Act thought there was no security, that
might be relied upon, that a Man was no Popish Recusant, but by doing,
subscribing, and swearing as that Act requires; and how dangerous it must needs
be to put, though but a suspected or a possible Papist into such a Post as his,
where there are continually so many, not only sick, but dying Persons, I leave
your Lordship and all Protestants to determine: and I appeal to all the World,
whether a professed Papist might not every whit as legally have been chosen into
this House in Mr. Hughes his Station, as Mr. Hughes himself in a religious
Post, having the cure of the Souls of this Hospital committed to him, receiving
Wages out of the public Revenue for his Service, and not giving that security
which the Act requires.

Neither does it signify any thing in this case, that we are all hired
Servants, as the printed Ordinances of St. Bartholomew's Hospital do expressly
call us, and that we are all Printed at London, 1652. p. 1.
of us dependent upon pleasure, (notwithstanding as I have said, we may lay
claim to an equitable Right) for just so are most of the Officers of the King's
Household, as also of the Customs and Excise; and yet they shall be and they are
all of them in common practice, obliged to take this Test by virtue of this
Act, merely upon account of their receiving Wages and Salary from the King, let
their Places be never so arbitrary and dependent; and in case of Competition,
for Example, betwixt Mr. Hughes and me, the one to be continued in his
Possession, the other to be restored, I suppose these three things will be
granted, first, that he that was legally elected into his Possession, being of
that Communion, that Order of Men, of which he ought by Law to be, is
preferrable to him that was not, in point of right, though the tenure be only
durante beneplacito, because that beneplacitum can never extend to any thing
repugnant to or inconsistent with the Law.

Secondly, That he that after Election did within the time limited qualify
himself, by doing those things required by this Act, for the peaceable
Enjoyment of his Place, has also another Title which the other wants, so that
he is in two respects preferrable before him, and ought to be considered
without regard to the other, by all that will make the Law the measure and rule
of their Actions.

Thirdly, It is no less plain from the words of the Act it self, that Mr.
Hughes having formerly incurred a disability, though he have possibly since
taken this Parliamentary-Test, yet he cannot be restored to his Place again in
prejudice to any that was substituted in his room, and had an antecedent
Qualification for the Place by virtue of his being actually in Holy Orders,
according to Law, and a Subsequent, by doing within the time limited, as this
Act required; for these are the very express words of the Act it self, and, I
hope, your Lordship and the Court of Aldermen will not think it fit or
reasonable to dispense with an Act of Parliament, an Act of such Consequence as
this is, for the security of the Protestant Religion, at the very time when the
Parliament is sitting, and is considering even of further Securities to obviate
the dangers arising from Popish Recusants.

Provided also that any Person, who by his or her neglect or refusal, according
to this Act, shall lose or forfeit any Office, p. 146.
may be capable by a new Grant of the said Office or of any other, and to have
and hold the same again, such person taking the said Oaths, and doing all other
things required by this Act, so as such Office be not granted unto and actually
enjoyed by some other person, at the time of the re-granting thereof: Therefore
either this Act is not good Law, which I know your Lordship, as well out of
piety and zeal to the Protestant Religion, as for other Reasons will be very
far from allowing, or Mr. Hughes cannot be restored, by any thing less than an
Act of Parliament made in his behalf, in prejudice to me.

The last thing which I shall mention to prove that the Hospitaller's place,
though Mr. Hughes had been in Orders as he was not, comes within the Obligation
of this Act, shall be taken from this Consideration, that the place is of a
mixed nature, and is not wholly Spiritual or Ecclesiastic; I shall lay down the
full and entire Description of it, as I find it in the printed Orders of St.
Bartholomew's Hospital above cited, which are the same with ours, as to the
nature of the respective places, and the Obligations depending on them, and
then leave it to be considered, whether Mr. Hughes in his Oeconomical Capacity,
whatever becomes of his Sacred, receiving Wages from the King, was not equally
obliged to take the Test with a woman in Office, whose Office can hardly be
said to be civil in any other, than a very large and comprehensive sense of
that word, or with an hired Servant of the King's Household, or an Officer of
his Customs or Excise, or a Non-commission Officer of a Ship, receiving Pay
from the King or from those that act by Authority derived from him.

The words of that Book are as follows, p. 17.

The Office of an Hospitaller.

YOur Office is chiefly and most principally to visit the poor in their
Extremes and Sicknesses, and to minister unto them the most wholesome and
necessary Doctrine of Gods comfortable Word, as well by reading and preaching,
as also by ministering the Sacrament of the holy Communion at times convenient.

To receive also into this House, of the Steward, to the use of the same poor,
such Victuals and other Provision as by him shall be provided, entering the same
into your Book, and safely to keep them to their Use.

Also to deliver unto the Cook of this House from time to time, so much of the
same Victuals as shall be needful for the present time, to be dressed for the
poor; and the same being dressed to see seasonably, and truly delivered, and
distributed unto them.

Also whenever any poor Person shall be here presented or sued for, to be
admitted into this House, you shall receive the same Presentation, calling unto
you two of the Surgeons of this House, to view and examine the Disease of the
said Person, whether it be curable; if they Judge it curable then you by a Bill
of your Hand to certify the Name and Surname of the said diseased Person, unto
the Almoners, or two of them at the least, desiring them to subscribe their
Names thereunto, and that being done, you to keep upon a file the same Bill for
your VVarrant. And then ye shall commit the same poor to the Matron of this
House, to be placed accordingly as the Case shall require.

Also at the Admission of every poor Person into this Hospital, ye shall
enquire what Money or other Things of value, he or she has; and the same
together with his or her Name to enter into your Book, and you to receive and
safely keep the same, to the Use of the same poor, to be delivered again unto
him, her, or them, when they shall be cured out of this House. And monthly to
deliver to the said Almoners, a Copy of your Book of Entrances, that they may
register the same in the Book of their ordinary doings. And if such poor
fortune to decease and die in this House, then you to deliver all such Money and
other Things, as shall be in your Custody, to the Treasurer of this House, for
the time being, entering the same into your Book, to be committed and disposed,
to the Use of the poor.

And as often as any of the poor shall be cured and made whole, you with the
Surgeons to present them to the Almoners of this House, at their next
Assembly here, and to register in your Book their Names and Surnames of them,
and every of them, with the Day and Year of their delivery and departure out of
this House. And at their departure to give them a Passport, to be made
according to the Precedent and Form that is expressed in the End of this Book,
etc.

It is true indeed, that all the burden, besides what is Spiritual, is now by
Custom taken off of the Hospitallers shoulders, but yet still the original
Charge deriving from the sacred and indispensible Will of the Founder is the
same; and he is to see, that they that in many of these things are but
Substitutes acting under him, though appointed by the Governors, or by the King
thereto, be not wanting in the discharge of the Trust committed to them; and
this implies likewise, that he should be resident, which Mr. Hughes never was,
and consequently could not see to the Management of the House; it implies
likewise, that he ought not to be allowed to supply this place by a Curate, as
he intends to do, because he cannot transfer the authority committed to him,
neither can the Curate by virtue of any such delegated Power, correct or set
right the abuses, if any such shall happen, of the Steward or other Officers,
who are more or less under his Charge; and indeed if there were nothing, but
the Spiritual concern to be considered, yet it is so great a Trust of that
kind, where there are so many sick, and so many wicked People, that it is easy
to be discerned, that his actual residence at or near the Place, can never be
excused or dispensed with upon any pretense whatsoever, unless it be such as
our Statutes of Christ's College in Cambridge, call gravis aegrotatio, or
violenta detentio, a constraint laid upon him by sickness or by force. It was
the Will of the Founder, that it should be a Civil or Oeconomical Office, as
well as a Spiritual; and therefore it is so still, and he is paid his Wages
upon both of these accounts, notwithstanding the ordinary and immediate care of
some things be by custom and length of time, devolved upon others, that he may
be the more at leisure to attend to his Spiritual Charge.

I have still further to add, as to the business of Pluralities, that the Law
makes a Living of eight pounds a year value in the K. Books; and Mr. Hughes's
is thirteen, to be such a Living, as another cannot be held together with it,
but within the distance, and with the qualifications required, and the Canon
Law, which so far as it is consonant to natural Reason and Justice is of
eternal Obligation, is so strict that even a smaller Living than this cannot
and may not be held together with another, and by this Law since the
Reformation, Goodman, Dean of Wells was deprived of his Deanery, because he had
accepted a Prebend in the same Church Dyer, 273. p. 35. cit. P. C. p. 19.
though neither of these Preferments were with Cure of Souls, and yet at the
same time the Law is so favorable to contiguous Churches, that it has been
adjudged that two Rectories under one roof, are no plurality, because they are
not in pluribus Ec* p. 31. ib. cles^is, in more Churches than one; I have
further to represent, that at the same time that I was put into this Place, my
Father, as your Lordship well knows, was ejected out of another, which tho mean
in it self, was yet of a greater value than the advantage Mr. Hughes can make,
by holding this Hospital and his Living together; so that Mr. Hughes having no
legal injury done him, as I have sufficiently proved, and there being so many
other equitable Considerations, besides legal Pretentions on my side; I hope
your Lordship will add to all this the loss which my Father, your fellow
Citizen sustained, and will suffer that to intercede with you in behalf of his
Son.

And so I humbly beg your Lordship's Pardon, for this long but necessary
trouble, wishing you with all my heart an happy Year, a prosperous Government,
a good old Age, and an eternal Youth in the Kingdom of the blessed, where there
are Joys and Pleasures at the Right hand of God for ever-more; and I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship' s most Humble and most Faithful Servant, John Turner.

To Mr. HUGHES.
SIR,
YOU see I have been at no small pains to assert the Justice of my Cause
against you. It is now your part, if you have any thing to say for your self to
produce it as publicly as I have done, that so the World and the Reason of
Mankind may be the Judge of the Controversy between us. I leave you to
consider what indifferent Persons will say of you, especially in your
Circumstances, who either are or ought to be an Example of Truth and Justice,
if you still persist in snatching and extorting that by Power and Force, whose
just Possession you cannot honestly vindicate or defend, nor show one Reason
either from Law or Conscience, why I should be obliged to make a surrender to
you. I do not despair, but the Reason and Equity of my Cause will be too hard
for the real or pretended Inter^st of yours; and I have here enclosed sent you
the true Copy of a Testimonial, which that learned and good Society, where I
had my Education, were so kind to send me, hoping that their knowledge of that
little merit, which they are pleased to say they discerned in me, might be of
some Service to me in this present juncture, to shield me from the Violence and
Injustice of your Persecution against me. I doubt not, but I may obtain the
same Honor and Obligation from the Professors and Heads of Houses in that
University, if I desire it; in the mean time take this, which I have set down
without the names, because I hope you will believe me, when it is so easy to
convince me of a falsehood, if I have imposed upon you or any body else, and
because these names shall be seen, God willing, together with others, if you
have a mind to come to a Poll of our Brethren of the Clergy, and of the best
and learned among them, whether in common sense and justice, to which we
ought all to submit, the place of Hospitaller of St. Thomas Southwark, be
either yours or mine.

THese are to certify whom it may concern, that we the Master and Fellows of
Christ's College, to whom Mr. John Turner, Master of Arts, and late Fellow of
this our College was very well known; do hereby certify, that the said Mr.
Turner had justly that Reputation among us, of a Person of great Learning,
Integrity and peaceableness of Temper, whilst Fellow with us, that we could
have heartily recommended him, as very capable and deserving of Preferment in
the Church. Christ College, May 7th 1680.

And now if after all this I must be run down by number and by force, which I
can by no means induce my self to believe I shall, yet it is my comfort that I
have not yielded, and it is my firm Resolution, that I never will, whatever
becomes of me or of my Fortunes in the World, the loss of which I value much
less, than I do the common Interest and welfare of Mankind, which cannot be
supported otherwise than by every honest Man's standing up in the defense of
Justice, in their respective Stations, as far as it is proper for them, and as
far as without Sedition and Turbulence they may. It was old Caeneus' s Case, an
Hero of whom the Grecian Bards make Honorable mention, to be driven into the
Earth, by the dry strength of blows, as a Pile to support the weight that was
upon it, when he could not be conquered and knew not how to yield.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I leave it to you to construe if you can, and I am, Sir, your humble Servant,
expecting your Answer,

John Turner.

EA demum Victoria est, quando victi vincentibus accedunt, adducti rationibus,
puersuasi argumentis, non telis obruti, non vi compulsi, non dura Fortunae
ingruentis necessitate coacti: Vincit qui patitur, quando causa triumphat.

S. P. Q. L. and universo nomini Anglorum, sub duplici auspicio paris
Augustissimi, quos Amor and Imperium feliciter conjungunt, salutem, pacem,
concordiam, charitatem; quaque domi, qua foris prosperos eventus optat Johannes
Turner, indigena Londinensis and Nosocomii Regalis quod est ad D. Thomae, in
suburbano Municipio trans Thamesin ad Austrum sito, Regio Prerogativae and
Patronatus Jure, Hospitalarius.

FINIS.

