THE SPEECH OF Sr. EDWARD TURNER Knight. Speaker of the honorable House of
Commons, to the KING'S most excellent Majesty, delivered on Friday the
twentieth day of December, 1661.

regnal crown LONDON, Printed for JOHN WILLIAMS at the sign of the Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

May it please your most excellent Majesty,
THe last time the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of
Parliament had the honor to wait upon you in this place, your Majesty was
graciously pleased to congratulate with them for the glorious meeting of the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons of England, in this your full, free,
and legal Parliament.

Great Sir, it is our present comfort, and will be our future glory, that God
has made us instrumental for the repairs of those breaches, which the worst of
times had made upon the best of Governments. The late great Eclipse in our
Horizon, occasioned by the interposition of the earth, is now vanished; the
stars in our Firmament are now full of light; the light of our Moon is become
like the light of the Sun; and the light of our Sun is sevenfold.

A man that sees the River of Thames at a high water, and observes how much it
sinks in a few hours, would think it running quite away, but by the secret
providence of God, we see that when the ebb is at the lowest, the tide of a
rising water is nearest the return.

Your Majesty was likewise graciously pleased to speak something to us on Your
own behalf; and did vouchsafe to say you would ask something for your self;
withal, declaring some uneasinesse in your condition, by reason of some crying
debts which daily called for satisfaction.

Great Sir, I am not able to express, at the hearing of those words, with what
a Sympathy the whole body of the Parliament was presently affected; The
circulation of the blood, of which our late naturalists do tell us, was never
so sensibly demonstrated, as by this experiment; before your Majesty's words
were all fallen from your lips, you might have seen us blush; all our blood
came into our faces, from thence it hasted down without obstruction to every
part of the body, and after a due consulting of the several parts, it was found
necessary to breathe a vein.

We cannot forget how much our Treasure has been exhausted, but we remember
also, 'twas by Usurping and Tyrannical powers; and therefore we are easily
persuaded to be at some more expense to keep them out.

The Merchant tells us, it is good policy in a troubled Sea to lose some part of
our Cargoe, thereby to save the rest.

With Your Majesty's leave, we have been bold to look into the present state of
affairs, and find those great sums that have been heretofore advanced upon us,
were raised most of them in bad Times, and for ill purposes, to keep Your
Majesty out of this Your Native Kingdom: And when Your Majesty returned home
from Your long banishment, you found the Naval Storehouse unfurnished, which
will not easily be supplied: The unsettled humors, and unquiet Spirits that are
yet amongst us, do necessitate a Costly Guard for your Royal Person: The
honorable Accessions of Dunkirk, Tangier and Jamaica do at present require a
great supply; but we have reason to believe, in time to come, will repay this
Nation their Principal with good Interest.

Your Majesty has sent a Royal Fleet upon an happy Errand, to bring your Royal
Consort hither; and is there any English man will stick to pay the wages of
those Mariners, whose ships do bring so good a Freight?

Upon all these Considerations your Loyal COMMONS were in pain until, like
prudent and good Husbands, they had redeemed the Nation from all its public
Debts. And that your Majesty may at once have a full measure of their Duty and
Affection to your self: And that your Neighbors abroad, as well as the
discontented Commonwealths-men, with all their complicated Interests here at
home, may see the happy correspondence that is between our Head and all the
Members of this Body Politic: We have cheerfully and unanimously given your
Majesty 1260000 l. which Sum we desire may be levied in 18 months, by six
quarterly Payments, after the rate of 70000 l. per mensem, to begin the five
and twentieth of this present December. In order whereunto we humbly pray your
Majesty's Royal Assent unto this Bill.

I Do appoint JOHN WILLIAMS to Print my SPEECH, and that none else presume to
Print it without my Order.

ED. TVRNER.

FINIS.

