A THIRD REPRESENTATION OF THE CASE OF THE HOSPITALER OF St THOMAS: WHEREIN The
Point of Law is Argued and Discussed; Humbly Addressed To the Right Worshipful
the PRESIDENT, and the Court of the GOVERNORS, at their next General Meeting.

-- Necdum finitus Orestes. Printed in the YEAR 1689.

CLEANTHES apud Epictetum in Enchiridio.
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
Idem ex Versione Senecae, Epist. 107. Duc me parens celsique dominator poli,
Quocunque placuit, nulla parendi mora est.
Assum impiger, fac nolle, comitabor gemens,
Malusque patiar, quod pati licuit bono.
A THIRD REPRESENTATION OF THE CASE OF THE Hospitaler of St. THOMAS, etc.
THE true decision of the Controversy depending betwixt Mr. Hughes and Mr.
Turner, is very plain and easy to any man that will consider it upon right
Principles.

For all the question is, Whether the Kings and Queens of England for the time
being, are the Supreme Visitors and Disposers of this House and its Affairs and
Officers or no; for upon supposition that they are, what the King does by his
Commissioners acting by his Authority, and not exceeding the Powers committed
to them, he does by himself, and if there be no appeal from the King, if he be
invested with a legal Power, to visit this House whenever there is occasion, or
whenever he thinks or judges that there is, without appeal, (which cannot be
admitted without supposing a superior Judge) then there can be no appeal from
the Commissioners neither, tho they should exceed the Powers committed to them,
but only to the King, because they are immediately constituted and authorized by
him, who is the supreme, and therefore cannot be subject to any inferior
Jurisdiction or Authority whatsoever.

That the King has actually such a legal Power of visiting and inspecting the
management of this House, appears first by its being a Royal Foundation,
endowed and constituted by Edward the Sixth.

And secondly by the express reserve in the Charter or Instrument by which this
Royal Charity was consigned and conveyed, in which there is an appeal reserved,
and a power of Visitation granted to the Kings and Queens of England for ever.

Thirdly, the same thing appears from the nature of the Charity, which was for
the relief of their Majesty's poor Subjects, and more especially of those who
are sick or wounded in their particular service, and in the defense and
maintenance of their Country, and the deceasing King, or otherwise resigning or
relinquishing his Government, does with his Crown and Scepter, with his
Imperial Diadem, his Prerogatives and Territories, his Throne of Majesty, and
his Royal Robes, transmit the Cares that were lately incumbent upon himself: So
that every new Royal Hospital that is founded for the good in general of the
infirm and sick, and more particularly of those that are so in their Majesty's
and their Countries service, becomes a new part of the Regal Administration and
his Dominion, the most easy and natural, the most charming and delightful part
of it, is in some sense enlarged by every such new Foundation. But there is
nothing certainly more contrary to Sense, or more abhorrent from Nature, than
to suppose a King sitting with his hands tied under his irksome Canopy of
State, and looking like an unconcerned, or which is still worse, an impotent
Spectator, while the Charity of his Royal Predecessors is either abused to ill
purposes, or managed by Persons that are unfit for their charge, or undeserving
of the same: And if this be so absurd, so monstrous, so very irrational and
strange a thing, then is it that sort of demonstration which the Schools call
per absurdum, it is an impossibility in Politiques, whatever it be in Nature, a
thing that can never be supposed on the one hand, or granted on the other, that
the present King or Queen should not always be entrusted with a power of
Visitation in case of such abuses, or in case they are of opinion that any such
are committed, in all the respective Charities and Endowments of their Royal
and glorious Predecessors, the fragrant and sweet Odor of whose happy Memory,
ought not to be choked or stifled, or corrupted, by the imbezeling or abusing
of their Princely goodness, through any legal impotence or disability in those
that succeed to their Imperial Fortune, either to prevent or remedy so great a
Mischief.

That the King should found an Hospital, and take no immediate care of it when
he has done, especially when Abuses creep into the Constitution, and begin to
make Flaws and Cracks in the building he has erected, is a Piety plainly
inconsistent with it self, and it would be still more strange, that he that had
been at the charge, care, and contrivance of the Foundation, that had endowed
it, ordered it, settled and established it upon a Rule and Platform not to be
transgressed, not to be changed or altered in any wise or manner whatsoever;
and that had taken care, during his own Life or Reign, that all those Measures
should be exactly observed, that were for the good and reputation, and promoted
the design of this his Christian Munificence and Bounty, should after his
decease put it out of the power of his Successors for ever to enquire any
longer into the management of the trust, let it be never so much neglected or
abused; because this would imply a negligence so much greater in him, and so
much more inconsistent with his own declared design in erecting and contriving
an establishment of this nature, as all after Ages are in proportion bigger and
longer than the present, to the last end of the World. A tacit consent in this
Case would be sufficient, nay, an express prohibition would be of no avail,
because there is a plain trust lodged in the nature of the thing, and the
supreme Power is bound by virtue of its public intention for the common good,
to see that all public Trusts be not abused, and when they are abused, that is
the Judge, because otherwise it cannot exercise it self; only if the Prince in
a mixed Monarchy, and in the intervals of Parliament, does any thing by himself
or his Commissioners, to the injury of his Subjects, there lies a natural
Appeal to that Assembly, or to that part of it which is the supreme Judicature,
and the last resort for the obtaining of right; and if Mr. Hughes pleases to
carry his Business thither, Mr. Turner will not fail to tread upon his Heels,
and follow him thither in a succeeding Track, tho for treading in his steps he
desires to be excused. A Royal Endowment does naturally imply a Royal and
equally Majestic Visitation.

But besides what it is in Argument, it is true in Fact, that the Kings and
Queens of England for the time being have visited and inspected the Affairs and
Officers of this House, as often as there was occasion. As for the two last
Reigns, I know it will be urged, that the Regulations that were made depended
upon the avoidance of the Charter, and that the one was illegal as well as the
other, the former being only in consequence of the latter: But what then will
these Objectors say to the present? Have their present Majesty's no power,
notwithstanding the restitution of the City Charter, to dispose of the Revenues
of the Hospital as they please, supposing they be still laid out upon
charitable uses, for the relief and succor of the sick and wounded? What then
is the meaning of their Majesty's late gracious and encouraging Declaration,
for the reserving one Moiety of their Hospitals during this present War, for
the use of such as shall fall sick or be wounded in the service? Why did the
Privy Council order this Declaration to be printed? Were the King and they too
both out in their Law? Could not He or they that have ordained one Moiety to be
reserved for those that suffer in their service, appropriate the whole, if
occasion should require? How can they dispose of one half without a prudential
or occasional Propriety? And how came they to have a Propriety to one half more
than to the other? If they have no Propriety in such a House as this, they can
no more send Seamen or Soldiers to this Hospital for cure, than they can
quarter them in private Houses, and that without any satisfaction to the
Masters of them, as well as without their consent, or than they can raise a Tax
without the consent of their People, notwithstanding an Act of Parliament in
the one case, and the perpetual practice of the common Law for time immemorial
in the other? But if they have a Propriety, a legal Right, a successive
Jurisdiction from their Royal Predecessors, who shall hinder them from doing
what they please with their own? or disposing of their Domestiques in their own
House, just as they please themselves? Is it not ridiculous to say they may
dispose of the main body of the Revenue, which is perpetually spent upon the
sick and poor, but not of the Officers belonging to them, and of that part of
the Revenue which belongs to their service? That they may dispose of Masters,
but not of their Servants; for we are indeed no other than Servants to the
Poor, tho we may call our selves or take upon our selves like Masters, we are
in the nature of Instruments that are for the sake of others, and not for
themselves; and if they for whose sakes we are what we are, are at the Kings
disposal, then certainly we are much more; for Instruments are valued by their
fitness to their end, and they that are entrusted with the end it self, are
much more supposed to be judges of all those means by which that end may most
effectually be accomplished. Shall he that owns an Estate, not choose his
Steward? Shall he that keeps an House, be denied the choice of his own Chaplain
duly qualified according to the Laws of his Country, notwithstanding he may if
he pleases, and for as long as he so pleases, entrust the exercise and
administration of this Power in some subordinate hand? If these things be true,
as certainly they are, let Mr. Turner's Adversaries show, if they can, by any
thing that looks like sense, that they do not extend to his Case, and he will
immediately surrender up all his pretensions, or else, dentibus vipereis limam
rodunt, they gnaw a File that will be too hard for their teeth, and had better
hold their peace, than bark at the Moon to no purpose, for the Moon will still
shine and go on in its course, when they have tired their Lungs with barking at
it. But what do I speak of Moons, when the Sun himself is up, when the light of
truth is in its Zenith, riding in a Chariot of meridian Flames, and all must
own its brightness, but they that shut their eyes, and cannot encounter the
piercing of its beams without being dazzled and blinded, who call light
darkness, and mis-call darkness light, and have no sense of the difference and
distinction betwixt the one and the other.

Mr. Turner, tho his own Property be concerned in this Affair, yet against so
great opposition as he has met with, he had not appeared so obstinate in the
defense of it, but that the Parish of S. Thomas it self, being in the same
Gift, and enjoyed by him upon no there Title than the Hospital, he knew not how
far such Orders might extend, and he saw but too plainly that with equal reason
they migh eject him out of all, so that it was proximus Vcalegon all over, and
the Rector of S. Thomas could not stand by like a party unconcerned, when the
Hospitaler was in so much danger.

He hopes after all the Clamors that have been raised against him for his
Contempt and Disobedience to the Court of Aldermen, to whom he has not been
wanting to pay all due and reasonable respect, that he shall be easily excused
from any such imputation, by all indifferent Persons who shall consider, that
the Court of Aldermen is no Court of Judicature, and that this is a matter of
Right, in which case there would have lain an Appeal, without any thing of
Contempt, or any suspicion of it, in all inferior Courts of Judicature
themselves; where is the Contempt, when he stands only by the Kings
Prerogative? and when their Majesty's and the Privy Council are so plainly on
his side, when without reflecting on his particular Case, unworthy so great a
cognizance as that is; they have made the one a positive Declaration, and both
of them together an express Order that involves it.

He is humbly of opinion, that his Possession being legal in its root, and not
to be disturbed by any Power inferior or subordinate to that which gave it,
without an express Leave or Appointment of the Supreme; and having ensured his
fidelity to their present Majesty's, by taking the Oaths required by the late
Act of Parliament made in that behalf, that he has the assurance of their
Majesty's gracious protection, who have promised to maintain the Church of
England, and every individual Member of it in all their legal Possessions, and
that he has further the confirmation of the Parliament it self, who by
appointing and prescribing a Condition upon which all legal Ecclesiastical
Possessions shall be securely enjoyed, and not otherwise, are supposed upon the
performance of the Condition prescribed, to confirm the Possession to the
present legal Incumbent, and such is he till he be legally ejected, or till any
body be so hardy to undertake to prove the contrary, and so successful to do
it. And I do hereby challenge all the Council that the Chamber of London can
retain, to prove that Mr. Hughes has any shadow of a Title, or that Mr.
Turner's Possession is not strictly legal.

The Place is immediately in their Majesty's disposal; and besides that, Mr.
Hughes by being appointed by an inferior Power, is not sufficiently authorized
for what he pretends to; besides that, he is for ever incapacitated and
disabled, by not taking the Test, as he should have done. Mr. Turner humbly
hopes that he is every whit as able and fit to serve the King and Queen in this
or any other Station as his Competitor Mr. Hughes, though he were another sort
of Man in many respects than really he is.

As to Mr. Hughes his particular merit to the Royal Family, it is too well
known to need many words to express it; and because Mr. Turner is accused by
some that want something to find fault with, of Disingenuity and Malice, in
representing Truth, tho he was forced to it in his own defense, to let the
World see that the Man and his Title were both of them alike, both equally
rotten and vicious at the bottom, and that it was at least a mistaken and a
sinful Charity to support him any longer, either in respect to his Person or
his Cause; yet as to what rela^^^ to his Sermon preached at Abingdon, if it be
thought too invidious to reflect upon it, he desires it may be considered by
such Censurers as these, that nothing was more essential to his Argument than
that was, nor any thing that could less be spared or omitted, by a Man that
would defend himself as he ought to do against him; for notwithstanding the
Regulation that had been made in this House, in the Reign of K. Charles II. yet
upon the Solicitations that were made in behalf of Mr. Hughes, it is well known
to all that are not unacquainted with the History of that Affair, that he had
certainly been restored again, had it not been that this very Sermon was put
into the hands of one of the then Principal Secretaries of State, and by him a
Representation made of it to the King himself; after which His Majesty and
those that were then in power, were deaf to all Entreaties and Solicitations in
his behalf; so that this being the very reason of his ejection from his Place,
the very and the only motive that turned the Scale against him, when all other
Considerations were either forgotten, or forgiven, or neglected: I offer it to
any Man of common sense to consider, whether a greater Affront could possibly
be offered to the memory of that excellent Person and beloved Prince, whose
Death was so universally lamented, that no Age, no History can afford a
parallel of so epidemical, so sympathetique, so strange and wonderful a Grief,
a Grief that smote every breast with horror and surprise, that made all Faces
pale, all Knees to shake, that tapped, like Moses, even the Rocks themselves,
and made the most hard and unrelenting weep, than to rescind his legal Act, or
at least to pretend to do it, by one that neither is nor can be so, and an Act
that was done not only by him that had full power and authority for what he
did, but also upon so just, so great, so personal and so sacred a resentment?
Have we forgot those Tears, and the respect that is due to the Ashes of a
Prince whose life was so inestimably precious in our sight? Or do we disallow
the reason upon which he went in this particular Action? Do we condemn the
Piety and the Duty that forced his gentle nature to a very gentle, but yet
unwilling severity upon so great an Offender, whom tho he had forgiven by an
Act of Grace, yet without some testimonies of Repentance, some retaliation of
Service for the Fault he had committed, he thought it a sin to encourage and
reward, or to let him eat, like Mephibosheth, at the Kings Table, and be fed
with the Bread of those Princes whom he had, like Shimei, cursed, and like some
proud and haughty Philistin, had defied? In a word, do we pretend to justify
those Principles which he once espoused, those Practices which he publicly
defended? How can we else go about to restore him to a Service which he lost to
his advantage, and out of which he was ejected for no reason but this, the
greatest and the worst of provocations, by him that could have done it legally
and unaccountably for no reason at all? Or is it not rather certain, that those
worthy Gentlemen, whose charity and good nature has inclined them to restore
him, were unacquainted with the true State and History of his ejectment, which
was done out of a principle of natural affection to a Prince and Father, and
for a Cause in which all the Royal Family are equally concerned? However, Mr.
Turner is certainly excusable for urging this against him, because he is the
Person struck at by Mr. Hughes, and all Weapons are lawful to him that is
unjustly assaulted; and he is still the more excusable, because he had no hand,
nor so much as the tip of either of his little fingers in the management of
that fatal Accusation against him; nay, he really knew nothing either of him or
his Sermon, and now he would have spared him the repetition of that Crime, as
he would have done formerly of several others, if an hard necessity had not
forced him to do things contrary to his nature; and if sparing of him, who
seeks his ruin so contrary to all sense and justice, had not been injustice and
cruelty to himself: But yet he does not urge this as matter of Law, the Law
will defend him upon another bottom, because he was put into this station by
one King and confirmed by another, whose Power was paramount to that which Mr.
Hughes has recourse to, and who had a legally arbitrary and unaccountable
disposal vested in themselves, of the Affairs and Officers of this House; and
if neither they nor the Law, which is nothing else but common right and
justice, are able to defend him, then his Case is worse than that of the Rulers
of Jezreel with respect to Jehu; for how shall he be able to defend himself
against a Power which neither two Kings nor the Law it self have been able to
withstand?

To conclude, whatever becomes of the Place for the future, the Arrears for the
time past and so much longer, as till he be ejected by a competent Authority,
are unquestionably his, and it is plain injustice, to give it the mildest term,
to keep them from him; and Mr. Hughes, who neither can nor dare put Pen to
Paper to assert his Title, is neither more nor less than a Robber for receiving
them: Mr. Turner therefore begs and entreats of the Court of Governors at
their next general meeting, that they would consider and redress the injustice
that is done him, without putting him to the trouble and formality of bringing
an Action against a litigious Fellow, or those that have paid him what they
cannot answer.

Mr. Turner is willing to submit his whole Cause to be argued by Council on
both sides before the Court of Aldermen, or before the Governors at their next
general meeting, or to refer it to my Lords the Bishops as many of them as are
now in Town, or to any five of them whom Mr. Hughes shall choose, or to the
House of Commons, who are the Guardians of the Liberties of the People, or to
the House of Lords, who are the supreme Judicature of the Nation; and he would
add also to the King and Queen themselves, but that they are indeed Parties,
their Royal Prerogative being interested in it; or to the Privy Council, but
that they have already determined in his favor; and in one word, he submits it
to all Mankind, and to his Enemies themselves, if they will speak their
Consciences, as they will answer it at the day of Judgment, always provided,
that they expect and believe there is such a day a coming, whether Mr. Hughes
or he be in the right, or which has the juster and the plainer Title of the
two to the Place of Hospitaler of S. Thomas Southwark, or whether a more
baffled and shamefully defeated Cause than Mr. Hughes's is, were ever known or
heard of in any Story.

FINIS.

