A Phisico-Theological DISCOURSE UPON THE Divine Being, or first Cause of all
Things. Providence of God, General and Particular. Separate Existence of the
Humane Soul. Certainty of Revealed Religion. Fallacy of Modern Inspiration. And
Danger of Enthusiasm.
To which is added An APPENDIX Concerning the Corruption of Humane Nature, the
Force of Habits, and the Necessity of Supernatural Aid to the Acquest of
Eternal Happiness. WITH EPISTOLARY CONFERENCES between the Deceased Dr. Anthony
Horneck and the Author, relating to these Subjects. In several LETTERS from a
Gentleman to his Doubting Friend.

London: Printed by F. C. for TIMOTHY CHILD at the White Heart at the West End
of St. Paul's Churchyard. School.

To the Reader of the following LETTERS.
THat which principally engaged the Author in a Discourse of this Nature, is
taken notice of in the first of the ensuing Letters; and to excuse its
Publication is beyond his Intention, unless by intimating that neither Secular
Advantage nor the vain hopes to become Popular, by such an Enterprise, had any
share in it: If the World will not give him credit for the first, they must
allow the last, since his desire to be concealed will plead the same in his
behalf; but indeed he stands so much indebted to other Men for the confirmation
of his own Opinions, that he freely owns himself in justice to be entitled to
no more than the least valuable part thereof.

There may seem, it is true, the less occasion for printing any thing of this
kind, since there have been already so many excellent and learned Treatises
delivered to the World: but whoever considers the Genius of the times, the
Profanity and Libertinism of the present Age, together with the prevaling
Contagion of our Modern Deisus, that lately revived shelter for Atheistic
Principles, will be more easily persuaded that all that can be said for the
proof of these important Truths is not to be judged needless, and that there
has not been so much said, or the Subjects so fully handled, as to exclude the
use of any thing hereafter to be added.

The methods of Men's writing must be acknowledged to be exceeding different,
and it is no more than necessary they should be so, there being so great a
difference in the tempers and dispositions of their Readers, who reject at one
time the same Truth they embrace at another, when more suitably adopted to the
mode of their Understandings. But beyond all others, the Pulpit Discourse, how
prudently or sincerely soever managed, labors with disadvantage, in that by
many People it is looked on but as a useless Cant, and the very name Priestcraft
has made so great a noise in the World, that it is sufficient a Discourse be
hist at by the unthinking Multitude, or the conceited Debauchee, if the same
happened to be delivered in the manner of a formal Sermon.

There has been of late abundance of pains taken to stagger Men in their Faith,
to shake the very foundation of all true Piety, and to render Religion no more
than a mere Scarecrow, set up by a sort of Men, viz. the Clergy, that they may
frighten us into a slavish Vassalage, or condescens^on to their own sinister
Designs. Some late Pamphlets of the Socinians have had a visible tendency this
way, but much more the Writings of those insolent and barefaced Oppugners of
Christianity, whose Designs (at least many of them) we have reason to believe
no other than ^sten^tation of their Authors Parts: and in judging thus, we are
as charitable as they themselves can expect we should: for though the Emissaries
of the Powers of Darkness must have made use of such like Tools, for the
undermining true Religion, and expelling all undissembled Piety out of the
World, yet it is possible the Intentions of these high Pretenders to Reason were
not altogether so villainous, whatever Consequences may attend their Writings.

Whoever informs himself in their Characters, will think the Cause of Religion
to be the l^ss concerned; neither will their Arguments, however weighty at the
first view, be ever able to persuade the Man who is bottomed upon sound
Principles: they may tickle the Sense of the Libertine, buoy him up in his
practice of Impiety or Irreligion, and sooth his tormented Conscience with this
deceitful Remedy when he comes to dye: that seeing there is no farther time
alottted for his continuance here, and that he can sin no longer, if he express
his sorrow for what is past, he is out of danger from any thing to come See the
Account of the De^^^ Religion in O^^cles of Reason.
, for God is merciful, he makes no Man to damn him; and though the Offense be
committed against an infinite Being, yet the Creature who commits it being but
finite, Repentance is all that can be required by way of Atonement, for
infinite Justice cannot be extended on a finite Creature infinitely, with out a
contradiction to infinite Mercy: besides, if this wont do, God Almighty being
Omnipotent, cannot be resisted, and irresistible Power is always safe, since he
need punish no Man for his own Security, and it is beneath him to let us suffer
by way of Revenge.

I shall not think my self obliged to take any particular Survey of the
Writings of these Men, nor to examine the Stories of their Authors Lives; some
of which are so well known to the World, that they cannot injure any
considerate Man, with their hetorodox Opinions. I need not instance in Mr. H --
s (one of their Epistolary Correspondents) a Man however admired and celebrated
for his Writings, yet died in a despondency, and had his Religion to choose
even at the hour of his death. As for the right honorable my Lord -- I think
they had much better have left him out of their Oracles, since however fondly
he had former^y embraced both Them and their Opinions, it made a great part of
his Contrition before he finished his Life, that he had ever countenanced such
extravagant Thoughts, or showed himself a Favorite to such wretched Associates.

Whoever considers the manner of Mr B -- t's Life, and the circumstances
attending his Death, may pity him as an unhappy Gentleman, but will find it a
hard matter to persuade himself that he was more than a mere Sceptick, or in
good earnest in any thing but his fatal Passion. His Father Sir Henry's
Discourse de Anima, where he begins, Spiritus in nobis non manet in Identitate:
sed recens ingeritur per renovationem continuam, sicut Flamma, sed velociore
transitu, quia Res est spiritualior. Nos quotidie facti sumus ex iis quae
transeunt in Nos: Morimur and renascimur quotidie, neque lidem hodie and heri
sumus: Et Personam quam transeuntem non sentimus, tandem pertransisse
agnoscimus, etc. This, I say, which was thought a noble Present, for the most
ingenious Strephon, so far as it has a relation to the Material or Sensitive
Soul in Man and Brutes, or in general to the Animal Life, is for the most part
true, and what Philosophers have in general agreed to: but as intended to
characterise the Rational Soul of Man, it is by no means to be allowed. Whether
the Master of its Composition retained the same Sentiments at his Death,
concerning the Reasoning Principle within him, I have not informed my self: but
it is easy enough to conceive the Thought more readily indulged, that the
looser Scheme of Religion might serve turn; and that the Sensitive Appetite
might not admit of any Restraint, by the fears of a Post Mortem aliquid.

How the Learned S -- m came in among this Gang, is somewhat strange: That he
was acquainted with them, we are given to understand by a Letter of Mr. B --
ts, in which was enclosed an Epitome of Deism: I must confess I have been
informed that excellent Physician was tainted with these Principles, but yet I
could never understand but that he died far from an irreconcilable Enemy, to
Christianity, and firmly persuaded of a future Retribution.

I shall not mention such of them as are now living, although they seem to
pride themselves in having been the Parents of those Monstrous Births, which
they have boldly set their Names to, and delivered to the giddy World for the
Standards of Truth and Reason: it may please Almighty God to enlighten their
Understandings, and to bring about so happy a Reformation, that they may be
satisfied in the certainty of those Divine Truths, which will shine still with
the greater Luster, the more powerfully they are assaulted, and flourish under
the Scandal and Contempt of their malicious Adversaries.

I must confess I had a great desire to see the Arguments of these Men, and
when I had procured them, I looked them over without any such anticipated
Prejudice as could sway me to a Partiality Pro or Contra: I rather premise
this, as believing it no easy matter for any Man, who would be thought to have
a Respect or Veneration, either for God or true Religion, to peruse such
Treatises without so great an Abhorrence and Detestation of the Authors, as
will hinder him from giving either a due attention to what they write, or to
consider thoroughly the proper weight of their Expressions. Now upon a mature
and deliberate consideration of what I find they have delivered, I have
ventured to pass this Censure, that the Authors have plainly discovered
themselves to be Men very far short of sound or right Reasoning, of very little
Piety, and Men of no certain or steady Principles. And this Sentence I have
adventured to pass upon them, on these Accounts; that whereas in one place I
find them highly pleading for a Natural Religion, ridiculing Revelation, and
mustering up all the Arguments that themselves and their Friends the Libertines
can furnish out, in another they change their Aspect, and submissively
condescend that the Scriptures should have some little Authority: they speak
modestly of the two Testaments, calling them Sacred Records, and ingeniously
confess, that since Humane Reason is like a Pitcher with two Ears, which may be
taken on either side: in our Travels to the other World, we should choose the
Common Road as the safest; for though Deism may serve to manure our Consciences,
yet certainly if sowed with Christianity, it will produce the most plentiful
Crop.

There is nothing, says the same Person (in another place where he had been
just before using Arguments to the discredit of our Immortality) more
unaccountable and contradictory, than to suppose a hum drum Deity, chewing his
own Nature, a Droaning God sit hugging of himself, and hoarding up his
Providence from his Creatures: This is an Atheism no less irrational, than to
deny the very Essence of a Divine Being. It is the same also to believe the
Soul to be Mortal, as to believe an Immortality without Rewards and Punishments.

Thus it is very common with this sort of Men, to dogmatize even in the most
important Points of Religion; strenuously affirming for Truth what their Reason
dictates, and presently after, when they have said all they can, they are
forced to grant that what they have said, is only such twilight Conjecture as
Humane Reason (of which we yet so vainly boast) can furnish them withal, it is
now an Aliquid Divinum which does all things, and our Capacities being unable
to discern the same, make us fasten either upon the Elementary Qualities of
Hippocrates or Galen, or the Cartesian Rule of Geometrical Proportions: The
Conclusion of all is this, that since we are not qualified to understand the
real Essence or intime Nature of things, we can know nothing certainly; all our
Philosophy, excepting Skepticism, is little more than Dotage. These are their
own words, which I think may give us a very justifiable occasion to look upon
these Men, very improper Standards for our Reason or Religion to be directed
by, and as unfit Oracles for us to consult. As for their Divinity, if a parcel
of fine words will satisfy, we may think very devoutly of them: but indeed, I
cannot for my own part persuade my self, when I consider the tendency of their
common Discourse, and their Converse in the World, but that their Religion may
be fairly resolved into (...) De^s^^, or the single Belief of a first Cause;
and that our Immortality was tack't to it, that the Bait might be swallowed
with the less suspicion, and the extravagant Absurdity of their Novel Opinions,
less strictly examined or inquired into. For when we find Men devoted to the
study of ^^religion, to frame and invent Arguments to disturb and perplex our
Faith, we have surely but little Reason to think well of their Persons, or to
regard their Speeches. And that this has been the design of those I am speaking
of, even the whole bent of their Minds, in manifest enough, in the manner of
their paraphrasing the Mosaic History, in their endeavors to establish the
Sufficiency of Natural Religion, to future Happiness, and opposing the same to
the Revelation of Christ Jesus: in their collecting. Arguments out of Ethnic
Authors, for the Mortality of the Soul and the Eternity of the World, in their
in^^^^^ting a Possibility for a free and reasoning Principle, to be compatible
to Matter; and all this with the same Assurance as if they had received
Intelligence from the Court of Heaven.

I am informed one of their late Treatises, which contains the Heads of their
Opinions, will be e're long taken to pieces, and judiciously examined: however
difficult the Task may appear, I see nothing in them to discourage any
ingenious Man in the Undertaking: for if we deprive them of their Varnish, and
set them in a clear Light, we shall find but little in them more than empty
Sound and insignificant Harangue: They have been either feignedly or really
ignorant of Antiquity, which is clear from their gross mis-representation of
some Passages, and their falsifying downright in others: They have racked their
Brains for their beloved Cause of Natural Religion, but have not offered (which
they ought first of all to have done) one Syllable to disprove the Founder of
the Christian Religion, or the Apostles the Dispensers of his Gospel. Indeed,
the best of their Demonstration is either very Sophistical, or so very foolish,
that a Schoolboy would expect better Arguing than some of theirs: Th^^ we are
told it is impossible to embrace or to believe any thing which comes not within
the compass of our certain Knowledge, and if a Man cannot believe, it is a sign
the Evidence was not strong enough to make him. This indeed is so serviceable
an Argument to the Profane and Debauched, that as nothing could have been
better contrived for the advantage of such, so is there no Reply more
frequently made by them: This serves them at all times under whatever
Circumstances.

When Men have as it were blinded their Intellects, poluted their Minds,
vitiated and perverted their Cognoscent Faculties: when their Understanding is
transformed into a brutish Appetite, and their Reason thoroughly tinctured with
some long contracted and habitual Vice, the only Remedy they have then left to
palliate their Misery, is to cry out They cannot help it, to do better is out
of the compass of their Knowledge: and therefore they cannot believe that they
ought; and if they cannot believe, it is a sign, you know, that the Evidence was
not sufficient to convince them.

But waving at this time any farther Reflection upon the Men of this
Persuasion, it is convenient I promise somewhat that may justify the freedom I
have taken with the Writings of other Men, which I did not out of Expectation
of being entitled to the honor of their Labors, but to spare my self the
pains of putting into any other form those Arguments which were ready at hand,
and which I found so very nearly corresponding with my own Thoughts. Neither
can it be, as I conceive, the least Injury to an Author, that by the
transferring of his Arguments a Proselyte is made, though in another manner
than was intended by him. The greater part of those I am in this Nature obliged
to, are such whose Names will be found sufficient to recommend them to the
World. They are such who have had too much Honesty as well as Honor to impose,
and too much Sense to be imposed on. In a word, They are Men whose Learning and
Reputation secure them from being lightly esteemed, even by their Adversaries,
who have been unable to withstand the force of their Arguments, and shun their
Acquaintance upon no other Account than the Fears of a Conviction.

A Physico-Theological DISCOURSE, etc.
LETTER I. Concerning GOD. To his Friend Mr. --
My very much respected Friend;
THERE will be less need of an Apology for my troubling you with the following
Lines, when you consider that in some of our late Conferences, you have
occasionally dropped one Expression or other, which has tended to evince not only
your distrust of the Soul's Immortality, but also of the Existence of the
Divine Being.

I must confess I am less startled, to find a Man of your Capacity turn
Skeptic, in an Age where Satyr supplys the place of solid Argument, Ridicule
passes for Demonstration, and to be Wise is only to suspend the Judgment: But
indeed the preceding Truths (if such they can be proved) are of so general and
vast Importance, that we may very well admire that any Person should think
himself unconcerned in their Indagation, or to find (amongst reasonable Men)
one so profanely Impious, as to say, with the Psalmist's Fool, There is no God:
unless he could give better Reasons for his saying so, than the most profound
Adepti in Atheism have as yet produced.

I was never too forward in Disputes of this Nature, for truly it is but seldom
that I have observed the most prevalent or cogent Arguments to take place;
which I ascribe for the most part to prejudicial Prepossessions, to an
over-fond Opinion of our own Abilities, to an entire dependence upon the Powers
of our own Souls, and a Contempt of Divine Assistance. But at your Desire that
I would enter upon this Subject, the last time we met, I have taken this
Opportunity, wherein I shall endeavor to prove to you the necessity of
rectifying your mistaken Judgment: and that the securing an after Happiness, or
(in your own Phrase) the saving of your Soul, is a Task which will sufficiently
recompense you, for all the trouble you may meet with in the Undertaking.

I shall only mention the Conditions requisite to each of us, which I conceive
to be more peculiarly the divesting our selves of Prejudice, so far as it is
possible, and not to suffer the Bias of Education, by any means to interfere:
by this we shall make way for that steady and uniform Light of Impartial Reason
to take place, which however misapplied, mistaken or miscall^d, is undoubtedly
the same simple undivided Essence, and (setting aside Revelation, which we are
not to mention here) the only Rule bestowed upon us, for the regulating of our
Actions.

I know not whether I might not properly begin with some short Account of the
Nature of the Humane Mind, and the Extent of its Powers, viz. those of
Thinking, Apprehending, Reflecting, Judging, etc. by which we should both gain
this one considerable Point, That Reason, how excellently advantageous soever
it be to us, yet in its greatest Latitude, as it is applicable to the Mind of
Man, surrounded with Corporeal Organs, is not a full commensurate Rule of
Truth, at least not so adequate, as that we should exclude every Truth from
being such on the account of its surmounting our Apprehension; but to descend
into this Enquiry will take up too much time, you may if you please concede
this Postulate, if not, you will find your self however obliged to confess,
that you do assent unto the verity of some things, which you are so far from
conceiving or apprehending fully, that you have scarce any knowledge at all of
them. To begin then,

Amongst the several sorts of Atheists, who have denied the necessity of
admitting one first independent Being, or Cause of all Things, which we call
GOD, and have endeavored to solve the Phenomenon of the Universe, without
recourse to Him; they may all (if I mistake not) be reduced to those, who have
first of all not scrupled to affirm an Eternity of Successions in the
Generation of Mankind, as well a part ante as a part post, or in the same (as
much incomprehensible) sense that the Universal Systeme with its constituent
parts, Bodies animate and inanimate, has been from all Eternity as we find it
now, and shall for ever so continue. Or, Secondly, To those who perceiving the
Absurdities of such a multiplied Eternity, have thought fit to acknowledge a
Beginning of all Things; but rather than ascribe this mighty Work of Creation
to a Divine Energy, will have every portion of the Mundane Matter, under
whatever form, shape or texture, nay even the Body of Man himself however
curiously contrived, to be the result of nothing more, than an unguided
shuffling of senseless Atoms, after numberless occursions and conflicts with
each other, at length happening into that beautiful Order and Harmony of the
World. There are others who ascribe our Origin to the Effect either of an
Astral or Solar Influence upon Matter duly modified: but these are such gross
Figments, that I shall take no notice of their repugnancy, or spend time in
setting upon their Confutation.

Which of these Hypotheses may best please you I know not, nor indeed when I
consider, can I persuade my self, that you heartily espouse either; since I
impute your Incredulity rather to an unbecoming Negligence or careless
Supinity, than to any reasonable Objection you can make against the Mosaic
History of the Creation. I shall endeavor as briefly as I know how, to display
some of those gross Absurdities and palpable Contradictions, which attend this
Notion, that Mankind has thus eternally subsisted in infinite Generations
already past; which being proved a downright falsehood, you will perceive that
they had their rise from one primitive Couple: from hence I will proceed in
such other Methods, as may be most likely to lay open the Falsity of all other
Opinions, unless that which grounds the World's Genesis, upon the Power of
Almighty God.

The Thoughts of a very great Philosopher, as well as a Divine, upon this
Argument run parallel with my own, and therefore I shall take the liberty to
deliver them in his words.

Mr. Bently's third Sermon at the Lecture which was ^ounded by the honorable
(...)
Infinite Generations of Men (you say) are already past and gone. But
whatsoever is now past was once actually present. So that each of these
infinite Generations was once in its turn actually present; therefore all
except one Generation were once future, and not in Being, which destroys the
very Supposition: for either that one Generation must it self have been
infinite, which is nonsense, or it was the finite beginning of infinite
Generations between it self and us, which is infinitely terminated at both
ends.

Again, Infinite past Generations of Men have been once actually present,
therefore there may be some one Man of them given, that was at infinite
distance from us now; therefore that Man's Son likewise (suppose forty years
younger than his Father) was either at infinite distance from us, or at finite:
if that Son too was at infinite distance from us, then one Infinite is longer
by forty years than another, which is absurd, if at finite, then forty years
added to finite makes it infinite, which is absurd as the other.

The number of Men that are already dead and gone is infinite, as you say, but
the number of the several parts of the Bodies of those Men, must necessarily be
much greater than the number of the Men themselves; and at this rate we shall
have one infinite number twice, ten times, and thousands of times as great as
another: which is a notorious Contradiction. And thus we see that it is
impossible in it self, that any successive Duration should be actually and
positively infinite, or have infinite Successions already gone and past.

Sixth Sermon.
But farther, That the present or a like frame of the World has not subsisted
from everlasting: We will readily concede that a Thing may be truly Eternal,
though its duration be terminated at one end: for so we affirm human Souls to be
immortal, though there was a time when they were nothing: and therefore their
infinite duration will always be bounded at one extreme by that first beginning
of Existence: So that for ought appears as yet, you may say the Revolutions of
the Earth, and other Planets about the Sun, though they be limited at one end by
the present Revolution, may nevertheless have been infinite and eternal,
without any beginning; but then we must consider, that this duration of human
Souls is only potentially infinite, for their Eternity consists only in an
endless capacity of Continuance without ever ceasing to be, in a boundless
Futurity that can never be exhausted; or all of it be past and present: but
their duration can never be positively or actually Eternal, because it is most
manifest that no Moment can ever be assigned, wherein it shall be true that
such a Soul has then actually sustained an infinite duration: for that
supposed infinite duration will by the very Supposition be limited at two
Extremes, though never so remote asunder, and consequently must needs be finite.
Wherefore the true Nature and Notion of a Soul's eternity is this, That the
future Moments of its Duration can never be all past and present, but still
there will be a futurity and potentiality of More for ever and ever. So that we
evidently perceive from this Instance of a Soul, that whatever successive
duration shall be bounded at one end, and be all past and present, must come
infinitely short of Infinity; which necessarily evinceth that this or a like
World can never have been Eternal, or that there cannot have been infinite past
Revolutions of a Planet about a Sun: for this supposed Infinity is terminated
at one Extreme, by the present Revolution, and all the other Revolutions are
confessedly past, so that the whole Duration is bounded at one end, and all
past and present, and therefore cannot have been infinite. This will also show
us the vast difference betwixt the false successive Eternity backwards, and the
real one to come: for consider the present Revolution of the Earth, as the
Bound and Confine of them both, God Almighty, if he so pleases, may continue
this Motion to perpetuity, in infinite Revolutions to come, because Futurity is
inexhaustible, and can never be all spent, and run out by past and present
Moments: but then if we look backwards from this present Revolution, we do
apprehend the impossibility of infinite Revolutions on that side, because all
are already past, and so were once actually present; and consequently are
finite by the Argument before. For surely we cannot conceive a pretariteness
(if I may so speak) still backwards in infinitum, that never was present, as we
can an endless Futurity that never will be present: so that though one is
potentially infinite, yet nevertheless the other is positively finite. And though
this reasoning does necessarily conclude against the past infinite duration of
all successive Motion and mutable Beings, yet does it not affect the Eternal
Existence of the Adorable Divinity, in whose invariable Nature there is no past
nor future, who is Omnipresent not only as to space, but as to duration: and
with respect to such Omnipresence it is certain and manifest, that Succession
and Motion are more Impossibilities, and repugnant in the very terms.

Thus does the Atheists Hypothesis, touching the Eternity of the World,
absolutely destroy and confute it self. For let us suppose some infinite
Revolution of the Earth about the Sun, to be already gone and expired, I take
it to be self-evident, that if none of those past Revolutions have been
infinite Ages ago, all the Revolutions put together cannot make up the Duration
of infinite Ages; it follows therefore from this Supposition, that there may be
some One assignable Revolution among them, that is at an infinite distance from
the present; but it is self-evident likewise, that no one past Revolution can
be infinitely distant from the present; for then an infinite or unbounded
duration, may be bounded at two Extremes, by two annual Revolutions, which is
absurd, and a Contradiction.

And again, upon the same Supposition of an Eternal past Duration of the World,
and of infinite annual Revolutions of the Earth about the Sun; I would ask
concerning the Monthly Revolutions of the Moon about the Earth, or the Diurnal
ones of the Earth upon its Axis, both which by the very Hypothesis are coaeval
with the former, Whether these also have been finite or infinite? Not finite to
be sure, because th^n a finite number would be greater then an infinite, as 12
or 365 are greater than a Unite. Nor infinite neither, for then two or three
Infinites would exceed one another, as a year exceeds a Month, or both exceed a
Day: So that both ways the Supposition is repugnant and impossible.

These Difficulties, as I have already intimated, cannot be reasonably applied
to the Eternal Duration of the Supreme Power; for though we cannot comprehend
Eternity and Infinity, yet we understand what They are not, and something we
are sure must have existed from Eternity, because all things could not emerge
from nothing: So that if this Prae-existent Eternity is not compatible with a
successive Duration, as we clearly and distinctly perceive that it is not, then
something (though infinitely above our finite Comprehensions) must have had an
Identical, invariable continuance from all Eternity: which Being is what we
call God; for as his Nature is perfect and immutable, without the least shadow
of Change, so his Eternal Duration is permanent and invisible, not measurable
by Time and Motion, nor to be computed by number of successive Moments.

Third Sermon at ^^les ^^^ture.
But this Opinion of Infinite Generations, is repugnant likewise to Matter of
Fact. It Is a Truth beyond opposition, That the Universal Species of Mankind has
had a gradual Increase notwithstanding what War and Famine, Pestilence, Floods,
Conflagrations, and other Causes, may at certain Periods of Time, have
interrupted and retarded it. This is manifest from the History of the Jewish
Nation, from the Account of the Roman Census, and from the Registers of our own
Country, where the proportion of Births to Burials, is found upon observation
to be yearly as fifty to forty: Now if Mankind do increase (though never so
slowly, but one Couple suppose in an Age) it is enough to evince the falsehood of
infinite Generations already expired: for though the Atheist should contend that
there were Ten thousand million Couple of Mankind now in being (that we may
allow him multitude enough) it is but going back so many Ages, and we descend to
one single Original Pair: and it is all one in respect of Eternal Duration yet
behind, whether we begin the World so many millions of Ages ago, or date it
from the late Era of about Six thousand years: which recent Beginning is, I
think, sufficiently established, from the known Original of Empires and
Kingdoms, and from the late Invention of Arts and Sciences: whereas, if
infinite Ages of Mankind had already preceded, there could nothing have been
left to be invented or improved by the successful Industry and Curiosity of our
own. The Circulation of the Blood, and the Weight and Spring of the Air (which
is as it were the Vital Pulse, and the great Circulation of Nature, and of more
importance in all Physiology than any one Invention since the beginning of
Science) had never lain hidden so many Myriads of Generations, and been
reserved for a late happy discovery by two great Luminaries of this Island.

I hope, from what has been said, you may gain (if not undoubted satisfaction)
at least some certain knowledge, that this Notion of Infinite past Generations,
or the World's Eternity, is so far from bearing the Test of a Reasonable
Inquisition, that the very Supposition is void of Sense, and a palpable
Contradiction.

The Atomical Hypothesis of a fortuitous Jumble, without any Intelligent Being
to direct the Portions of the Mundane Matter, into their several Forms, is a
Fancy no less extravagant; a Whimsy so unaccountable, that (in the words of a
great Man) there is nothing more wonderful to imagine, unless this, That it
should ever enter into the heart of Man. The better to confute this, together
with those other Opinions of the Astral and Solar Influence, I have here
borrowed a Scheme of fair and reasonable Argumentation, from the Judicious Mr.
Lock, such an one I hope as will extort a Confession from you, that there must
unavoidably be admitted a first Cause of all things, and that the same can be
no other than a most Intelligent as well as Powerful Being.

1. Though God has given us (says that learned Man) no innate Idea's of himself;
though he has stamped no original Characters on our Minds, Mr. Lock's Essay of
Humane Understanding.
wherein we may read his Being; yet having furnished us with those Faculties our
Minds are endowed with, he has not left himself without witness, since we have
Sense, Perception and Reason, and cannot want a clear proof of Him, as long as
we carry our selves about us; nor can we justly complain of our Ignorance in
this great Point, since He has so plentifully provided us with the Means to
discover and know Him, so far as is necessary to the end of our Being, and the
great Concernment of our Happiness. But though this be the most obvious Truth
that Reason discovers, and though its Evidence be (if I mistake not) equal to
mathematical Certainty; yet it requires Thought and Attention, and the Mind
must apply it self to a regular Deduction of it, from some part of our
intuitive Knowledge, or else we shall be as uncertain and ignorant of this as
of other Propositions, which are in themselves capable of clear demonstration.
To show therefore that we are capable of knowing, i. e. being certain that
there is a God, and how we may come by this Certainty, I think we need go no
farther than our selves, and that undoubted Knowledge we have of our own
Existence.

2. I think it is beyond question, that Man has a clear Perception of his own
Being; he knows certainly that he Exists, and that he is something: He that can
doubt whether he be any thing, or no, I speak no more to, than I would argue
with pure Nothing, or endeavor to convince Nonentity that it were something.
If any one pretend to be so skeptical, as to deny his own Existence (for really
to doubt of it is manifestly impossible) let him (for me) enjoy his beloved
Happiness of being Nothing, until Hunger or some other Pain, convince him of
the contrary. This I think I may take for a Truth, of which every ones certain
Knowledge assures him, beyond the liberty of doubting, viz. That he is
something that actually Exists.

3. In the next place, Man knows by an Intuitive knowledge the Certainty that
bare Nothing can no more produce any real Being, than it can be equal to two
right Angles. If a Man knows not that Nonentity, or the Absence of all Being,
cannot be equal to two right Angles, it is impossible that he should know any
Demonstration in Euclid. If therefore we know there is some real Being, and
that Nonentity cannot produce any real Being, it is an evident Demonstration
that from Eternity there has been something; since what was from Eternity had a
Beginning, and what had a Beginning must be produced from something else.

4. Next, It is evident that what had its Being and Beginning from another,
must also have all that which is in, and belongs to its Being to another too:
all the Power it has must be owing to, and received from the same Source. This
Eternal Source then of all Being, Being must also be the Source and Original of
all Power, and so this Eternal Being must be also the most powerful.

5. Again, A Man finds in himself Perception and Knowledge, we have then got
one step farther, and we are certain now that there is not only some Being, but
some knowing Intelligent Being in the World. There was a time then when there
was no knowing Being, and when Knowledge began to be, or else there has been
also a knowing Being from Eternity. If it be said there was a time when no
Being had any Knowledge, when that Eternal Being was void of all Understanding;
I reply, That then it was impossible there should ever have been any Knowledge;
it being as impossible that things wholly void of Knowledge, and operating
blindly without any Perception, should produce a knowing Being, as it is
impossible that a Triangle should make it self three Angles bigger than two
right ones: for it is as repugnant to the Idea of senseless Matter, that it
should put into it self Sense, Perception and Knowledge, as it is repugnant to
the Idea of a Triangle, that it should put into it self greater Angles than two
right ones.

6. Thus from the Consideration of our Selves, and what we infallibly find in
our own Constitutions, our Reason leads us to the knowledge of this certain and
evident Truth, That there is an eternal, most powerful, and most knowing Being,
which whether any one will please to call God, it matters not, the thing is
evident, and from this Idea duly considered, will easily be deduced all those
other Attributes we ought to ascribe to this Eternal Being. If nevertheless any
one should be found so senslesly arrogant, as to suppose Man alone knowing and
wise, but yet the Product of mere Ignorance and Chance, and that all the rest
of the Universe is acted only by that blind Hap-hazard, I shall leave with him
that very rational and emphatical Rebuke of Tully, Lib. 2. de Leg. to be
considered leisurely: Quid est enim verius, quam neminem esse oportere tam
stulte arrogantem, ut in se Mentem and Rationem putet inesse, in Coelo Mundoque
non putet? aut ea quae vix summa Ingenij ratione comprehendat, nulla ratione
moveri putet? Or that of the Philosopher, Egregie mentiuntur qui dicunt non
esse Deum, etiamsi enim interdiu negant Noctu tamen and sibi dubitant.

From what has been said, it is plain to me, we have a more certain knowledge
of the Existence of a God, than of any thing our Senses have not immediately
discovered to us: Nay, I presume I may say that we more certainly know that
there is a God, than that there is any thing else without us. When I say we
know, I mean that there is such a Knowledge within our reach, which we cannot
miss, if we will but apply our Minds to that, as we do to several other
Enquiries.

7. How far the Idea of a most perfect Being, which a Man may frame in his
Mind, does or does not prove the Existence of a God, I will not here examine;
for in the different make of Men's Tempers and application of their Thoughts,
some Arguments prevail more on one, and some on another, for the confirmation
of the same Truth. But yet I think this I may say, that it is an ill way of
establishing this Truth, and silencing Atheists, to lay the whole stress of so
important a Point as this, upon that sole foundation, and take some Men's having
that Idea of God in their Minds (for it is evident some Men have none, and some
worse than none, and the most very indifferent) for the only proof of a Deity,
and out of an over-fondness of that darling Invention, cashier, or at least
endeavor to invalidate all other Arguments, and forbid us to hearken to those
proofs, as being weak or fallacious, which our own Existence, and the sensible
parts of the Universe offer so clearly and cogently to our Thoughts, that I
deem it impossible for a considering Man to withstand them: for I judge it as
certain and clear a Truth as can any where be delivered, that the invisible
things of God are clearly seen from the Creation of the World, being understood
by the things that are made even his Eternal Power and Godhead.

Though our own Being furnishes us, as I have shown, with an Evident and
incontestible Proof of a Deity, and I believe no Body can avoid the Cogency of
it, who will but as carefully attend to it, as to any other Demonstration of so
many parts; yet this being so fundamental a Truth, and of that consequence,
that all Religion and genuine Morality depend thereon, I doubt not but I shall
be forgiven, if I go over some parts of this Argument again, and enlarge a
little more thereon.

8. There is no Truth more evident than that something must be from Eternity: I
never yet heard of any one so unreasonable that could suppose so manifest a
Contradiction, as a time wherein there was perfectly nothing, this Being of all
Absurdities the greatest to imagine that pure Nothing, the perfect Negation and
Absence of all Being, should ever produce any real Existence.

It being then unavoidable for all rational Creatures to conclude that
something has existed from Eternity, let us next see what kind of thing that
must be.

9. There are but two sorts of Beings in the World, that Man knows or
conceives; First, Such as are purely material, without Sense, Perception, or
Thought. Secondly, Sensible thinking and perceiving Beings, which, if you
please, we will hereafter call cogitative and incogitative Beings, being more
to our present purpose, and perhaps better terms than Material and Immaterial.

10. If then there must be something Eternal, let us see what sort of Being it
must be: And to that it is very obvious to Reason, that it must necessarily be
a cogitative Being; for it is as impossible to conceive that ever bare
incogitative Matter should produce a thinking Intelligent Being, as that
nothing should of it self produce Matter. Let us suppose any Parcel of Matter
Eternal, great or small, we shall find it in it self able to produce nothing:
for example; Let us suppose the Matter of the next Pebble we meet with Eternal,
closely united, and the parts firmly at rest together: If there were no other
Being in the World, must it not eternally remain so, a dead unactive Lump; is
it possible to conceive it can add motion to it self, being purely Matter, or
produce any thing? Matter then, by its own strength, cannot produce in it self
so much as Motion, the Motion it has must also be from Eternity, or else be
produced and added to Matter by some other Being more powerful than Matter.
Matter, as is evident, having not power to produce Motion in it self. But let
us suppose Motion eternal too, yet Matter, incogitative Matter and Motion,
whatever Changes it might produce of figure and bulk, could never produce
Thought. Knowledge will still be as far beyond the power of Motion and Matter
to produce, as matter is beyond the power of nothing to produce: And I appeal
to every ones one Thoughts, whether he cannot as easily conceive Matter
produced by nothing, as Thought to be produced by pure Matter, when before
there was no such thing as Thought or an Intelligent Being existing. Divide
Matter into as minute parts as you will (which we are apt to imagine a sort of
spiritualising or making a thinking thing of it) vary the figure and motion of
it as much as you please, a Globe, Cube, Cone, Prism, Cylinder, and you may as
rationally expect to produce Sense, Thought and Knowledge, by putting together
in a certain figure and motion the grossest portions of Matter, as by those
that are the very smallest that any where exist. They knock, impel and resist
one another, just as the greater do, and that is all they can do: so that if we
will suppose nothing first or eternal, Matter can never begin to be: if we
suppose bare Matter without Motion eternal, Motion can never begin to be: if we
suppose only Matter and Motion first or eternal, Thought can never begin to be;
for it is impossible to conceive that Matter, either with or without motion,
could have originally in and from it self, Sense, Perception and Knowledge, as
is evident from hence that then Sense, Perception and Knowledge, must be a
property eternally inseparable from Matter, and every particle of it. Not to
add, that though our general or specific conception of Matter, makes us speak of
it as one thing, yet really all Matter is not one individual thing, neither is
there any such thing existing as one material Being, or one single Body that we
know, or can conceive; and therefore if matter were the Eternal first
cogitative Being, there would not be one Eternal infinite cogitative Being, but
an infinite number of Eternal finite cogitative Beings, independent one with
another, of limited Force and distinct Thoughts, which could never produce that
Order, Harmony and Beauty, which is to be found in Nature.

Since therefore whatsoever is the first Eternal Being, must necessarily be
cogitative; and whatsoever is first of all things must necessarily contain in
it, and actually have at least all the Perfections that can ever after exist,
nor can it ever give to another any Perfection that it has not, either
actually in it self, or at least in a higher degree, it necessarily follows
that the first Eternal Being cannot be Matter.

11. If therefore it be evident that something necessarily must exist from
Eternity, it is also as evident that that something must necessarily be a
cogitative Being: for it is as impossible that incogitative Matter should
produce a cogitative Being, as that Nothing, or the Negation of all Being
should produce a positive Being or Matter.

12. Though this Discourse of the necessary Existence of an Eternal Mind, does
sufficiently lead us to the knowledge of a God since it will hence follow, that
all other knowing Beings that have a beginning, must depend on Him, and have no
other ways of Knowledge, or extent of Power, than what He gives them; and
therefore if He made those, He made also the less excellent Pieces of this
Universe, all inanimate Beings, whereby his Omniscience, Power, and Providence
will be established, and all his other Attributes necessarily follow; yet to
clear up this a little further, we will see what Doubts can be raised against
it.

13. First, Perhaps it will be said, that though it be as clear as Demonstration
can make it, that there must be an Eternal Being, and that Being must also be
knowing, yet it does not follow but that thinking Being may also be material.
Let it be so; it still equally follows that there is a God: for if there be an
Eternal, Omniscient, Omnipotent Being, it is certain that there is a God,
whether you imagine that Being to be material or no. But herein I suppose lies
the danger and deceit of that Supposition: There being no way to avoid the
Demonstration that there is an Eternal knowing Being, Men devoted to Matter
would willingly have it granted, that this knowing Being is material, and then
letting slide out of their Minds, or their Discourse, the Demonstration whereby
an Eternal knowing Being was proved necessarily to exist, would argue all to be
Matter, and so deny a God that is an Eternal cogitative Being, whereby they are
so far from establishing, that they destroy their own Hypothesis: for if there
can be, in their opinion, Eternal Matter without any Eternal cogitative Being,
they manifestly separate Matter and Thinking, and so suppose no necessary
connection of one with the other; and from hence establish the necessity of an
Eternal Spirit, but not of Matter, since it has been proved already, that an
Eternal cogitative being is unavoidably to be granted. Now if thinking and
Matter may be separated, the Eternal Existence of Matter will not follow from
the Eternal Existence of a cogitative Being, and they suppose it to no purpose.

14. But now let us see how they can satisfy themselves, or others, that this
Eternal thinking Being is material. First, I would ask them, whether they
imagine that all Matter, every Particle of Matter thinks? This I suppose they
will scarce say; since then there would be as many Eternal thinking Beings, as
there are Particles of Matter, and so an infinity of Gods: And yet if they will
not allow Matter as Matter, that is, every Particle of Matter, to be as well
cogitative as extended, they will have as hard a task to make out to their own
Reasons a cogitative Being, out of incogitative Particles, as an extended Being
out of unextended parts, if I may so speak.

15. Secondly, If all Matter do not think, I next ask, Whether it be only one
Atom that does so? This has as many Absurdities as the other; for then this
Atom of Matter must be alone Eternal, or not: if this alone be Eternal, then
this alone by its powerful Thought or Will, made all the rest of Matter; and so
we have the Creation of Matter by a powerful Thought, which is that the
Materialists stick at: for if they suppose one single thinking Atom to have
produced all the rest of Matter, they cannot ascribe that prae-eminency to it
upon any other account than that of its Thinking, the only supposed Difference:
But allow it to be by some other way which is above our conception, it must be
still Creation, and these Men must give up their great Maxim, Ex nihilo nil
fit. If it be said that all the rest of Matter is equally Eternal as that
thinking Atom, it will be to say any thing at pleasure, though never so absurd:
for to suppose all Matter Eternal, and yet one small Particle in Knowledge and
Power infinitely above the rest, is without any the least appearance of Reason
to frame any Hypothesis: every Particle of Matter, as Matter, is capable of all
the same Figures and Motions of any other; and I challenge any one in his
Thoughts to add any thing else to one above another.

16. Thirdly, If then neither one peculiar Atom alone, can be this Eternal
thinking Being, nor all Matter, as Matter, i. e. every Particle of Matter can
be it, it only remains that it is some certain System of Matter duly put
together, that is this thinking Eternal Being: This is that which I imagine is
that Notion which Men are aptest to have of God, who would have Him a Material
Being, as most readily suggested to them by the ordinary Conceit they have of
themselves, and of other Men, whom they take to be Material thinking Beings.
But this Imagination however more natural, is no less absurd than the other;
for to suppose the Eternal thinking Being to be nothing else but a Composition
of the Particles of Matter, each whereof is incogitative, is to ascribe all the
Wisdom and Knowledge of that Eternal Being, only to the Juxtaposition of parts,
than which nothing can be more absurd: for unthinking Particles of Matter,
however put together, can have nothing thereby added to them but a new relation
of Position, which it is impossible should give Thought and Knowledge to them.

17. But farther; This Corporeal System either has all its parts at rest, or it
is a certain motion of the parts, wherein its thinking consists; if it be
perfectly at rest, it is but one Lump, and so can have no Privileges above one
Atom. If it be the Motion of its parts on which its thinking depends, all the
Thoughts there must be unavoidably accidental and limited, since all the
Particles that by Motion cause Thought, being each of them in it self without
any Thought, cannot regulate its own Motions, much less be regulated by the
Thought of the whole, since that Thought is not the Cause of Motion (for then
it must be antecedent to it, and so without it) but the Consequence of it,
whereby Freedom, Power, Choice, and all rational and wise Thinking and Acting
will be taken away. So that such a Thinking Being will be no better nor wiser
than pure blind Matter, since to resolve all into the accidental unguided
Motions of blind Matter, or into Thought depending on the unguided Motions of
blind Matter, is the same thing: not to mention the narrowness of such Thoughts
and Knowledge, that must depend on the Motions of such parts: but there needs
no more enumeration of any more Absurdities and Impossibilities in this
Hypothesis (however full of them it be) than that before mentioned; since, let
this thinking Systeme be all or a part of the Matter of the Universe, it is
impossible that any one Particle should either know its own, or the Motion of
any other Particle, or the whole know the Motion of every Particular, and so
regulate its own Thoughts or Motions, or indeed have any Thought resulting from
such Motion.

18. Others would have Matter to be Eternal, notwithstanding they all owe an
Eternal Cogitative immaterial Being. This, though it take not away the Being of a
God, yet since it denies one and the first great Piece of his Workmanship, the
Creation, let us consider it a little. Matter must be allowed Eternal: Why?
Because you cannot perceive how it can be made out of Nothing: Why do you not
also think your self Eternal? You will answer perhaps, Because about twenty or
forty years since you began to be. But if I ask you what that You is, which
began then to be, you can scarcely tell me: The Matter whereof you are made
began not then to be; for if it did, then it is not Eternal: but it began to be
put together into such a fashion or frame as makes up your Body; but yet that
frame of Particles is not you, it makes not that thinking thing you are (for I
have now to do with One who allows an Eternal immaterial thinking Being, but
would have unthinking Matter eternal too) therefore when did that thinking
Thing begin to be? If it did never begin to be, then you have always been a
thinking Thing from Eternity; the absurdity whereof I need not confute, till I
meet with one so void of understanding as to own it. If therefore you can allow
a thinking Thing to be made out of Nothing (as all Things that are not Eternal
must be) why also can you not allow it possible for a Material Being to be made
out of Nothing by an equal Power, but that you have the Experience of the one
in view, and not of the other: though when well considered, Creation of a Spirit
will be found to require no less power than the Creation of Matter; nay,
possibly if we would emancipate our selves from vulgar Notions, and raise our
Thoughts as far as they would reach to a closer Contemplation of Things, we
might be able to aim at some dim and seeming Conception how Matter might at
first be made and begin to exist, by the power of that Eternal first Being: but
to give Beginning and Being to a Spirit, would be found a more inconceivable
Effect of Omnipotent Power. But this Being what would perhaps lead us too far
from the Notions on which the Philosophy now in the World is built, it would
not be pardonable to deviate so far as Grammar it self would authorize, if the
common settled Opinion opposes it; especially in this place, where the received
Doctrine serves well enough to our present purpose, and leaves this past doubt,
That the Creation or Beginning of any one Substance out of Nothing, being once
admitted, the Creation of all other but the Creator himself, may with the same
ease be supposed.

19. But you will say, I^ it not impossible to admit of the making any Thing
out of Nothing, since we cannot possibly conceive it? I answer no: 1. Because
it is not reasonable to deny the Power of an Infinite Being, upon the account
that we cannot comprehend its Operations: We do not deny other Effects upon
this Ground, because we cannot possibly conceive the manner of their
production. We cannot conceive how Thought (or any thing but Motion in Body)
can move a Body, and yet that is not a Reason sufficient to make us deny it
possible against the constant Experience we have of it in our selves, in all
voluntary Motions which are produced in us only by the free Thoughts of our own
Minds, and are not, nor can be the Effects of the impulse or determination of
the Motion of blind Matter in or upon our Bodies, for then it could not be in
our power or choice to alter it. For example, My right hand writes, whilst my
left hand is still, what causes Rest in one, and Motion in the other? nothing
but my Will, a Thought of my Mind: my Thought only changing, the right hand
rests, and the left hand moves; this is matter of fact which cannot be denied:
Explain this, and make it intelligible, and then the next step will be to
understand Creation. For the giving a new determination to the Motion of the
Animal Spirits (which some make use of to explain voluntary Motion) clears not
the difficulty one jot^: to alter the determination of Motion, being in this
Case no easier nor less than to give Motion it self; since the new
determination given to the Animal Spirits, must be either immediately by
Thought, or by some other Body put in their way by Thought, which was not in
their way before, and so must own its Motion to Thought, either of which leaves
voluntary Motion as unintelligible as it was before. In the mean time it is an
over-valuing our selves, to reduce all to the narrow measure of our Capacities,
and to conclude all things impossible to be done whose manner of doing exceeds
our Comprehension: this is to make our Comprehension infinite, or God finite,
when what He can do is limited to what we conceive of it. If you do not
understand the operations of your own finite Mind, that thinking Thing within
you, do not deem it strange that you cannot comprehend the operations of that
Eternal infinite Mind who made and governs all things, and whom the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain.

I hope (my Friend) you will more readily excuse the foregoing Prolixity, on
the account that first Principles (especially those of so great moment as these
before us) ought to be as clearly and satisfactorily proved as it is possible:
which if upon your most serious Reflection you find established beyond
opposition, I expect that from this moment you date the downfall of your
Atheism, and that you presently commence Deist in order to turn Christian.

I know of no better way of arguing with the mere natural Man, or with such who
value themselves so highly upon the strength of their own Judgment or Humane
Reason, than to endeavor their Conviction by the most rational Deductions from
as rational Propositions: whether or no these are such which I have transferred
hither from the Writings of these two famous Men, I must leave you to consider.
I confess there is little hopes of reclaiming such foolhardy Libertines, who
argue for their Infidelity by the same powers in their Souls, which, to the
more considerate, are convincing proofs, That the Soul, which is invested with
such mighty Power, must undoubtedly be a Substance independent of Corporiety,
and consequently incapable of suffering an extinction with the Lamp of Life;
but of the Nature of the Rational Soul of Man, and its different Existence from
the Soul of Brutes, I shall discourse elsewhere, having here confined my self
more particularly to enquire after the Author of our own Being, and all others
which surround us.

There have been many Methods used in handling of this Subject, and indeed
(were our Opponents so full of Reason as they pretend) one might wonder that
any of them should prove insufficient. I shall not here stay to examine the
Certainty of that Cartesian Notion, That it is impossible we could have had any
Idea of that infinite Eternal all-wise Being we call God, if such a Being did
not really exist, or were not in rerum Natura: But of this we may be satisfied,
that unless we do believe there is such an immense Being has created us with a
design not to deceive us, we must be pure Scepticks: for it is impossible
without this Belief, we should be fully assured of any Truth whatsoever; and
therefore I think it is not without Cause that the Philosopher lays this down as
a necessary Introduction to Science, Nihil intelligitur, nisi Deus prius
intelligatur.

Having proved the Necessity of some Eternal cogitative Being, by a train of
Arguments which are founded upon right Reason, neither supported by Tradition
or Authority, either Sacred or Profane, I shall next inquire how it comes to
pass that this first and (if I may so say) greatest Truth, the Foundation of
all true Happiness, is so wonderfully obscured effaced, and even obliterated
out of the Hearts of a great part of Mankind.

Whosoever will take the trouble to inform himself, after what manner most
People account for the Productions they see daily brought to pass, may easily
understand that where one Man speaks either reasonably or becomingly of the
great Author of the Universe, and acknowledges any such Being as superintends
the agency of second Causes; there are abundantly more who look no farther than
the empty Sounds of Fate, Fortune, Chance, Destiny, and in their Enquiries into
the Structure of Humane Bodies, or the Discords of the Animal Economy, you
rarely find any thing more particularly taken notice of than the Archaeus, by
some, by others the Plastic Power, and indeed by all most commonly a certain
Nature, which though continually in their Expressions, they know not what to make
of.

Excuse me (Sir) if I think it worth my while to examine which of these can
supply the place of an Almighty, or of any real efficient Cause; or with what
reason we can ascribe unto either of these nominal Agents, the Operations
imputed to them.

Seneca l. 2. de ^^^^ion. ^^tural.
Fate or Destiny (says SENECA) is an immutable and invincible Law, imposed
upon Things and Actions. You will say perhaps that this thing shall happen, or
not happen: if it must come to pass, although you vow and make your request, yet
shall it take effect: If it shall not come to pass, vow and pray as much as you
list, yet it shall not fall out. Now the Consequence, says he, of this
Argument is false, because you have forgot the Exception that I have put
between them both; that is to say, This shall happen provided a Man makes Vows
and Prayers, it must necessarily happen, that to vow, or not to vow, are
comprehended in, and are parts of the same Destiny. Again, It is destinated, or
it is such a Man's fate to be an eloquent Man; but under this Condition, it is
likewise destinated that he be instructed in good Letters. It is destinated for
another Man to he rich, but here it is included in the same Destiny, that be
make use of the means for their procurement. So likewise may it be said it was
such a Man's destiny to be hanged; but here that he render himself guilty of
some capital Offense, for which he is convicted by the Law, is part of the same
Destiny.

In the sense wherein these words are used by this Philosopher, I see no mighty
prejudice; there is indeed this mistake very often attending, That whereas by
Fate or Destiny are understood the unalterable Laws of God, which are founded
upon his Prescience, Men are apt to overlook the Lawgiver himself, and to
represent this Law by him established, as a certain powerful Agent or
irresistible Deity, which they say does blindly and accountably govern the
World.

Give me leave to take notice, That I look upon this Fate and Destiny of the
Heathens (in its vulgarly received Phrase) very nearly to correspond with the
Predestination of some Modern Christians; they do both of them partake of the
same tyrannical, despotic power; and both tend to the same end, viz. the
robbing Man of his Freedom, and exposing him, Brute-like, to act by an
irresistible Impulse.

The Eternal Decrees of the Divine Being, which are made as it were
conditional, and founded on a foreknowledge of the Good and Evil that Man
shall act, carry nothing along with them contradictory to his Truth and
Justice: but the Absolute Predestination which is supposed exclusive of M^ns
Actions, as a free Agent, is a Doctrine so very harsh, and so pregnant with ill
Consequences, as is not to be countenanced. Thus much for Fate and Destiny.

Chance and Fortune are words so insignificant, that had not a foolish Custom
rendered them familiar, one might justly admire that ever they should be
mentioned by considering Men. Bentley's 5th Sermon.
The true Notion of Fortune (in the words of a Learned Man) denotes nothing
more than the ignorance of an Event in some knowing Agent, concerned about it;
so that it owes its very Being to Humane Understanding, and without relation to
that would be a Non Ens, or really Nothing. 'Twas Man that first made Fortune,
and not Fortune Man; so likewise the adequate meaning of Chance (as it is
discinguisht from Fortune, in that the latter is understood to befall only
Rational Agents, but Chance to be amongst inanimate Bodies) is really a bare
Negation that signifies no more than this, That any Effect amongst such Bodies
ascribed to Chance, is verily produced by Physical Agents, according to the
established Laws of Motion, but without their consciousness of concurring to the
Production, and without their Intention of such an Effect. So that in this
genuine acceptance of Chance, here is nothing supposed that can supersede the
known Laws of natural Motion; and thus to attribute the formation of Mankind to
Chance, is equally as absurd as to ascribe the same to Nature or Mechanism.

Having given you these few hints, touching the unreasonableness of our
ascribing any Effect to that which is in truth no more than a Chimaera or
Fiction of the Brain, and our looking on them as Agents, which are mere
Non-Entities, I shall take notice of those other Expressions which are so
frequently made use of, not only by the Ignorant, but even by Physicians
themselves and other Learned Men, such I mean as the Archaeus, the Plastic
Power, the formative Faculty, and that petty kind of Deity called Nature. For
the better comprehending the significancy of these several Terms, let us put
our selves upon reflecting, and a very little attention will discover the
fallacy. Suppose then, for instance, that any Man should tell me that such or
such a Thing will exhilirate the Archaeus, or enliven decayed Nature; that such
a Monster owes its rise to a Defect or Error committed by the Plastic Power, or
formative Faculty; is it not very reasonable that we desire to know what either
of these are, whether or no they are real Agents, or intellectual Beings,
employing themselves in the care of our Conservation; or in a word, what they
do truly import in their genuine and proper meaning. If we make, I say, this
Enquity, we may satisfy our selves, that every one of these words, with many
of the like signification, particularly such as go by the name of Faculties and
Qualities, were first of all taken up, either as an Umbrage for Men's Ignorance
of real Causes, or invented in order to a more compendious way of speaking,
whereby the several Means made use of toward a particular Production, are
comprised under some single Appellation. Boyle's Enquiry into the Notion of
Nature.
And thus it happens (as Mr. Boil speaks) that a fit and actuating Power of
the Teeth, Tongue, Spittle, Fibers and Membranes of the Gullet and Stomach,
together with the Natural Heat, the Ferment and Menstruum, and some other
Agents, which cooperate to the Transmutation of our Aliment into Chile, are
all included in that frequent Expression of Concoctive Faculty; a word as
commonly made use of by those who know not what they mean when they speak it,
as by those that do.

But amongst all the pretended Causes of those Effects we see daily produced,
there is none more frequently made use of than the word Nature, upon which
consideration the most Judicious Boil, foreseeing the abuse of that unhappy
word, was (as he expresses himself) so paradoxical, as to make a very serious
doubt, whether this same Nature so much discourst of, was a Thing or a Name; or
whether it was any real existent Being, or a Being purely notional. For when
any Man tells me, says he, that Nature does this or that; that it is natural
for one thing to do this, and another that; he does in no wise help me to
understand, or to explicate the manner of these Productions: for it is manifest
enough, that whatsoever is done in this World (where the Rational Soul
intervenes not) is really effected by corporeal Agents, acting in a World so
framed as ours is, according to the Laws of Motion, settled by its omniscient
Author.

It Is true, that many acknowledge this Nature to be a Thing established by the
Almighty, and subordinate to Him: but though many confess it when they are asked,
whether they do or not: yet besides that they seldom or never lift up their
Eyes to any higher Cause; he that takes notice of their way of ascribing Things
to Nature, may easily discern, that whatever their words sometimes be, the
Agency of the God of Nature, is very little taken notice of in their Thoughts.

Indeed, if I thought my Opinion might sway with you so far, as to put you upon
reflecting in good earnest, I should give you to understand that it is my real
belief, That the improper use of this very word has been vastly injurious to
the Glory of our Maker, and (in the words of the foresaid Author) I doubt not
but the looking upon merely Corporeal, and oftentimes Inanimate Things, as if
they were endowed with Life, Sense and Understanding, and the ascribing to
Nature, and some other Beings, whether Real or Imaginary, Things that belong
only to God, have been some, if not the chief of the grand Causes of Atheism
amongst Nominal Christians, and of Polytheism and Idolatry amongst the Gentiles.

The wretched Subterfuges of Atheism, being thus manifestly discovered
insufficient Causes of any manner of Production, the greatest part of them
being purely Imaginary, and (like aerie Phantoms) disappearing at the Light of
Truth, I hope that you will endeavor to remove that Veil of Ignorance which has
so long darkened your Understanding, and that you will find your self
necessitated to acknowledge the Eternal Cause, in whom you Live, Move, and have
your Being.

If at length you are persuaded of this Supreme Intelligence, and satisfied
that the Universal Systems is a Product of his Power, that the several Species
of Animals, under whatsoever Genus, must necessarily take their Rise from some
Prolific Seeds or Seminal Principles created by the same Power (spontaneous
Productions, and the whole Business of aequivocal Generation being detected a
plain Fallacy) if this, I say, appears manifest (as I see not how any thing can
be more evident) although the Mosaic History of Genesis is seemingly
unintelligible and contradictory to many later Observations and Experiments, I
shall expect that you heartily subscribe the prime Article of our Creed, viz
the Belief of God.

As there is no Man indispensably tied to the Letter of the Mosaic History, so
its being to our Conjectures unphilosophitick, or its not exactly quadrating
with the latter Discoveries of our Vertuoso's, neither is, nor ought to be
reputed either as an Error in the Historian, or a Flaw in the History, by those
who consider the Condition of the Infant World, and the Genius of the People to
whose Capacities this Narration was more especially adapted. To instance in one
Particular; Though we are to suppose that Joshua was too great a Philosopher to
be unacquainted with the Copernican Hypothesis of the Earths Motion, yet
considering the Apprehension of his Auditory, if in the Hearing of the
Multitude, he had commanded the Earth, as he did the Sun to stand still, he
would not unlikely have been deemed a Man distracted by such who would have
thought it a very extravagant Absurdity, to bid the Earth, which they conceived
a dead, unactive Lump, to stand still, or to command rest to that which they
imagined was incapable of Motion.

Be this however as it will, it is not a Fundamental of Religious Faith;
besides, we have no such certainty as to exclude all doubting, that the Sun is
a fixed Planet, or that the Earth turns round upon an Axis.

This Mosaic History, you find, has employed the Wits, and perplexed the
Understandings of many Learned Men, who, though they have taken upon them to find
faults in this Account, yet in their Endeavors to erect a new Theory, or to
reconcile the old to their own Reason, they have generally come short of the
satisfaction they had at first proposed to themselves.

Disquisitions of this Nature are for the most part fruitless; and indeed it is
but just that we meet with Disappointments in such Enquiries, where we limit
the Power of the Divine Being to our finite Apprehensions; and seemingly infer
that even Omnipotence it self cannot act any thing unfathomable by our weak
Capacities.

Let it suffice that we enjoy a plenary Knowledge that the World was created by
the Power of God, without enquiring for the (...), or quo pacto: and if the
Revealed History of Genesis is not full enough to surprise us into admiration
of its mighty Author, let us survey but any Portion of the curious Fabric, and
we may find as it were stamped thereon, such indelible Characters of his Power
and Wisdom, as must undoubtedly astonish us, and these discoverable by the
common mode of Humane Understanding.

Nevertheless, if the Exposition or Explanation of the Learned, may be in any
manner satisfactory, I shall here give you the Sentiments of one (and him alone
I prefer to a whole Sect of Philosophers) I mean the Judicious Mr. Boil, who
in his Enquiries into the vulgarly received Notion of Nature, expresses himself
as follows.

I think it probable (for I would not dogmatise on so weighty and so difficult
a Subject) that the great and wise Author of Things, did when he first formed
the universal and undistinguisht Matter into the World, put its parts into
various Motions, whereby they were necessarily divided into numberless Portions
of different Bulks, Figures and Scituations in respect to each other; and by
His infinite Wisdom and Power, He did so guide and overruled the Motion of
those parts at the Beginning of Things (whither in a shorter or a longer time,
Reason cannot well determine) that they were finally disposed into that
beautiful and orderly Frame we call the World, among whose parts some were so
curiously contrived as to be fit to become the Seeds or Seminal Principles of
Plants and Animals. And I farther conceive, that He settled such Laws or Rules
of Local Motion amongst the parts of the Universal Matter, that by his ordinary
and preserving Concourse, the several parts of the Universe, thus once
completed, should be able to maintain the great Construction or Systeme and
Economy of the Mundane Bodies, and propagate the Species of Living Creatures.

Again (says he) I consider the Frame of the World already made, as a great
and (if I may so speak) pregnant Automaton, or as a Ship furnished with Pumps,
Ordnance, etc. and is such an Engine as comprises and consists of several less,
and this compounded Machine in Conjunction with the Laws of Motion, freely
established, and still maintained by Almighty God in all its parts, I look upon
as a complex Principle, from whence results the settled Order or Course of
Things corporeal; and that which happens according to this Course, may
generally speaking be said to come to pass according to Nature, or to be done
by Nature; and that which thwarts this Order, may be said to be preternatural,
or contrary thereto. And indeed, though Men talk of Nature as they please, yet
whatever is done amongst Things inanimate (which make up incomparably the
greatest part of the Universe) is really done, but by particular Bodies acting
on one another by local Motion, modefy'd by the other Mechanical Affections of
the Agent of the Patient, and of those other Bodies that necessarily concur to
the Effect or Phenomenon produced.

^^^le of Qualities and Forms.
Farther, Though I agree with our Epicureans in thinking it probable, that the
World is made up of innumerable Multitude of singly insensible Corpul^ses,
endowed with their own Sires shapes and motions: And though I agree with the
Cartesians in believing (as I find that Anaxagoras did of old) that Matter has
not its motion from it self, but originally from God; yet in this I differ from
both Epicurus and Des Carts, that whereas the former of them plainly denies
that the World was made by any Deity; and the latter of them, for ought I can
find in his Writings, or some of those of his eminent'st Disciples, thought
that God, having once put Matter into Motion, and established the Laws of that
Motion, needed not more particularly interpose for the Production of Things
corporeal, nor even of Plants or Animals, which according to him are but
Engines: I do not at all believe that either th^se Cartesian Laws of Motion, or
the Epicurean Casual Concourse of Atoms, could bring mere Matter into so
orderly and well contrived a Fabric as this World; and therefore I think that
the wise Author of Things, did not only put Matter into Motion, but (when he
resolved to make the World) did so regulate and guide the Motions of the small
parts of the Universal Matter, as to reduce the greater Systems of them into
the order in which they were to (...), and did more particularly contrive some
of the Portions of that Matter into S^minal Rudiments or Principles, lodged in
convenient R^ceptacles (and as it were Wombs) and others into the Bodies of
Plants and Animals: one main part of whose Contrivance did (as I apprehend)
consist in this, That some of their Organs were so framed, that supposing the
Fabric of the geater Bodies of the Universe, and the Laws he had established,
some juicy and spirituous parts of these living Creatures must be fit to be
turned into prolific Seeds, whereby they may have a power by generating their
like, to propagate their Species. So that, according to my apprehension, it was
at the beginning necessary that an intelligent and wise Agent should contrive
the Universal Matter into the World (and especially some Portions of it into
Seminal Organs and Principles) and settle the Laws, according to which the
Motions and Actions of its Parts upon one another, should be regulated: without
which Interposition of the Worlds Architect, however moving Matter, with some
probability (for I see not in the Notion any Certainty) be conceived to be
able, after numberless occursions of its insensible Parts, to cast it self into
such grand Conventions and Convolutions as the Cartesians call Vortices, and as
I remember Epicurus speaks of under the Name of(...): yet I think it utterly
improbable that brute and unguided Matter (although moving) should ever convene
into such admirable Structures as the Bodies of perfect Animals. But the World
being once framed, and the Course of Nature established, the Naturalist
(excepting those Cases where God and Incorporeal Agents interpose) has recourse
to the first Cause, but for its general and ordinary Support and Influence;
whereby it preserves Matter and Motion from annihilation or desition; and in
explicating particular Phenomenon, considers only the Size, Shape, Motion, (or
want of it) Texture and the resulting Qualities and Attributes of the small
Particles of Matter, and thus in this great Automaton the World (as in a Watch
or Clock) the Materials it consists of being left to themselves, could never at
the first convene into so curious an Engine: yet when the skilful Artist has
once made and set it a going, the Phenomenon it exhibits are to be accounted
for by the Number, Bigness, Proportion, Shape, Motion (or endeavor) Rest,
Coaptation, and other Mechanical Affections of the Spring, Wheels, Pillars, and
other Parts it is made up of: and those Effects of such an Engine that cannot
this way be explicated, must, for ought I yet know, he confessed not to be
sufficiently understood.

You may hereby inform your self of the Sentiments of this great Philosopher,
with respect to the unavoidable necessity that we meet with of referring our
selves to some powerful intelligent Being, for the disposing the Mundane Bodies
into that wonderful and mighty Fabric we call the World. So that to sum up all,
whatever Opinion you may as yet harbor, with relation to the Nature of your
own Mind, and how great soever the Difficulties and seeming Absurdities may be,
which tend to impeach the Divine Providence, and rob the Deity of his
Government of the World; thus far I hope we are got at least, that whether or
no we are willing, we must acknowledge his Divine Fiat in the Business of
Creation; and there is no Man will e're be looked on as a Rabbi (if I may so
speak) in Atheism, till he becomes not only acquainted with real Essences, the
Mechanical Affections and all the Powers of Matter, but can intelligibly
resolve us how second Causes act in their several Productions, and which is the
main point of all, can prove to us that there was no need of Intelligence,
Power or Wisdom to preside in their Primitive Constitution.

It Is now high time to look about you, and if you look as becomes a Creature
endowed with Reason, there is nothing can present it self, which is not able to
discover its Almighty Author, or (in Helmont's Phrase) the Wisdom of the
Protoplast.

The Interest of Reason in Religion.
The Existence of a God (says another of great Learning) were there no such
thing as Supernatural Revelation, is plainly evidenced as well by what is
without us, as what is within. Hence it is, that although God, has wrought many
Miracles to convince Infidels and Misbelievers, yet He never wrought any to
Convince an Atheist, nor do the Penmen of Sacred Writ attempt to prove it, but
take it for granted, as being evidently manifest both by sensible and rational
Demonstration.

As for innate Idea's of God (continues He) I see no occasion to believe any
such thing at all: for I know of none that are formally innate; what we
commonly call so, are the Result of the Exercise of our Reason. The Notion of
God is no otherways inbred, than that the Soul is furnished with such a natural
Sagacity, that upon the Exercise of her Rational Powers, she is infallibly led
to the Acknowledgment of a Deity: and thus by looking inwardly upon our selves,
we perceive that the Faculty resident in us, is not furnished with all
Perfections, and therefore not Self-existent, nor indebted to it self for those
it has: otherwise it would have clothed it self with the utmost Perfections
it can imagine, and by consequence finding its own Exility and Imperfection, it
naturally and with case arrives at a Persuasion of deriving its Original from
some first Supreme and free Agent, who has made it what it is, and this can be
nothing but God. 2. We perceive that we have such a Faculty as apprehends,
judges, reasons: but what it is, whence it is, and how it performs these
things, we know not; and therefore there must be some Supreme Being, who has
given us this Faculty, and understands both the Nature of it, and how it
knows which we our selves do not. 3. Our Natures are such, that as soon as we
come to have the use of our Intellectual Faculties, we are forced to
acknowledge some things good, and others evil. There is an unalterable
Congruity betwixt some Acts and our reasonable Souls, and an unchangeable
incongruity betwixt them and others. Now this plainly sways to the Belief of a
God, for all distinctions of Good and Evil relate to a Law under the Sanction
of which we are, and all Law supposes a Superior who has right to command us:
and there can be no Universal ind^pendent Supreme but God. 4. We find our
selves possessed of a Faculty necessarily reflecting on its own Acts, and passing
a Judgment upon it self in all it does: which is a farther Conviction of the
Existence of a God; for it implys a Supreme Judge to whom we are accountable.
5. We find that we are furnished with Faculties of vast Appetites and Desires,
and that there is nothing in the World that can satisfy our Cravings, and by
Consequence there must be some Supreme Good, adequate and proportionate to the
longings of our Souls; which can be nothing but God. 6. We find the frame of
our Rational Powers to be such that we cannot form a Notion of God, though it
were in denying Him, but we include his Actual Existence in it. Optimus
maximus, or a perfect Being is the Idea we have of God, whenever we think of
Him; now this includes actual Existence, it being a greater perfection for a
thing to be essentially, independently and necessarily; then to be
contingently, and by imagination from another, on whose pleasure its Existence
depends. All Propositions, whose Praedicate is included in the Essence of the
Subject, are styled Self-evident, or per se nota: because if we do but once
understand the import of the Term styled the Subject, we necessarily assent to
its Identity with the Praedicate. 7. By consulting still our Faculties, we do
not find any thing included in our Idea, by virtue of which we must either ever
have been, or through existing this moment must necessarily exist the next;
which naturally conducts us to a persuasion of a God, from whom we derived our
Being at first, and to whom we owe our continued Subsistence.

Secondly, If we look around us, there is nothing discoverable but what bears
the most clear and perspicuous Characters of Wisdom, Contrivance or Design. Now
if we consider the naked Existence of Things, how they come to be in the
posture they are, we can by no means grant that they could cause themselves:
Existence as always presupposed to acting; Nothing can be both before and after
it self. Nor 2 dly, were they Eternal: For 1. it is an Hypothesis pregnant with
Contradictions, that any thing finite or dependent, as all things in the World
are, should be Eternal. 2. We see every thing subsist by a succession of
Generation and Corruption, which is plainly repugnant to Self and Eternal
Existence: Production from Eternity is a palpable Contradiction; whatever is
produced, passes from a state of Nonentity into a state of Being; and
therefore we must conceive a time when it was not, e're we can conceive the
time when it was. But the recency of the Existence of things, is plain from the
Deficiency either of History or Tradition anteced^ntly to Moses, and He is so
far from recording the World to have been Eternal, that He instructs us
particularly both how and when it began; and as the Word was not Eternal, so
neither did it result by a casual Concourse of the Particles of Matter, moving
in an infinite ultra Mundane space, and justling one another till they fell
into this form and order in which we now behold them. For 1. the Eternity of
Atoms is attended with the same Contradictions as the Eternity of the World. 2.
Motion is hereby supposed intrins^cal to Matter, which is not only false, but
impossible. It is the greatest Absurdity that can be imposed upon Reason, to
ascribe Motion to such a stupid and unactive Principle as Matter, without the
acknowledgment of a first and Divine Motor. 3. If all things be the Result of
Matter, how comes a Principle of Reason to be conveyed into us, by that which
had it not inherent in it self. 4. This Hypothesis supposes that to have been
the Effect of Chance, which openly shows a Divine Contrivance. 5. If the Fabric
of the World be no more than the result of the casual Meeting and Concatenation
of Atoms, how comes it to pass that by their daily striking against each other,
they do not dance themselves into more Worlds, at least into some one Animal or
other. 6. Epicurus 's Infinity of Atoms carries a repugnancy in it to his inane
space, and yet without this his whole Hypothesis falls to the ground; nor is it
possible to solve the permanency of the World, and the continuity of Bodies, by
the fortuitous concatenation of Atoms, through their different configurations
and jagg'd Angles, without the superintendency of an Omnipotent Goodness, who
sustains both the whole Creation and every part. Especially it is not
conceivable how such Bodies as are made up, either of globular Particles, or of
those minute Corpuscles which Des Chartes styles his first and second Elements,
should hold together without the influence of a higher Principle to keep them
in their consistency. And thus from these manifold Considerations of things
both without us and within us, are we led to a Persuasion and Conviction of the
Being of a God.

Nor can the Atheist who denies his Existence, give any rational Account of the
Universal Consent of Mankind, that there is one; whereas he that maintains one,
can easily resolve it by showing how such a Persuasion flows naturally from the
Exercise of every Man's Understanding: and forasmuch as it is alleged that
there have been some who have dissented, and consequently that the Persuasion
is not Universal, it amounts to no more, but that there have been some who did
(...), i. e. speak falsely of and belly our Nature: which may be so perverted by
Vice, that Men will not acknowledge what lies most proportionate to Reason;
being corrupted by bad Education, evil Customs and wicked Institutions, they
destroy even their most natural Notions. So that if the Contradiction of a
single Individual or two, were enough to invalidate a Universal Persuasion, or
to impeach a Natural Truth, there would be neither one nor the other in the
World; for not only Cicero tells us there is nothing so absurd which some of
the Philosophers have not maintained: But Aristotle informs us that there have
been some who have held that the same Thing might at the same time be, and not
be. So that, that thing is universally known, not which every one
acknowledges, but that which every one who has not debauched his Faculties,
does discern.

It Is a very sad Truth, when Men are sunk into the greatest Sensualities, their
Reason becomes (...), compliant with their Sensual Appetites. Besides, such Men
living as if there were no God, can make no Apology to the World for it, but by
espousing such Notions as may justify them in their Courses. Withal, being
resolved to live as they list, it is their Interest with reference to their
Tranquality in the mean time to believe, through holding that there is none to
call them to account, that they may do so, and quod valde volumus facile
credimus.

From what has been said upon this Argument, I see not what Evasions can be
found out to avoid this Concession that there is a God: And truly, considering
the slender supports of Atheism, viz. Chance and the World's Eternity, are so
easily overthrown, and prove insufficient to satisfy even the thinking
Libertine himself, I admire not that the more reputable Name of Deist has been
taken up by our Modern Vitioso's: the initial Letter of your Character must be
now expanged, and unless you acknowledge Theism, the Men of Letters, (however
debaucht) will laugh at and contemn you.

I have often wondered what those Men think of the Divine Being, or what God is,
who are so very familiar with his Name, that they scarce repeat a Sentence
without it, although it be by way of imprecating his Judgments, or wishing him to
damn them.

That the Name is more than a useless Sound most of them will acknowledge; and
those who boldly plead for the Custom of Swearing, do grant that though God is,
yet does He not take notice of what they say; neither are they capable (if not
punished here) of suffering hereafter. It must certainly be this Conceit that
emboldened a lewd Fellow, when he was asked whether he was in earnest when he
cried G -- d D -- ^ Him, to reply, That for his part, Jest or Earnest he
thought were equal, since though he wished Damnation, he believed there was
nothing in his Composition which was capable of it, and therefore there was no
danger. Custom had rendered the practice of it familiar, and he used it instead
of other words to imbellish his Discourse.

If profane Sweating be at all allowable, it must be to such as these; but for
any Man to pray that G -- d would D -- m his Soul, and at the same time to
believe its Immortality, or at least to fear any such thing, is a Matter
unaccountable, and no ways to be resolved but by the Degeneracy of our Reason,
the Abolition of our Sense, and a total Depravation of our Understandings: and
yet this is the Practice (I do not say of your self) of many who tell us they
are persuaded of the Being of a God, and that they are far from any Certainty
that their Souls may not survive their Bodies.

Dr. H -- y's new Principles of Philosophy.
There are many Men (says a Modern Philosopher, and Physician) ^^tho take a
wonderful delight in Swearing, each word must have a S'w -- ds, by G -- d, or a
G -- d D -- m them for its attendance; otherwise the Language would seem to be
imperfect, or at least to want its natural Eloquence. This Interjection of
Speech is so much practiced, that some Masters of Languages in France make it
the third Lesson to their Scholars. A German (continues he) newly arrived at
Paris, and applying his Mind to the study of that Language, showed me his third
Lesson which his Master had recommended to him to get by heart. This Pius of
Doctrine did contain no less than Thirty, or Five and Thirty Oaths, some of
which he said were of the last years Invention, which his Master had
particularly marked. I asked the Gentleman how he would come to know their
proper Places and Insertions? He answered me, that that was the first Question
he asked his Master; who resolved him, that a little Converse with the French
would soon make him perfect in that Business.

Well might this Ingenious Man cry out upon these Reflections, O Tempora! O
Mores! and surely it must strike every more than ordinary thoughtful Man, with
the most profound Admiration, to consider the Practices of those Men, who are
continually acting that which they themselves have all imaginable assurance
they shall sooner or later repent of, and be concerned for.

It Is very common, as I have before taken notice of, for Men to live as if
there were no God; and we may meet with some so extravagantly audacious, as to
tell us they are both certain of the truth of their Opinions, and certain that
(come what will) they shall never alter them. But yet I very much question,
whether one Instance can be given of a clearly reasoning Atheist, unconcerned
in his last Minutes. I had a very slight Acquaintance with a Gentleman of some
acquired Parts, who had frequently beasted amongst his intimate Friends; that
he questioned not but he should show at his Death the same disregard to the
Belief of a Divine Being, and the Immortality, as he had done all along; and
this he spoke with a more than usual Seriousness. Some few years after (as I
was told by one of his Friends) this Gentleman being on the Th^^es, the Boat
was overset by some Accident, and turned the bottom upwards. The Spark had been
just before Swearing and Damming himself in his wonted ^^ife; and yet
nevertheless upon his first sinking, he was heard very dolefully to cast out,
^^ God be mercif --. By the endeavor of the Watermen, and some other
Assistance, they were all saved, some of them almost expiring their last
Breath. 'Twas several days before this Person was able to go abroad; and upon
his first visit to one of his Fellows, he was upbraided with Cowardice for
betraying the Cause of Irreligion, and falsifying his Promise to dye an
Infidel. The Sense of his late Disorder had made too great an Impression to be
so soon obliterated, and calling to Mind his Deportment when he thought himself
a dead Man, he fairly confessed that he could not help what he did; though at the
same time, if his Soul proved independent, he thought himself plunging into
Eternal Misery: At this time (says he) my fears are pretty well worn off, I
find my self as much a Libertine as ever; though I must tell you, that you
shall never catch me making Resolutions what to do when I am dying.

Thus do these miserable Wretches, at one time or other (in spite of their
most firm Resolves to the contrary) betray the Weakness of their Cause, and by
their apparent fears that they are in the wrong, together with their many
private and public Recantations, they by some means or other satisfy us, that
there is no secure Dependence upon the strongest of their Arguments, or
weightiest of their Notions.

I might illustrate this Subject by a Transcript of those clear Thoughts and
Apprehensions of the Deity, which are conspicuous in the Writings even of the
Heathen Philosophers: but having already transgrest the Bounds of an Epistle, I
shall shut up all in the words of an unknown Author to this purpose.

Enquiry into the Evidence of Christian Faith.
It would be too tedious to consider all the little Cavils and Objections of
Atheists against a Deity: The most material are reducible to those that have
been proposed, and may be refuted by the Answers we now have given, for they
proceed either from wrong Apprehensions of the Nature and Attributes of God, or
from Ignorance of the Nature and Relation of other things, or from an obstinate
Resistance of what is de facto evident; and all of them demonstrate their
Unreasonableness and Absurdity, which does further appear by the unreasonable
Consequences of not acknowledging a Deity, which is a second way of proving it.

For if there be no God, then it necessarily follos that either every Thing
made it self, or that all things came from nothing, and that there are Effects
which have no Cause: for there is Life, Sense, and Reason without any Being
capable to produce them: and there are artificial Contrivances, regular
Proceedings, and wise Adaptations of Things to ends and purposes, far above the
Power and Capacity of any Thing which is Existent. These, and many such Things
as these follow the Denial of a God, which are not only great Difficulties, but
such gross and senseless Absurdities, as no thinking Person can swallow or
digest.

As therefore Deformity shows Shape and Proportion beautiful, so the Belief
of a Deity appears more reasonable by the Absurdity and Unreasonableness of
Atheism, which contradicts common Sense, overturns the agreed Principles of
Knowledge and Reason, confounds Chance and Contrivance, Accident and Design,
and which has its recourse to wild Romantic and most precarious Hypotheses; for
they cannot shun the owning an Infinity, and the Existence of something from
Eternity; and they are forced to acknowledge that things are framed according
to the Rules of Art and Proportion. Now as it not more reasonable to ascribe
the constant observance of these Rules, to an Intelligent Being, than to Chance
or no Cause? for there is no middle Thing betwixt them to be fixed on: either
the one or the other must take place. Nature, which they talk so much of, is an
obscure word for concealing their Thoughts and Sentimens; if by this they mean
something distinct from Matter, which moves and directs it, their Nature is God
in disguise; and if they must flee to this for a rational account of the
Production of Things, why do they quarrel at the word (GOD) which carries a
clear Idea, and in the sense of which all the World is agreed. Though this Nature
of theirs be equivalent, yet it is more mysterious, and therefore it smells of
some designed Perverseness, as if by the use of this word, and the disuse of the
other, they would turn Peoples thoughts from God, and God from the Honor of
being the Creator of all things. But if by Nature they only understand certain
Laws, and I know not what Ordinances, by which things must move, is this
sufficient to explain the first Productions of Things? For though it should be
true that Matter cannot move but according to those Laws, and that moving by
them in process of time, the Work could have been produced as it is at present,
after that Romantic manner of Cartesius: yet there was no cecessity that Matter
should move at all, nor could it move of it self; wherefore, whether they will
or not, they must own the Existence of something prior to Matter it self; or
the Motion of it, which Carts was sensible of, and therefore he could not
build his aerie and fanciful System without supposing the Existence of a Deity.
So that in a word, as God is the first Cause and Author of all things, this
Belief is the foundation of all solid Reason; what is not built on this is
Nonsense and Absurdity.

I know the Atheists arrogate to themselves Wit and Judgment and Knowledge
above others, and do think that it is the Ignorance and Credulity of the Bulk
of Mankind (at one lately words it) which make them to be of another Belief:
but why I pray must they carry away Sense and Understanding from others,
because they are so vain as to think it? Do not those in Bedlam think
themselves wiser than others? all the rest of the World are Fools in their
eyes, and those who keep them there not only such, but Oppressors and most
unjust. Yet Atheism is a more extravagant and pernicious Madness, which it is
the highest Interest of Mankind to keep from spreading. But alas, it has been
suffered to take root, it is cherisht and encouraged: Men walk the Streets, and
publicly act this Madness: in every Corner they throw their Scoffs, and Droll
against the Almighty Author of their Being. They meet in Companies to concert
how they may most wittily expose Him, and what is the readiest way to render
Him ridiculous in the eyes of others: a Clinch, a Jest, or puny Witticism, is
received and entertained and carried about with all diligence. Though there be no
reason why the Atheist should be a Zealot, there being no obligation on him to
propagate his opinions, and because the less they are entertained by others, he
himself is the more secure: Yet no Sect is become more zealous of late than
Atheists and their Fraternity, who maintain their Cause by an affro^ting
Impudence, by the Exercise of a frothy Wit instead of Reason, and by jesting
and drolling instead of serious Arguments; but let any Man judge if this be a
reasonable or commendable way of handling a Matter so serious and important:
Should Impudence run down Evidence? Should a Jest or a foolish Witticism be of
more weight than the Dictates of common Sense and sound Reason? If these Men
were capable of Counsel, I would ask them whether they are absolutely sure that
they are in the right? Are they able to demonstrate that there is no God? This
is more than any ever yet pretended to: and if they cannot pretend to this,
ought they not to walk very cautiously; if there be a God (as there may for any
assurance they have to the contrary) what then have they to expect for their
bold Insults and Oppositions to Him? Our Notion of a God is no vain Hypothesis
or imaginary Supposition; it is a Truth loudly proclaimed and strongly
confirmed, not only by Reason, but every part of the World. So that whatever
the Atheist may arrogate to himself, and whatever esteem may be paid to him in
a corrupt Age, yet i^ he so far from being wiser than others, that by the
Universal Voice of Nature, as well as that of Divine Revelation, he will be
declared a Fool who says there is no God.

May the Supreme Power direct us all to a Knowledge of Himself, such a
Knowledge as will be attended here with a solid Peace and Satisfaction, and
hereafter with Eternal Happiness. I have nothing more to add, unless this, that
I am (in all Sincerity)

Your real Friend to serve you.

LETTER II. Concerning Providence. To Mr. etc. --
My esteemed Friend,
IN my former you had the Thoughts of several Learned Men, together with my own
Conjectures, concerning that unhappily controverted Truth (the Basis of all
others) the Existence of a God. In this I shall communicate my own Sentiments
(amongst those of some more prudent Persons) concerning Providence: a Matter by
almost all Men frequently debated, although by very few of them very rationally
explicated.

This is indeed a Theme so difficult, so intricate and obscure, so amasingly
stupendous, and withal a Subject that requires so very much Caution in its
Explanation, on the account of its general Moment and Concern, that I profess
to you, I scarce know where or in what manner to begin, or how to deliver my
Conceptions freely on this weighty Argument: I will however venture some few of
my own Thoughts, rude and indigested as they have occurred upon a short
Reflection; if the Philosopher should happen to get the Ascendant of the
Christian, I hope it will be excused by those who consider the Person unto whom
I write: You have given me, I must acknowledge, a liberty to open the Pandects
of Nature, and to furnish my self from thence with any thing that seems useful,
but will have nothing to be thought valid which is transferred from the more
Sacred Records of Revelation.

A God, ergo a Providence, has been by almost all, but especially Christian
Philosophers, thought a necessary Conclusion: but since we are to concede
nothing by way of an implicit Faith, or as founded upon the bare Testimony of
other Men, I shall not spend my time in considering the Analogy, or reflecting
whether or no these terms are Synonimous: but will endeavor impartially to
take notice, not only of some few particulars, which may countenance, but of
some others which seem to thwart and to be repugnant to this Notion, as it
seems generally established.

In order to my proceeding, I expect you should take notice that with some
others, who have written upon this Subject, I distinguish Providence as
bipartite, or under a double signification ( viz.) General and Particular; the
former, which by Philosophers is termed the general Concourse or Cooperating
Influence, I conceive to be so reasonable and intelligible a Notion, that I
presume, when once you have consented to the acknowledgment of a first Cause of
all Things, you will find your self as it were necessitated to own, that the
same Power who created the Universal Matter out of Nothing, and disposed its
several Parts into so many curious and elaborate Engines, must unavoidably be
concerned, at least in the preservation of the same from Annihilation, or
extend a Power of Conservation to its continuance and support; for however
possible it may be to conceive that God Almighty in directing the Particles of
Matter into their several Shapes, Forms, or Configurations, did establish
certain Catholic Laws of Motion, yet surely, if hereupon we suppose the Deity
to retire within himself, no farther to be concerned with his Divine
Workmanship, nor so much as ever after to think of or regard it; it is utterly
unconceivable that Matter and Motion, and the several Textures arising from
their Combination, can be kept on foot, or secured from their Primitive
Nonexistence.

In this Doctrine of God's ordinary Concurrence, I must confess I can find
nothing but what is easy and as it were self-evident; but when we survey some
very unaccountable Ph^nomena, and those various Anomali's which run retrograde
to our Sense and Opinions of the Divine Attributes; when we reflect upon what
some call the Prosperity of wicked Men, and the Adversity of the good; when we
see Justice and Innocence trampled under foot, and all that's good and virtuous,
degraded and contemned, whilst Vice in the mean while reigns as it were
triumphant; when we see that neither the Profession nor Practice of the Sacred
Rites of Religion, can secure us from Rapine, Cruelty and Oppression; lastly,
when we consider, as the Atheist says, That Time and Chance happens to all;
these, I say, notwithstanding they may be fairly solved by those Primitive Laws
of Motion bestowed on Matter, and still maintained by the Divine Being; yet
when we view them as under his immediate Concern and Government, or resulting
from his especial Providence, they then appear with a somewhat differing
Aspect, and leave our Reason in a thick Darkness and Obscurity.

To this purpose, you may object that however great and wise that Power may be,
who made the World, you can discover not much of either in its Government. You
can own indeed, that all Effects must have sufficient Causes, but then (of
which you make so mighty an advantage) you daily find these Causes take place
in the production of all Effects promiscuously, and that they are seldom or
never prevented by a Divine Suspension, even when they seem to impeach the
Power and Wisdom of an especial Providence. That I may give an Instance
suitable to your own Thoughts; You see that Mankind (from whatsoever Cause they
had their Origin) are now continued by the mutual Embrace or Carnal Knowledge
of the Two Sexes; and therefore you don't admire, that when they come together
in the state of Wedlock, or under the Nuptial Institution, with the Generative
Organs rightly disposed, that they should propagate their Species: but when on
the other hand, you consider many incestuous Embraces, and that a Conception is
the Result of a Venereal Act in Fornication or Adultery, provided the faeminine
Ova are prolific, or capable of Impregnation by the Seminal Aura of the Male:
Here you see abundant Reason to cry out of Providence, and expect the Supreme
Power should either immediately pursue the Transgressors with Divine Vengeance,
or suspend his Laws of Motion in the Act, in order to prevent a spurious
Illegitimate Issue.

Again, by the same Catholic Law of Motion, or rather by a Specific Gravity or
Principle of Gravitation (which is the Property of every Particle of Matter)
you come to understand that if a ponderous Body be suspended by too slender a
Line, or a weighty Structure raised upon an infirm Basis, insufficient for its
Support or Fulcrum: Here, I say, by a very little knowledge in Mechanics, you
easily foresee, that if the suspended Body preponderate the force intended to
hold it up, the Line must necessarily break, and the weight as necessarily
fall: so likewise the Building in time grown ruinous, or decayed by other
Accidents (the Foundation failing) most certainly tumbles; but if a sober or
reputed pious Man passing by should chance to make a Perpendicular to the
suspended Body at the time of the Lines breaking, and by the fall of the said
weight receive some extraordinary hurt: or if by the sinking of an infirm
Building, a supposedly righteous Family should be crushed to Death; here the
Atheist thinks he has a strong and powerful Reason to inveigh against, or
triumph over the Providence of God, and will hardly be persuaded, but that if
the Divine Being did inspect or concern himself with the Affairs of Mankind, he
would upon all such Emergencies miraculously interpose, and either by a
Revelation, or some other Supernatural Illumination, discover to us the
impending danger, or (for our Security) stop the Laws of Motion, which he at
first established, or deprive those Bodies of their Specific Gravitation which
would otherwise injure us.

Farther, According to this general and prime established Law, it is easy to
conceive that According to Mr. Boil.
the minute Particles of Matter, each of them having their own proper size,
shape or texture, as it happens that they are posited in reference to the
Horizon, as erected, inclining or level, when they come to convene into one
Body, from their primary Affections, Disposition and Contrivance, as to Posture
and Order, there must necessarily result that which by one comprehensive Name,
we call the Figure, Shape, or Texture of that Body: and what we call a Monster
after this manner produced, is so far from being an Error or Trespass upon the
Laws of Motion, that there is nothing less than a Miracle could prevent it; and
indeed supposing the Particles of Matter (from whatever Cause) posited in the
manner we are now speaking, it would be much more monstrous, if they should
convene into any other Shape, which we account more regular, handsome, or
complete. But then, when we survey this unusual Figure as the Workmanship of
the Deity, especially where we suppose the same was designed a Mansion for the
Rational Soul, we expect that the Supreme Architect should have interposed, and
either alterd the Laws of Motion, or have given a new Modification to the
Particles of Matter, whereby they might be disposed to have better answered his
Design, and to be rendered more pliable to what Philosophers pronounce the
Plastic Power.

Our Reflections of this Nature, upon the particular Providence or God's
Government of the World, do put us very often upon the most impious
Conclusions, and almost persuade us to question (if we are not very cautious
and sensible that it is impossible for us to fathom his Designs) whether there
be any Divine Intelligence at all, or other Superintendent Being, who sits at
the Helm, and takes notice of us Mortals; all this being in our Opinions more
easily resolvable into Time and Chance, Matter and Motion.

These (if I mistak not) are the unhappy Doubts of the Inconsiderate, and
although they appear not so bare faced in the modester sort of Infidels, yet are
they (so far as we are able to apprehend) the genuine Thoughts of every
irreligious or profane Person.

We are too apt to set up our own perverted, shallow, and corrupt Reason for
the Universal Standard, to which Test must be brought not only each others
Actions, but those of God himself, and (which is somewhat strange)
notwithstanding scarce any one of our Lives is regulated by this Exemplar; yet
if we cannot immediately reconcile the unsearchable and inscrutable Designs of
the Supreme Power, to our own finite Understandings; if we discover not the
most secret Mysteries or Arcana Deitatis, and are unable to account for each
several Dispensation, we blaspemously cry out with Epicurus, Aut De^^ vult
toltere Mala, and non potest: aut potest and non vult: aut utque vult neque
potest: aut and vult and potest. Si vult and non potest, imbecillis est,
idioque non Deus. Si potest and non vult, invid^^ est, quod aeque alienum a
Deo. Si neque vult neque potest: and invid^^ and imbecillis est, idebque utque
Deus. Si vult and potest, quod solum Deo convenit, unde ergo Mala? aut cur illa
non tollit?

Believe me (Sir) I have been often apt to think, that we need not seek much
farther for the Causes of Irreligion, than our mistaken Notions concerning
Providence* nor indeed can I persuade my self of a greater stumbling Block, or
more considerable Difficulty, to be encountered in the Christian Warfare. It is
this which has sometimes staggered the Faith of some of the wisest Men, and
made others pure Skeptics in Matters of Religion. It was this which put the
Divine Psalmist (if I may use his words) upon crying out, Psalm. 73.
But as for me, my Feet were almost go^e, my step^ had well ^igh slipped. For I
was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked: for they
are not in trouble as other Men, neither are they ^l^g^ed like other Men. Their
Eyes stand out with fatness: they ^^^e more then heart could wish. They are
corrupt and speak wickedly. They set their Mouth against the Heavens, and they
say how does God kn^w. Behold! these are the ungodly, who prosper in the World:
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in Innocence: for
all the day long have I been plagued and chastened every Morning. When I
thought to know this it was too painful for me, until I went into the Sanctuary
of God, then understood I their end.

We have surely the less Reason to admire, that the regardless and foolish
Libertine should be startled at the seemingly unequal distribution of the
Divine Favors, when we find the devout Psalmist himself almost confounded, and
openly confessing that these things were too painful for his knowledge, till he
went into the Sanctuary and there informed himself.

Lactantius lib. 3. c. 17.
To the same purpose (says one of the ancient Fathers) Videbat Epicurus, Bonis
adversa semper accidere: Paupertatem, Labores, Curae, Amissiones: Malos contra
Beatos esse, augeri Potentia, Honoribus affici. Videbat Innocentiam minus
tutam, Scelera impune committi. Videbat sine delectu Morum, sine ordine and
discrimine annorum, saevire Mortem: sed alios ad Senectutem pervenire, alios
Infantes rapi, alios jam robustos interire, alios in primo adolescentiae flore
immaturis funeribus extingui. In Belli^ potius meliores and vinci, and perire;
maxim autem commovebat, Homines imprimis religiosos malis affici; iis autem,
qui aut Deos omnino negligerent, aut minus pie colerent, vel minora incommod^
evenire, vel nulla.

It was the like Consideration, which extorted that Confession of Ovid, Cum
rapiant Mala Fata Bonos, ignoscite fasso,
Sollicit^r null^s esse putare Deos.


It was the seeming Felicity of the Impious and Unjust, with the smart
Afflictions of the Pious and Devout, that amazed the sober Claudian (as he is
called by Dr. Ch --) and more than inclined him to Apostatize from Religion,
and declare himself on the side of Epicurus in these words: In Ruffin. lib. 1.
Sepe mihi dubiam traxit Sententia Mentem,
Curarent Superi Terras, au nullus inesset
Rector, and incerto fluerent Mortalia Casu?
Sed cum Res Hominum ta^ta Caligine volvi
Adspicerem, laetosque diu florere Nocentes,
Vexariqu^ Pios: rursu^ labefacta Cadebat
Religio, causaeque viam non sponte sequebar
Alterius vacuo quae currere semina motu
Adfirmat, magnumque novas per Inane figuras
Fortuna, non Art regi, quae Numina Sensu
Ambiguo vel nulla putat, vel nescia nostri.


Men look into the World; and perceive a shower of Good and Evil over their
Heads, which falls down, as they imagine, without Choice or Direction: They
acknowledge indeed an established Law of Motion, but by what Power they heed
not; nor will they be persuaded of the Author's Justice, since the same Event
at sometimes happens to all; and if the Wicked have not the Precedence, they
are at least equally happy in this Life with the Good and Pious.

Dr Stillingfleet Sermon. at Whitehall on Luke 7.35.
These Men (says that great Master of Antiquity the Learned B -- of W --) have
found out an expurgatory Index for those Impressions of a Deity which are in
the hearts of Men; and use their utmost Art to obscure, since they cannot
extinguish, those lively Characters of his Power, which are every where to be
seen in the large Volume of the Creation.

Religion is no more to them, but an unaccountable Fear, and the very Notion of
a Spiritual Substance (even of that without which we could never know what a
Contradiction meant) is said to imply one; but if for quietness sake, and it
may be to content their own Minds, as well as the World, they are willing to
admit of a Deity (which is a mighty Concession from them who have so much Cause
to be afraid of Him) then to ease their Minds of such troublesome Companions as
their Fears, they seek by all means to dispossess Him of his Government of the
World, by denying his Providence and Care of Humane Affairs. They are contented
He should be called an Excellent Being, that should do nothing, and therefore
signify nothing in the World. Or if the Activity of their own Spirits may make
them think that such an Excellent Being may sometimes draw the Curtain, and
look abroad into the World, then every Advantage which another has got above
them, and every cross Accident which befalls themselves (which by the power of
Self-flattery, most Men have learnt to call the prosperity of the Wicked, and
the Sufferings of good Men) serve them for mighty Charges against the Justice
of Divine Providence. Thus either God shall not govern the World at all, or if
He do, it must be upon such terms as they please, or approve of. So great is
the Pride and Arrogance of our Nature, that it loves to be condemning what it
cannot comprehend; and truly, there need be no greater Reason given concerning
the many Disputes in the World about Divine Providence, than that God is wise,
and we are not, but would fain seem to be so; while we are in the Dark, we
shall be always quarrelling, and those who contend most, do it that they might
seem to others to see, when they know themselves that they do not.

The variety of Disputes which have been founded upon the unaccountable Methods
of the Divine Providence, and the Arguments brought by designing Men to
overthrow this Notion, as it is founded in Religious Minds, though they have
perverted the Faith of some, and like an impetuous Torrent, overwhelmed and
confounded a great part of the Christian, as well as Heathen World, have yet
proved ineffectual to Bias or Seduce those, whose Modesty has been greater than
to set up their own Reason for an adequate Rule of Truth; who have had more
Piety and solid Wisdom than to limit the Power even of Omnipotence it self, to
their own bounded and very narrowly circumscribed Intellectuals; and too much
Consideration to be imposed on, by the Information of their External Senses, or
to take every slight appearance of Reason for a convincing Argument.

It is surely the most ridiculous Folly and Presumption of which any Man can be
guilty, to pretend to set limits to that most Excellent Being, by whose Power
we live; or to deny the All-wise Author that Homage and Fealty due unto Him,
for no other Reason, but because we cannot acquaint our selves with the secret^
of his Designs, have very little knowledge of final Causes, cannot dive into
the motives of every single Dispensation, and are not chosen Privy Counselors
to the Majesty of Heaven. But before I attempt any Explication of the foregoing
Difficulties, or make any Reply to these usual Atheistical Objections, I will
give you the Sentiments of two very Learned Men concerning the general
Concourse or Act of Conservation, which one of them has been pleased to term a
continued Act of Creation; a Business of so vast an import and necessity, that
should it please the Almighty Architect, for the least moment of time, wholly
to withdraw his Divine Power of Preservation or ordinary Concourse, the
Universal System must fall to ruin, and this beautiful Fabric be immediately
translated into its Primitive Chaos.

In our Reflections upon Divine Providence, Des Carts upon the Passions of the
Soul.
we are to imagine it impossible that any thing should happen otherwise, than
the same Providence has determined: for it must be understood that all things
are guided by his Providence, whose Decrees are so immutable, that unless those
things which the said Decrees have pleased to let depend on our free
Disposition, we ought to think for our parts, that nothing happens but what
must of necessity; nor can we without a Crime, desire that the same should
happen otherwise.

Mr. Boil in his Enquiry into the Notion of Nature, has some particular
Thoughts, which however at first view they may seem to thwart an especial
Providence of God, for that He does not interpose or miraculously intervene, so
often as we expect he should; yet they will give us a clear insight into our
mistaken Notions concerning that Semi-Deity we call Nature, and helps us to
reconcile some very odd Effects, not only to our Belief of the Divine Being,
but of his general Concourse.

1. I conceive (says that Excellent Philosopher) that the Omniscient Author of
Things, Boil of Nature.
who in his vast and boundless Understanding comprehended at once the whole
Systeme of his Works, and every part, did not mainly intend the welfare of such
or such particular Creatures, but subordinated his Care of their Preservation
and Welfare, to his Care of maintaining the Universal Systeme and Primitive
Scheme and Contrivance of his Works; and especially those Catholic Rules of
Motion and other grand Laws, which he at first established amongst the portions
of the Mundane Matter: so that when there happens such a Concourse of
Circumstances, that particular Bodies, fewer or more must suffer, or else the
settled Frame, or the usual Course of things must be altered, or general Law of
Motion hindered from taking place; in such Cases, I say, the Welfare and
Interest of Man himself, as an Animal, and much more that of inferior Animals,
and of other particular Creatures, must give way to the Care that Providence
takes of Things of a more general and important Nature and Condition. This
premised, to obvi^^^ Mis-constructions, I shall take notice that there are
several Instances of Persons, who have been choked with a Hair, which they
were unable either to cough up, or to swallow down. The reason of this fatal
Accident is probably said to be the irritation that is made by the stay of so
unusual a thing as a Hair in the Throat, which occasions every violent and
disorderly or convulsive Motions, to expel it in the Organs of Respiration; by
which means the continued Circulation of the Blood, necessary to the Life of
Man, is hindered, the consequence whereof is speedy Death: but this agrees very
ill with the Vulgar Supposition of such a kind and provident Being as they
represent Nature, which is always at hand to preserve the Life of Animals, and
succor them in their Physical Dangers and Distresses, as occasion requires;
for since a Hair is so slender a Body that it cannot stop the Throat, so as to
hinder either the free passage of Meat and Drink into the Stomach, or that of
the Air to and from the Lungs (as may he argued from diverse no way mortal
Excrescencies and Ulcers in the Throat) were it not a great deal better for
Nature to let the Hair alone, and to stay till the Juices of the Body have
resolved or consumed it, or some other favorable Accident have removed it,
than like a passionate and transported thing, oppose it like a Fury, with such
a blind violence, as instead of ejecting the Hair, expels the Life of him who
was troubled with it. How the care and wisdom of Nature will be reconciled to
so improper and disorderly a proceeding, I leave her Admirers to consider: but
it will appear very reconcilable to Providence, if we reflect upon the lately
given Advertisement; for in regard of the use and necessity of deglutition, and
in many cases of coughing and vomiting, 'twas in the general most convenient
that the part ministering to those Motions, should be irritated by the sudden
sense of things that are unusual, though perhaps they would not be otherwise
dangerous or offensive; because, as we formerly noted, 'twas fit that the
Providence of God should, in making provision for the welfare of Animals, have
more regard to that which usually and regularly befalls them, then to
extraordinary Cases or unfrequent Accidents.

2. Now the difficulty we find to conceive, how so great a Fabric as the World
can be preserved in order, and kept from running again to a Chaos, seems to
arise from hence, That Men do not sufficiently consider the unsearchable Wisdom
of the Divine Architect, or (...) (as the Scripture styles Him) of the World;
whose piercing Eyes were able to look at once quite through the Universe, and
to take into his prospect both the beginning and the end of time: so that
perfectly foreknowing what would be the consequence of all the possible
Conjectures of Circumstances, into which Matter divided and moved according to
such Laws, could in an Automaton, so constituted as the present World is,
happen to be put, there can nothing fall out, unless when a Miracle is wrought,
that shall be able to alter the course of things, or prejudice the Constitution
of them any farther than He did from the Beginning foresee and think fit to
allow. And truly, it more sets off the Wisdom of God, in the Fabric of the
Universe, that He can make so vast a Machine as the Macrocosm, perform all
those many things which he designed it should, by the mere contrivance of brute
Matter, managed by certain Laws of local Motion, and upheld by his ordinary and
general concourse, than if He employed from time to time an intelligent
Overseer, such as Nature is fancied to be, to regulate, assist and control the
Motion of its parts. For as Aristotle, by introducing the Opinion of the Worlds
Eternity, did at least in almost all Men's Opinions, openly deny God the
Production of the World; so by ascribing those admirable Works of God to what
he calls Nature, he tacitly denis him the Government of the World.

Now those things (continues he) which the School Philosophers ascribe to the
Agency of Nature, interposing according to Emergencies, I ascribe to the Wisdom
of God in the Fabric of the Universe; which He so admirably contrived, that if
He but continue his ordinary and general Concourse, there will be no necessity
of extraordinary Ineterpositions; which may reduce Him to seem as it were to
play after-games: all those Exegencies upon whose account Philosophers and
Physicians have devised what they call Nature, being foreseen and provided for
in the first Fabric of the World: So that mere Matter, thus ordered, shall in
such and such Conjunctures of Circumstances, do all that Philosophers ascribe
on such occasions to their almost Omniscient Nature, without any knowledge what
it does, or acting otherwise than according to the Catholic Laws of Motion.
For when it pleases God to overruled or control the established Course of
Things in the World, by his own Omnipotent Hand, what is thus performed may be
much easier discerned and acknowledged to be miraculous, by them that admit in
the ordinary Course of Corporeal things, nothing but Matter and Motion, whose
powers Men may well judge of, than by those who think there is besides a
certain Semi-Deity which they call Nature, whose skill and power they
acknowledge to be exceeding great, and yet have no sure way of estimating how
great they are, and how far they may extend. And give me leave to to take
notice to you, on this occasion, that I observe the Miracles of our Savior and
his Apostles, pleaded by Christians on behalf of their Religion, to have been
very differently looked upon by Epicurean and other Corpuscularian Infidels:
and by those other Unbelievers, who admit of a Soul, of the World, or Spirits
in the Stars; or in a word, think the Universe to be governed by Intellectual
Beings distinct from the Supreme Being we call GOD: For this latter sort of
Infidels have often admitted those Matters of Fact, which we Christians call
Miracles, and yet have endeavored to solve them by Astral Operations and other
ways; whereas the Epicurean Enemies of Christianity have thought themselves
obliged resolutely to deny the Matters of Fact themselves, as well discerning
that the Things said to be performed, exceeded the Mechanical Powers of Matter
and Motion (as they were managed by those who wrought the Miracles) and
consequently must either be denied to have been done, or be confessed to have
been truly miraculous. Thus far Mr. Boil.

I must confess my self extremely taken with the Thoughts of this great Man,
which are every where so weighty, and withal so modest, that I know of no
Author I have as yet consulted, who has so pertinently handled in a few words
this noble Theme, or afforded me so much Content and Satisfaction.

I have been formerly, like your self, very familiar with Fate and Fortune,
Time and Chance, with Destiny and other empty Notions; and which was the
farthest of my Flight, when I knew how to talk of Real Qualities and
Substantial Forms, when I conceived the Archaeus or Plastic Power as a kind of
Agent or Intelligent Being, disposing and ordering the Seminal Principles;
choosing or selecting fit Materials; designing and drawing out as it were the
first Rudiments of Life, and delivering to each Part a Capacity to discarge its
Office or proper Function. Lastly, When I could resolve all with much ease into
the ambiguous term of Nature, I thought my self arrived at a Ne plus ultra,
till the Result of a more serious Consideration, which I was put upon by a
Converse with the Writings of this Divine Philosopher, obliged me to conclude
thus, and to take for granted, That however all the Phenomenon, or each several
Event we have, or ever shall see come to pass, may be accounted the immediate
Offspring of Matter, as variously modified by local Motion: Yet
notwithstanding this Concession, we must mediately recur to the Divine
Providence, not only for some Author of this Motion, who did in the beginning
establish its Laws, or prescribe those general Rules it is governed by; but also
for a Power by whose Cooperating Influence the same are still maintained, and
without which these second Causes (by too many only taken notice of) would be
deprived of their Energy.

There is nothing, Sir, will hely you to evade this, unless it be the sorry
Refuge of the Worlds Eternity; which in my former Letter was proved to be taken
up with any shadow of Reason or Probability: a most precarious Assertion, which
being denied can never be proved: A Contradiction to the Universal Tradition of
Mankind, which has always attested that the World had a Beginning. It is an
Assertion against the current Testimony of all History, which traceth the
Original of Nations and People, the Invention of Arts and Sciences, and which
shows that all have happened within the space of less than Six thousand years,
according to the most probable (if not certain) Calculation, which could not be
if the World or Man had been Eternal: It Is therefore with much reason that your
beloved Lucretius thus wittingly argues upon this Topic, But grant the World
Eternal, Lucret. l. 5.
grant it knew
No Infancy, and grant it never now,
Why then no Wars our Poets Songs employ
Beyong the Siege of Thebes, or that of Troy?
Why former Heroes fell without a Name?
Why not their Battles told by lasting Fame?
But it is as I declare; and thoughtful Man
Not long ago and all the World began:
And therefore Arts that lay but rude before
Are published now, we now increase the store
We perfect all the old and find out more.
Shipping's improved, we add new Oars and Wings,
And Music now is found and speaking Strings.
These Truths, this Rise of Things we lately know.


But I have endeavored likewise to demonstrate that the Supposition of Eternal
Matter is ogregiously absurd, and that Motion is by no means to be accounted
of the Essence of Matter, but extra-advenient thereunto; yet supposing that
has Motion and Matter were Eternal, without a powerful and wise Providence to
direct the Particles of Matter, and give Laws to Motion, there could never have
been any thing else than an Eternal Jumble, nor so much as one regular
Structure would ever have been produced. This I am persuaded is an Apodictical
or Self-evident Truth, although for its Illustration I will enlarge in Mr. B --
's words.

There are indeed but few productions which are not Mechanical; Rently's 4th
Sermon. p. 19, 20.
but the Powers of Mechanism, as they are entirely dep^^^^^^ on the Deity, so
they afford us a very solid Argument for the Reality of his Nature. If we
consider the Phenomenon of the Material World, with a due and serious
attention, we shall plainly perceive that its present Frame and Constitution,
with its established Laws, are constituted and preserved by gravitation alone;
that is the powerful Cement which holds together this magnificent Structure of
the World; without that the whole Universe, if we suppose an undetermined Power
of Motion infused into Matter, would have been a confused Chaos; without Beauty
or Order, and never stable or permanent in any Condition: Nevertheless this
Gravity, the great Basis of all Mechanism, is not it self Mechanical, but the
immediate Fiat or Finger of God, and the Execution of the Divine Law: for there
is no body that has this Power of tending toward a Center, either from it self
or from other Bodies: so that though we do believe and allow that every Particle
of Matter is endowed with a Principle of Gravity, whereby it would descend to
the Center, if it were not repelled upwards by heavier Bodies; yet are we fully
persuaded, and certainly convinced, that this Gravity must be derived to it by
nothing less than the Power of God.

If we consider the Heart which is supposed to be the first Principle of Motion
and Life, and mentally divide it into its constituent Parts, its Arteries and
Veins, and Nerves and Tendons, and Membranes and the innumerable little Fibers
that these secondary Parts do consist of; we shall find nothing here singular,
but what is in any other Muscle of the Body: it is only the Site and Posture of
these several Parts, and the Configuration of the whole, that give it the Form
and Functions of a Heart: now why should the first single Fibers in the
formation of the Heart, be peculiarly drawn in spiral Lines, when the Fibers of
all other Muscles are made by a transverse Rectilinear Motion, or what could
determine the fluid Matter into that odd and singular Figure, when as yet no
other Member is supposed to be formed, that might design the Orbit of its
Course? Let Mechanism here make an Experiment of its Power, and produce a
spiral and turbinated Motion of the whole moved Body without an External
Director? It Is true, when the Organs are once framed by a Supernatural and
Divine Principle, we can willingly enough admit of Mechanism in many Functions
of the Body, but that the Organs themselves should be mechanically formed, is
as impossible as inexplicable.

I shall now flatter my self with hopes, that what I have here alleged will be
looked upon by you to be but little short of Demonstration, not only that there
is a God (which was the Subject of my first) but that He governs the World at
least by keeping up his established Laws of Motion, or by the general Concourse
of his Providence, which is manifestly conspicuous in his maintaining this
mighty System of the World, and in the Efficacy derived from Him unto Secondary
Agents, or those which are more frequently termed Natural Causes.

What remains of this Argument, which is by much the more intricate and
difficult part, relates to the special Providence, upon which is founded, as I
conceive, our Belief of these two Propositions: 1. That God Almighty, or the
First and Supreme Being, in his Government of the World, has not so
indispensably confined Himself to those general Laws of Motion He at first
settled in the World, but that He has reserved to Himself a power of Dispensing
with the same, and does deviate from these Rules by Suspending the Laws of
Motion, or by a particular Intervention and Interposition of his Power, so
often as it pleases Him to act miraculously, or to bring to pass a
Supernatural Effect. 2. That all the several Changes, Revolutions, or whatever
else befalls us from the Womb even to our Graves, are by the special Providence
of God allotted for us.

As to what respects the first of these, viz. God Almighty's deflecting or at
some times deviating from his usual and general Laws, it is impossible we
should ever Convince any obstinate Infidel of any such Matter of Fact, unless
he were an Eyewitness when the Business was transacted, and so as it were
compelled to acknowledge the Effect to be Supernatural, or surmounting the
Power of Secondary Agents.

We have indeed a sort of Men in the World, so wonderfully conceited of their
own Acquirements, and so strangely opinion'd of the Extension of their own
Minds, as to imagine there can be no such thing as an inexplicable Event; but
that all may be fairly and intelligibly resolved without that pusillanimous and
servile Refuge (as they express themselves) of recurring to a Miracle, the
Founders (say they) of which, have always been some subtle Impostors, who to
promote an Interest or to serve their own turn, have found it no very difficult
Matter to impose upon the Mole-ey'd Multitude. And at this rate not only the
Supernatural Actions of the Apostles, but the Surprising and Stupendous ones
of their Master Jesus Christ, must either by these Men be utterly denied, or
resolved (if it were possible) by the generally established Laws, or (in their
own words) by the Powers of Nature: so that we must either believe the History
of our Savior to be pure Forgery, a Romantic Legend fob'd upon us by designing
Men, or else we must have recourse to the Men of this piercing Apprehension,
and consult them as our Oracles for an Explanation of those Accounts, which we,
poor silly Creatures, believe to have been miraculous.

It is in vain, I know, to send you to that Sacred History, where so many of
these Stupendous and Divine Operations are faithfully recorded, whilst you
continue so Skeptical as to doubt concerning the Credit of the Historian, or so
much an Infidel as to deny the History to be an Authentic Record. If you can
believe there was ever such a Person as Jesus Christ, or such Men as his
Apostles, which I think in reason you are as much ob^ig'd, as to believe that
there were any Contemporary Prince or People at that time upon Earth, nay
(setting aside the remoteness of Place and Time) as that there ever was such a
Person as King Charles the First in England, or Lowis the Thirteenth in France:
If, I say, you can concede this, I would then beg you to consider, which way or
by what means you can conceive it possible, that the surprising and
supernatural Acts of those we are now speaking of, such as the turning Water
into Wine, satisfying the hungry Appetites of many hundreds with no more then
naturally suffic^d for some few single Persons: Walking upon the Surface of the
Water, restoring the Sick by a word speaking, and commanding the Dead to arise
from the Grave, with many others which were performed, not clandestinely or in
private, but in the midst of very great Assemblies, or a large Concourse of
People, and those for the most part implacable Enemies, and consequently very
curious in sifting out the Truth: I say, I would fain know which way you can
conjecture a Possibility that a Design of this Import and Universal Tendency,
could be fraudulently carried on inperceptibly to that great Number of Auditors
and Spectators, who were not wholly made up of the giddy Rabble or
inconsiderate Mob, but had some, even of the Priests and Elders of the Jewish
Church (Men doubtless too well acquainted with the Powers of Matter and Motion
to be imposed on) to attest the Truth of many of these Operations. We may
easily believe that those who looked upon the Gospel Promulgation, as an
insupportable Burden and Incroachment, and accounted it no other than a kind
of Heretical Innovation upon their more anciently established Law, would make it
their Business to pry into and enquire with their utmost Caution into the truth
of those Facts, which finding themselves obliged to acknowledge Supernatural or
Surmounting the Laws of Nature, or the force of Second Causes, yet rather than
confess any such Matter as a Divine Energy, they would have them to be
transacted by a Diabolical Assistance.

I might make, I think a farther very rational Query, Whether you can believe
the Accounts we have given us in Ecclesiastic History of the Martyrdoms or
painful Sufferings of some of these Apostles: If you do believe any of these
Accounts, as I think you may those at least which are recorded by some Friends
even of the Tyrants themselves, who were concerned in the Patriarchal
Tragedies, it will be worth while to enquire into the Motives which induced
them to hazard their Lives, by taking on them their several Embassses: If
instead of Honor, you find they had Disgrace; instead of Riches and Grandeur,
Poverty and Contempt: if instead of Courtesy, Civility and Respect, they met
with nothing but Reproach and Railery: Lastly, if for all their hardship,
instead of Temporal Promotion and Preferment, they willingly submitted to an
accursed, ignominious and painful Death, you then must either think there never
were any such Men (and thus by the same liberty you may disbelieve any such
Places as the Countries where it is reported they suffered Death) or if you
think there were, you must believe them either distracted, or finally, that in
following the Direction of their great Patron, they acted like Men truly
reasonable and discreet, and in that they preferred a Life of Misery, Anguish,
Disquiet and Tribulation, it is plain they had an Assurance, as well as
Expectation, of their Reward elsewhere; and that they questioned not to find a
sufficient Recompense bestowed upon them for all their Sufferings, in those
Sacred Mansions not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. But of this I
shall discourse more hereafter, when I come to give you my Opinion of Revealed
Religion. In the mean time, if none of those unaccountable Phenomenon which
latter Ages have produced some of which have been transacted within the compass
of our own Memory; and many more within a Century last past; such as Voices,
Specters, Apparitions, Stupendous Recoveries of the Sick and Lame, together
with the Satanical Powers of Fascination and Diabolical Possessions: if these,
I say, however sufficiently attested, will not be sufficient to induce you to
believe, that there ever was such a Thing as a Supernatural Production, but
that all Things are burried on by an established Law, or (in your own more
pleasing words) by an irresistible Fate or Destiny, and that all Effects are
the pure Result of Matter under its several Modifications, whose Powers were
never superseded by any higher Principle; and farther, that there are no such
extraordinary Prints of a Divinity, or Marks of Wisdom conspicuous in the
Creation; I would then desire you with as much attention as you can,
considerately to examine the Structure of your own Body: And if you begin with
a Survey, even of an inconsiderable part thereof, such as your Fingers, in each
of these (as is well remarkt by Mr. B --) you will find Bones and Cartilages,
Ligaments and Membranes, Muscles and Tendons, Nerves and Arteries, Veins and
Skin, and Cuticle and Nail, together with the Medulla, the Fat and Blood, and
other nutritious Juices, and all these solid parts of a determinate size and
figure, texture and situation; and each of them made up of myriads of little
Fibers and Filaments, not discoverable to the naked Eye; I say, when you
consider how innumerable Parts must constitute so small a Member, surely you
cannot look upon it, or the whole Body, wherein appear so much fitness, use and
subserviency to infinite Functions, any otherwise than as the Effect of Skill
and Contrivance: If this will not extort a Confession from you, that you are
fearfully and wonderfully made, you must at least allow your self to be the
Workmanship of some Intelligent Being; and although the commonness of the Object
takes off your Admiration, and you now find the Propagation of Mankind in a
Method settled by the Divine Providence, yet if you transgress not the Bounds of
Reason, you must affirm their first Production to be by the immediate Power of
the Almighty Author of all Things, and that every succeeding Generation of them
are the Offspring of one primitive Couple.

Having surveyed some of the Extremities of this mighty Machine, and diligently
passed over its outward Covering or Teguments; my next advice to you is, that
you retire within, and carefully examine not only the Parts wherein those
Offices are performed, but the Processes themselves; such as that of
Mastication, Deglutition, Chylification, Sanguification, the Inkindling of the
Blood for the Lamp of Life, its great Analogy in some respects with Culinary
Fire, viz. its constant nenecessity of Ventilation through the vesiculae of the
Lungs, and a perpetual supply of a fit Pabulum or Fuel out of the received
Aliment for the continuance of its Flame: when you have done here, and
discovered all the Secretions or Separations of the several Juices, which are
put off from the Sanguineous Mass in its wonderful Circulation, and deposited
in their several Receptacles, till called for to their proper Employments; you
may lastly, with that profound Humility and Veneration which becomes the
Enquiry, ascend into the Sanctum Sanctorum, that Divine Emporium of the Soul,
the Brain; where not only our Sensations, but all our Cogitations, our
Perception, Reflection, Intuition, and all those noble Faculties of Memory,
Phantasy or Imagination, etc. are surprisingly transacted. Here if you
diligently and Philosopically take to pieces the several parts of the Soul, I
mean the Sensitive, you may readily comprehend, with an excellent and most
judicious Dr. Willi^.
Man, that its Systasis or Constitution is made out of these two parts; viz.
the Vital or Flamy, which respects the Blood, and the Lucid or Ethereal, which
respects the Brain, or whose Hypostasis are the Animal Spirits, by whose alone
Energy and Intervention we account for the Phenomenon of the Animal Regiment,
in all things where the Superior or Rational Soul is unconcerned.

When you have thus finished your Physiological Contemplation, an Application
of this Consequence will, I think, be not only pertinent, but natural and
genuine: That since first, in relation to the Vital or Flamy Part, there are so
many prae-requisites in order to Digestion or Transmuting the gross and solid
Matter of our Food, into that soft and pappy Substance we call Chyle; if any
one of which be wanting, some certain detriment will ensue, whether this be in
the Ventricle it self, a deficiency of its native Heat, a weakness in the Tone
of any or all its Fibers, a want or perversion of the secreted Juices which
compose its Menstruum or Dissolvent: Or if all things are orderly performed
here, and safely delivered hence, yet since there are also many requisites to a
fit passage of the said Chylous Juice into the Blood, such as the admistion of
the Bile and the Pancreatic Juice, either of which being peccant in quantity or
quality, many Mischiefs will ensue: but if in these secondary Passages all
things have gone on well, yet if the Passages to the common Storehouse or
Receptaculum happen to be obstructed, and thereby rendered impervious to the
liquor they should receive; or if others of those curiously slender Tubes, the
Lacteal Vessels, by the forcible protrusion of the contained Matter should
break, or suffer a Solution of their Continuity, the Chyle must be
extravasated, and a fatal Inundation thereof in some little time comes on. But
if hitherto Matters have succeeded as they ought, and this noble Liquor is at
length safely arrived through its many Meanders and inconspicuous Ways, and as
safely delivered up to the Heart; yet if here it be not rightly sanguify'd or
turned into Blood; or if when it is so made and continued in its Circuit, the
containing Blood Vessels, either from a Deficiency of the Vis Motoria, or
Disorder of the Spirits in the Orbicular nervous Fibrils implanted in the
Tunics of the said Vessels, labor with an Obstruction, or suffer such a
Distension by the impelling Blood, as produces a Diruption, there presently
follows Extravasation and Stagnation of the Vital Liquor. Farther, If the Blood
it self (as from many Causes it may) contract too great an Acidity or
Viscosity, or by Adustion grow perfectly Corrosive; if its Crasis be
considerably vitiated or disordered, the Nutritious Juices must partake of the
Infection, and consequently the Assimulation or Apposition of their Particles
for the growth and increase of all the Parts of the Body, cannot at all, or not
regularly be performed, neither will the subtle parts of such a Blood, though
never so well elaborated in the Brain, afford either a sufficient Plenty, or an
exactly homogeneous Spirit for the influencing the Nerves, those Causes sine
qua of every particular Function and Operation: In a word (that I may not ti^e
you with a more particular Description of the parts of the Encephalon, or
Cabinet containing that inestimable Jewel the Soul) when you consider that from
any of these slightly mentioned Errors committed in any part, the whole Fabric
suffers, and the same becomes a tottering Carcass: when you consider how very
easily an heterogeneous Copula is admitted into the Nervous System, there
exciting those dismal irregular and horrid Explosions, which after they have
for sometime excruciated the frail Body, leave it lifeless: when you consider
also how very easily those slender (and to our fight impervious) Conduits of
the Nerves may by many ways be obstructed, which happening at their Source, as
in the Apoplexy, Lethergy, Coma, Carus, we are presently deprived of our
Sensations, the Soul suffers an Eclipse, and the ghastly Tyrant takes
possession: when you consider that the very Air, so absolutely necessary for
our Respiration, does sometimes prove a Vehicle to those malign Mias^^ata,
which impetuously rush on, and notwithstanding our pretended strength, in the
twinkling of an Eye extinguish the Lamp of Life: when you consider these
Particulars with a due attention, you will find abundant reason, instead of
denying any thing to be Supernatural, to confess that the Life of Man, whether
it be conceived as limited to a shorter or longer Date, is nothing less than
one continued Miracle.

Before I finish my Discourse of Supernatural Productions, or those Effects
which do surmount what we call the Powers of Nature, and frequently hare
witness to God's especial Providence, I will take the liberty to make a short
Digression, and give you my Opinion how it comes to pass that these unusual and
extraordinary Events, have gained so little Credit, not only with the Profane
and Sensual, but even amongst very many Sober and Learned Men. That I may do
this to your greater Satisfaction, I must give you to understand that many of
those surprising Symptoms, which are produced by the Disorders of the Nervous
System, are by the generality of all Men, unless Physicians, very frequently
looked on as unaccountable Prodigies: Thus many Hysteric Persons have been
esteemed Planet-struck, especially if by a Resolution of some particular
Nerves, one Muscle has been relaxed; and its Antagonist contracted, by which
the Parts have been distorted, and thereby rendered deformed: or if the
Celestial Bodies have been acquitted, it must be imputed to Fascination or
Witchcraft. Epileptics in like manner are taken for Daemoniacs, and the
surprising Phenomenon they exhibit, such as Dancing, Singing, Crying, Laughing
etc. are presently supposed to be wrought by a Praestigious or Diabolical
Possession: and if, as it often happens, the Priest be sent for instead of the
Physician, to eject the Evil Spirit, the mistake is then so far from being
rectified, or the Fallacy detected, that whole Cities have been imposed on by
such like Reports, and the supposed Authentic Testimony of the Parson of the
Parish has served for an irrefutable Confirmation. By these means, when
Atheistical Men have understood that such like Accidents, have proceeded from
no other Causes than the Convulsive Disorders which do frequently disturb the
Animal Economy, and that by Mechanic Principles they are to be explained, it is
natural for them presently to conclude, that all Relations of the like
tendency, proceed either from the same Origin, and exceed not the force of
second Causes, or that they are downright Cheats, which for the countenancing
some Design, are promoted and carried on by a Knavish Confederacy or
Combination: and indeed, though I am far from denying all accounts of Daemoniacs,
or the Satanical Power of Fascination, yet I could heartily wish that none of
them were published, without the proper Examen of Expert Physicians; for to
speak freely, I am well satisfied that those Subjects which have furnished so
many Histories, Discourses and Reports upon this Matter, have been for the
greatest part no other than Maniacal, Hypochondriacal, Hysterical or
Epileptical Persons, and that the usual Appearances they exhibit, belong
properly to Spasmology, or the Doctrine of Convulsions.

It Is not long since my Curiosity lead me to take a view of a young Woman, the
Report of whose Circumstances had brought a Multitude of Spectators from all
parts of the Town, who generally returned amazed at so surprising a Spectacle,
and gave out that she was Daemonical, or possessed with an evil Spirit, who did
sometimes utter very unusual Sounds, some of them not unlike the howling of a
Dog, without any perceptible Motion of her own Organs of Speech.

When I came into the Room with a particular Friend, we found her accompanied
by two or three other Women, and discoursing rationally, which they said at
some intervals she used to do. During the time I stayed, there was a continual
Motion of the Vertebrae of her Neck, and sometimes those of her Loins; the
former occasioned a violent throwing backwards and forwards of her Head: and
that which they looked on as unaccountable was this, That if any one offered to
stop this motion of her Neck and Loins, the same was then quicker, and
continued with a redoubled force. Upon this Advertisement just then received
from her self and the good Women, my Friend on one side, and I on the other (as
she was sitting on the Feet of the Bed) laid our hands on each side on the top
of her Shoulders, and first gently pressing of them down to retard the Motion,
I perceived a very sensible Opposition or Resistance, even beyond my
Conjectures of her own strength, insomuch that at length endeavoring with all
our Power to suppress this uncommon Motion of the Head and Body, the Resistance
made against us was so very forcible, as almost to throw us from her, and the
Agitation of both began to grow so vehement, as to occasion very irregular
Distortions of the Eyes, a Foaming at the Mouth, together with a very
considerable Influx of Blood upon the Surface of her Face; which frighting her
Acquaintance, and rendering her uneasy, we were desired to desist, and after
some few Minutes the Disturbance went off, she returning to her accustomed
Motion of gently moving her Head backwards and forwards.

During this time of her Agony, she spoke nothing; but being pretty well
recovered, I found her very willing to believe it a Supernatural Power that
thus impetuously moved her; and the rather, she said she was induced to think
so, because it was involuntary and much against her Inclination: for when at
any time (being all the while sensible) she wilfully endeavored to stop the
Motion, and to keep her self in Aequilibrio, she was so violently tormented in
some other parts of her Body, that if she did not submit her self to the Evil
Spirit, he would certainly kill her.

Before I attempt an Explication of these several Phenomenon, it will be
requisite that I acquaint you with the Method I took in the Exploring thereof.
There was at that time in the room an ancient Midwife, who, as I understood,
had put this young Woman under a Course of Physic, though altogether
unsuccessfully. Upon which Information I inquired on what account the Physic
had been given, or what expectation she designed it should answer: which
understanding who I was, she very freely told me, That what she had ordered,
was for a Suppression of -- under which Obstructions the Patient had labored
for a considerable time. I enquired no farther, but having given my Opinion,
came away with this Satisfaction, that if the whole was not Imposture, and she
a Counterfeit, as it was not impossible but she might, there was nothing in all
this but a Spasmodic or Convulsive Disorder of the Nerves, frequently attending
Hysterical and Epileptic Persons. I had beforehand asked her whether there was
Truth in those Reports she had suffered to be printed, concerning the Devil's
speaking in her, and barking like a Dog. She utterly denied this; and replied
she knew nothing of that Matter: and that it was both unknown to her, and
against her will that such Discourses should be dispersed. The Maid, I must
needs say, seemed very modest and soberly disposed, and was extraordinarily
lamented by some of those who knew that her Education and Converse in the World
had been unblamable and pious. I never certainly understood how her Distemper
terminated, and being willing to judge Charitably of her so far as I was
concerned, shall only intimate by the way, that it was publicly reported, not
long after, that she was proved a Cheat, and had got much Money by it. But as
to this I am not certain, being rather inclinable to believe the contrary, and
that she labored with the Symptoms of an Hysterical Affection.

I shall not think my self concerned to give you here a Mechanical Account of
the Progress of these Distempers, or to tell you by what means the Morbi^ic
Matter is contracted which insinuates it self into the Muscular Fibers, and
there excites these direful Effects; it is sufficient, at your leisure, that you
consult any Physical Author who has handled this Subject. In the Writings of
the acute and very sagacious Willis, See Willis's Discourse of Convulsions.
you may find Relations of this Nature sufficient to Evince those almost
incredible and surprising Phenomenon, which take their Rise from an
heterogeneous Copula admitted into the Nerves, or a degeneracy of the Spirits
themselves from their natural Crasis, exciting very strange unusual Explosions,
and producing oftentimes most astonishing Effects in the Humane Body; which yet
nevertheless we have no more reason to look upon as transacted by an Infernal
or Supernatural Power, than the prodigious strength of some Lunatics, their
long protracted Abstinence from Alimentary Provision, and the like; which
although more frequent, and consequently less regarded, are every whit as worthy
of our Enquiry or Indagation.

I remember some few years since, amongst others, I presented the R -- S --
with one very remarkable Case that occurred to my observation, relating to a
Youth bitten by a Dog, who after the Wound was cured, was seized with a
Deliriam, snapt at every thing that approacht him, and so nearly imitated the
Barking of a Dog in the height of his Paroxysms, that any Person unacquainted
might have been so imposed on, as to imagine there had been a Dog barking in
the Chamber: and I make it no question, had the Infection been communicated by
some indiscernible Passage, or had the Parents been ignorant that the wound was
made after this manner, they with many others would have thought their Child
possessed, and nothing less than the Devil must have been the reputed Author of
his surprising Actions.

But it is now time for me to resume the thread of my Argument, concerning
God's particular Providence, which that I might the better illustrate, I
thought my self obliged to make mention of those really Supernatural Acts of
the Divine Power, or the Miracles which have been wrought for the Conviction of
Infidels: and this I thought could not effectually be done without a Specimen
of the Powers of Matter, and the efficacy of second Causes in the Production of
Events by Mechanic Principles. By these Instances you may the more readily
collect how far these Powers may reach, and distinguish the Truth of
a-Supernatural Act, from a supposititious Miracle, many of which having been
inquired into, and by inconsiderate Men discovered either Forgeries, or the
Effects of Convulsive Indispositions, has been the occasion of a vast Increase
to the number of our Modern Sadducees and nominal Deists, who if they
condescend to grant that God Almighty may be a Spirit, yet must it be accounted
Dissonant to Reason, an Imposition upon our senses, and the Effect of a servile
abject Mind, to think there should be any other.

Thus having touched upon those two Extremes, of such who on the one side will
allow nothing to surmount Mechan^^ Powers; and those on the other, whose over
credulity has imposed the name of Miracle upon every more than ordinary
Accident; there remains a third sort, who however Sober and Learned they may
appear, and notwithstanding the fair glosses put upon their Designs, yet the
too great freedom they have taken with the Sacred Writings, their cavilling at
some of the Hebrew Particles for being equivocal, and rendering the
Translations, even the Septuagint, in many things uncertain and doubtful, give
us grounds to surmise that they let their own Reason keep pace with their
Faith, and that they either disbelieve, or suspend their Assent in all Matters
which they cannot resolve by their own Pinciples: amongst those you may well
enough imagine that I reckon our late Malmeiburian Oracle the great Leviathan,
and those equally mischievous Authors Mr. B -- and G -- who with some others
have been so fondly conceited of their own Performances, as to deliver them out
for the Oracles of Reason, and so profanely irreligious, as to set up the Light
of Nature in opposition to the Divine Revelation, or their own Phantastic
Whimseys to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. But before I leave my Discourse of
Miracles, it may not be unnecessary in respect to their Description and
Definition to acquaint you, that not only those Events which do result from a
Supernatural Concourse, but those also which are immediately produced by
Secondary Agents, may in the timing of those Agents, and continuing their
Action after an unusual manner, manifest unto us the Power of their great
Author, and ought to be reputed by us for unquestionable Miracles.

There is a Learned Foreigner, and a very great Critic, in whose Writings I
find a concurring Testimony to this Opinion. This Person, in some of his
Dissertations upon the Book of Genesis, has presented the Men of Letters with
some curious Thoughts: whether his Design be what it ought, I shall not go
about to determine; but will only acquaint you, that when he comes to discourse
of the Israelites Deliverance, from the Egyptian Servitude, by their wonderful
Passage over the Red Sea; he conceives (contrary to most other Commentators)
that the Miracle did not consist in that the Waters were divided, as generally
supposed, without a manifest Cause; but in this, Monsieur le Clerk's
Dissertations upon Genesis.
That upon the motion of the Rod, God raised a mighty and impetuous Wind the
Night before this great Design was to be put in practice, which with the
advantage of the Sea's ebbing, drove the Waters so far from the farther end of
the Gulf, toward its Mouth, that there appeared a large Ford over against the
Israelites, through which they went to the opposite Shore: and that the Wonder
was still more conspicuous in this, that so soon as the Israelites were safely
arrived on the other side, and their Pursuers plunged in, the Wind, which kept
back the Waters, on a sudden ceased, and the same Waters as suddenly returning,
their Enemies were overwhelmed by the Inundation. The same Person, in his
Comments on the Destruction of Sodom, does not think it necessary to believe
any such thing as a Shower of lighted Sulphur falling down upon (...)
^abitants, but that the whole of the Miracle might be wrought by the natural
Efficacy of Thunder and Lightning. We have already (says he) shown that this
Tract of Land was full of Bitumen, which as it will easily take Fire, was soon
inkindled by the Lightning, and the Flame was not only to be seen upon the
Superficies of the Earth, but so pierced into the Subterranean Veins of Sulphur
and Bitumen, that that Matter being destroyed, the whole Earth sunk down, and
afforded a Receptacle to the Waters flowing thither. Now God (continues he) is
not barely said to have rained down Brimstone and Fire, but Brimstone and Fire
from the Lord, where the addition of from the Lord, which at first sight may
appear to be superfluous, does particularly describe the Thunderbolt, which by
the Hebrews, and other Nations, is called the Fire of God, or the Fire from
God. And farther, Though Moses does not inform us after what manner the
Thunderbolts subverted those unhappy Cities and the adjoining Territories, yet
since he makes mention of them, we cannot comprehend how it happened otherwise,
than that the Thunderbolts falling in great plenty upon some of the bituminous
Pits, the Veins of that combustible Matter took fire immediately, and as the
fire penetrated into the lowermost Bowels of this bituminous Soil, those wicked
Cities were subverted by a tremor or sinking of the Ground.

I have instanced in these few, amongst other Cases of the like Import, not so
much to justify or countenance these Deviations from the Letter of the
History; or in favor of every phanciful Interpretation of them; as to
demonstrate that we are not absolutely tied to think that every Miracle is an
unaccountable Production, or effected by Powers every way Supernatural; but
that it is very possible a true and real Miracle may be brought to pass by
natural Agents, and that many of the Divine Judgments have been executed by
their being put into Action, though perhaps after an uncommon manner, at
particular times.

As to what relates to Specters or Apparitions, together with inorganic Sounds
and Voices, I shall reserve my Thoughts for another Letter; where it is
possible I may entertain you with some things diverting: I shall in this place
just mention that there are a multitude of Histories of real Demoniacs, of
Places and particular Families disturbed by Facination; of others miserably
tormented with Diabolical Delusions and odd Transactions; with which,
notwithstanding I was never otherwise acquainted then at second hand, yet I
take some of them to be so well attested by curious and inquisitive Men, who
have made it their business to detect any supposed Fallacy, that it were very
great Injustice to our selves, as well as an Affront to their Authority, should
we suspect them, or deny the Truth of all, because many such like Stories have
been proved false. That these Matters may be consistent with the especial
Providence of God, and reconcilable to the Divine Attributes, is undertaken
(as I am told) by a Learned Pen to be proved, amongst other Particulars of this
kind; for which reason I shall pass on to some other seemingly insoluble
Objections that have been invented by the subtilty of the Infernal Emissaries
to perplex this Argument, to which that I may reply effectually, and with as
much brevity as I can, I shall affirm with a judicious Author, Dr. Ch -- n's
D^rkness, of Atheism.
That every Man in whom the Light of Nature is not dampt by Fatuity, either
Native and Temperamental, or casually Supervenient, has this (...) or Impress
of an especial Providence, decreeing and disposing all Events that have, do, or
shall befall him. And this, I think, as sufficiently manifest from hence, that
there is scarce any Man, though edicated in the wildest Ignorance, or highest
Barbarity imaginable, but what is naturally, and by the Adviso' s of his
intestine Dictator, inclined either to conceive or embrace some kind of
Religion, as an Homage due from him to that Supreme Power, in whose Hands he
apprehends the Rains of Good and Evil to be held, and whose Favor and benign
Aspect he thinks procurable, and Anger atoneable by the seasonable Addresses of
Invocation and Sacrifice.

And in truth to him, whose Meditations shall sink deep enough, it will soon
appear that this Anticipation is the very Root of Religion; for though Man stood
fully persuaded of the Existence of God, yet would not that alone suffice to
convince him, into a necessity of a de^out Adoration of him, unless his Mind
were also possessed with a firm belief of this proper Attribute of his Nature,
which so nearly concerns his Felicity or Infelicity, viz. his especial
Providence, which regulates all the Affairs, and appoints all the Contingenciet
of every individual Man's Life: for it is the sense of our own Defects,
Imperfections and Dependency, that first leads us to the Knowledge of his
Alsufficiency, Perfection and Self-subsistance: the Apprehension of our
Necessities is the School wherein we first learn our Orizons, and the Hope of
obtaining Blessings from his immense Bounty, is both the Excitement and
Encouragement of our Devotion.

This indeed is the Spark at which all the Tapors of Religion were first
kindled. The very Ethnics themselves, whilst groping in the Chaos of Idolatry,
have discovered this; witness their magnificent Temples, costly Hecatombs,
Humane Holocausts, and frequent solemn Invocations, all which kinds of
Addresses they generally made use of, and obliged themselves unto, as the only
hopeful means as well to atone the Displeasure, as conciliate the Favor of
that Power, in whose hands they conceived the Book of Fate to be kept, and who
had the Guardianship or Administration of the Fortunes, not only of Cities,
Nations and Families, but even of every single Person: Witness also that
glorious Pagan Cicero, who deriving the Pedigree of Religion, Fathers it
immediately upon the persuasion of an especial Providence in these words: S^nt
Phylosophi and fuerunt, Cicero de Not. Deorum, lib. 1.
Qui omnino nullam habere censerent humanarum rerum procurationem Deos: Quorum
si vera est Sententia, quae potest esse Pietas? Quae Religio? haec enim omnia
pure ac cast tribuenda Deorum Numini ita sunt, si animadvertuntur ab his, and
si est aliquid a Diis immortalibus hominum Generi tributum; sin autem Dij neque
possunt, nec volunt nos juvare, nec curant omnino nec quid agamus
animadvertant, nec est quod ab his ad Hominum vitam permanere possit: quid est
quod nullos Diis immortalibus Cultus, Honores, Preces adhibeamus! in specie
autem fictae simulationis sicut reliquae vertutes; ita Pietas inesse non
potest, cum qua simul and sanctitatem, and Religionem tolli necesse est: quibus
sublatis perturbatio vitae sequitur and magna Confusio.

Moreover, as this inoppugnable Propensity to Religion is a Cyon of God's own
ingraffing on the Mind of Man, so also is it out of his power, though assisted by
all the hellish Stratagems, totally to eradicate it thence. This is a Truth
confirmed by the Experience of all Ages; for notwithstanding the insolent
Pretenses, and blasphemous Rho^omontado's of many Miscreants, who gloried in
the most execrable Cognomen of (...), and studied to advance their Names to the
highest Pinnacle of Fame, by being accounted Men of such absolute and fearless
Spirits, as that they scorned to own any Being superior to their own, to which
they should be accountable for their Actions; yet have they been compelled (so
violent are the secret touches of that (...) which converts all things into
Demonstrations of his own Glory) either by the Scourge of some sharp Calamity,
or the Rack of some excruciating Disease in their Lives to repent, or at the
near approach of that King of Terrors, Death, to confess this their horrid
Impiety.

Thus the proud Adamant-hearted Pharaoh, who deriding the Divine Embassy of
Moses, in an imperious strain of Scorn and expost^latory Bravado, demanded of
him, Quis est Jehovah? cujus voci auscultem dimittendo Israelem. Non novi
Jehovam, etc. did yet, when the Divine Vengeance by heavy Judgments had
convinced him, send presently away for those whom he had barbarously exiled
from his Presence, humbles himself before them, and howles out this Palinodia,
Peccavi hac vice, Jehova justissimus, Ego vero and Populus meus sumus
improbissimi.

Thus Herod Agrippa, who by the blast of p^pular Euge' s had the Wings of his
Pride fanned up to so sublime a pitch, that he lost sight of his own Humanity,
and vainly conceived the adulatory Hyperbole of his Auditors, to be but their
just Acknowledgment of his Divinity, being wounded by the invisible Sword, by a
fatal Experiment, confuted both his own and his Flatterers Blasphemy, and with
the Groans of a tortured Wretch, he cries out, En ille Ego, vestra appellatione
Deus, vitam relinquere j^beor, fatali necessitate mendacium vestrum coarg^e^te,
and quem immortalem salutastis ad Mortem rapior; se^ ferenda est voluntas
Celestis Numinis. Joseph. 19 Antiq. p. 565.

Thus Antiochus Epiphanes, who had not only denied, but enraged by a malicious
Phrensy, publicly despited and reviled the Almighty Patron of the Jews,
blasphemed his most Sacred Name, demolisht his Temples, profaned his
Consecrated Utensils, violated his Religious Institutions, and persecuted his
Worshippers with all the most bloody Cruelties that the Wit of an exalted
Malice could invent or inflict: being put upon the Rack of a sore and mortal
Disease, and despairing of any Help but from his injured Enemy God, he ^ighs
out his Confession, The sleep is gone from mine Eyes, and my Heart fails for
very care; and I thought with my self, into what Tribulation am I come, and how
great a Flood of Misery is it wherein I now am. But now I remember the Evils I
did at Jerusalem; I perceive therefore that for this Cause these Troubles are
come upon me, etc. It is meet to be subject unto God, and that a Man who is
mortal, should not proudly think himself equal to God. 1 Maccab. chap. 6. v. 9,
10, 11.

Thus the Emperor Maximinus, as cruel to the Christians as Antiochus had been
to the Jews, boasting the acuteness of his Wit, by the Invention of new ways of
Tortures for those patient Martyrs, and advancing the Roman Eagle in Defiance
of those who fought under the bloody Standard of the Cross, was so infatuated
with the Confidence of his own Greatness and Personal Strength, that he
conceited Death durst not adventure to encounter him: yet notwithstanding, when
he felt himself invaded with a verminous Ulcer, evaporating so contagious and
pestilential a Stench, as killed some of his Physicians, being then sensible
that the same was a Supplitium divinitus illatum, his Heart began to melt, Et
tandem ( says Eusebius) sentire caepit, Quae contra Pios Dei Cultores impie
gesserat, and haec se propter insaniam contra Christum praesumptam merito and
ultionis vice perpeti confessus est; in the midst of these Acknowledgments of
his own Guilt and the Divine Justice, he breathed out his execrable Soul from a
gangrenous and loathsome Body.

Thus also that notorious Apostate Julian, Vid. Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. l. 3.
c. 20.
who had not only renounced the Faith of Christ, but proclaimed open and
implacable Hostility against him, and to quench the Thirst of his Diabolical
Malice, drank whole Tuns of the Blood of his Members, being defeated and
mortally wounded in a Battle fought against the Per^ians, he instantly learned
of his awakened Conscience, that the Cause of his present overthrow was his
former Impiety, and rightly ascribing the Victory to the revenging Finger of
that God whose Divinity he had abjured, rather than to the Arm of Flesh, he
threw up his Blood into the Air, and together with his black Soul, gasped out
this desperate Ejaculation, Vicisti Galilaee Vicisti.

The Examples of this Nature are very numerous, and each of them is a kind of
Proof that Religion is a Plant so deeply radicated in the Soul of Man, that
though the damp of a barbarous Education or Conversation may a while retard, or
the rankness of those Weeds of Sensuality, the Honors and Delights of this
World, conceal its Germination: yet will it at some time or other, early or
late, and always in the Winter of Calamity, shoot up and bud forth into an
absolute Demonstration, of the Dependence of our Happiness and Misery on the
Will of the Supreme Being.

The Sum of this is by the excellent Tertullian comprised in these words; Anima
licet Corporis Carcere pressa, licet Institutionibus pravis Circumscripta,
licet lebidinibus and concupiscentiis Evigorata, licet falsis Diis exanci^^ata:
cum tamen resipiscit ut ex Crapula, ut ex Somno, ut ex aliqua valetudine, and
sanitatem suam patitur Deum nominat. And by Lactantius in these, who speaking
of Men's forgetfulness of the Divine Providence, in the time of their
Prosperity, Tum maxim (says He) Them ex Hominum memoria elabitur, cum
beneficiis ejus fruentes honor^m dare Divinae Indulgentiae deberent: yet,
continues he, the least gust of Affliction soon sets them to rights, and
renders these Characters fair and legible to the first refl^xive Glance of the
S^^l: Si qua enim necessitas gravis presserit, tum demum recordantur, si belli
terror infremuerit, si Alimenta frugibus longa siccitas denegaverit, si saeva
tempestas, si grando ingruerit, ad Deum protinus confugiunt, a Deo petitur
Auxilium, Deus ad subveniat oratur: Si quis in Mari vento saeviente jactatur
hunc inv^cat, si quis aliqua vi afflictatur hunc protinus impl^rat.

Indeed, it seems to me very evident, as well as reasonable, that the special
Providence of God is a Notion so unquestionable, that without its Establishment
in the Heart of Man, the Foundation and Support of all Religion would be
unhinged. For instance; could we once persuade our selves that the Divine Being
was inexorable, our Prayers and Supplications for the Supply of what we want,
and for the Removal of our Evils must be all invalid. Could we assure our
selves, that either God could not, or would not be our Refuge when we call upon
him, but that he has left us wholly, having set before us Good and Evil, to
the determination of our own Wills, without the least regard or notice of our
Election, or without concerning Himself in any manner to help us, to direct or
assist us when we are wandered and have ran astray: In a word, if we can once
persuade our selves there is no God that hears Prayer, that has neither the
Power of Life nor Death, neither acquitteth nor condemns, to what purpose are
all our Petitions, our Prayers, Penetential Tears, or fervent Supplications? or
on what account do we frequent any Places, either of Public or Private
Worship? Omnipotence, Justice and Goodness are ascribed in vain, if God neither
made the World, nor regard it being made: Nor will it be easy to persuade Men
to worship Him, if we are neither beholding to Him for our Being, nor under His
Laws, and if He no more respect our Adorations, than if we did reproach and
blaspheme Him: If it were thus, we should undoubtedly have cause to think our
selves, by much the most miserable part of the Creation. But on the other hand,
That there is a natural Belief in us, both of God and of his Providence, the
greatest of our Adversaries, the most irreligious and profane, the learned and
profound Atheist, as well as the illiterate, nay, all Mankind have been as it
were forced to grant and acknowledge. I am sure it is a prodigiously rare Case,
to find any so unconcerned an Infidel, let his Life have been never so
remarkable for Immorality, or one continued Act of Impiety and Irreligion,
notwithstanding the force of contracted evil habits may have thoroughly immerst
him in all kinds of Sensuality, yet when some grievous Calamity has befallen
him, or the disorder of his Body put him upon a Retirement, he begins to think
first that there may be such a Thing as Divine Providence, as well as that
there may not: and when a farther Reflection convinces him that it is more
probable there is, than that there is not, if Death approach him, in the midst
of his Meditations, there is scarce an Atheistical Desparado, can forbear
giving his Testimony to this great Truth, but either silently or loudly breaths
out his Soul with an O God be merciful.

Now if these Men, the mighty Sticklers against the Divine Providence all their
Lives, had that assurance in their last Minutes, that God Almighty is neither
wise enough to know their Circumstances, nor powerful enough to punish them, I
would gladly know from whence proceeds these lamentable Expirations? You will
say perhaps from those bugbare Fears of invisible Powers, with which Tales they
are so perpetually plagued from Pulpit Harangues, and promiscuous Converse with
Men devoted to a Religious Superstition, that it is hardly possible for any Man
so thoroughly to shake off these Childish Fears and Apprehensions, but that at
some time or other they will intrude upon him, and in spite of all his
Opposition imbitter his Delights and Natural Satisfactions. The World, you say,
is so pestered with the Levitical Tribe, that there is scarce a Corner of the
Earth to be found, where a Man might live secure from this disturbing Noise of
a Being who sees all our Actions, and will retribute to every Man after he is
dead and buried, you know not how nor where, according to his Deserts, either
of Reward or Punishment. Thus the Prejudice and Prepossession of Education in
some, of Conversation in others, are the great Bias that sways the whole Bulk
of Mankind, and keeps them under those servile Fears which necessarily arise
from a Supposition of a God, and of other Separate Beings.

That I may make a short, though I hope sufficient Reply to this Objection, I
must confess that the Allegation of an early imbibed or preconceiv'd Prejudice,
may be prevalent enough to startle those, who either through a careless
Negligence or Incapacity, have never dived into the bottom of this weighty
Affair; but that it should have force enough to master and overpower the great
and potent Masters of Humane Reason, and subjugate their seemingly impregnable
and strenuous Fortresses, or strong Holds of Atheistical Argumentation, is in
my Opinion, plainly giving up their Cause, and a silent Acknowledgment that the
Proleptic Evidence or Light of their own Consciences, notwithstanding their
vain Endeavors to suppress and extinguish it, will, however it may be
sometimes smothered and kept under, break out at length to their sorrowful
assurance, That those Noble Faculties of their Souls are more than a mere Sound
or Echo from the clashing of senseless Atoms, and must indubitably proceed from
a Spiritual Substance of a Heavenly and Divine Extraction: and that those
admirable Fabrics of their Bodies ought no longer to be ascribed to the fatal
Motions of blind unthinking Matter, but to the Wisdom and Contrivance of a
Power Omnipotent.

The Recollections of this Nature, and Recantations of former Principles,
together with the strange Horror and Consternation those we are speaking of lie
under at particular times, is decypher'd by Juvenal in these Lines; Satyr 13.
Hi sunt qui trepidant and ad omnia fulgura Pallent
Cum tonat Exanimes primo quoque murmr Coeli.


There is no occasion to search Antiquity for these Examples, Modern Story will
abundantly furnish us; we have lately had a R -- r that may serve for all: A
Man who, as perhaps his Profanity wants a Parallel, so likewise his incredible
Acuteness of Judgment and Apprehension, together with his great Learning, had
qualified him for diving as far into the Mystery of Atheism, as any of those
that went before, or may happen to follow after him. I suppose you are no
Stranger to the last Conferences which he held with the present B -- of S --
nor of those Rational and Penetential Expressions that ushered in his last
Minutes; upon which account I shall ease my self of the Trouble of their
Transcription. But since that happy, though unexpected Alteration in the opinion
of his Lordship, is by his once beloved Libertines imputed to a Decay of his
Rational Faculties, and a want of his former Strength and Vivacity of Judgment,
induced by a long and painful Sickness, together with his frequent Commerce
with the infectious Priests; though this, I say, be all too weak to blacken and
obscure the Testimony of that late, yet unfeigned noble Convert, or to render
his Religious Deportment but an inconsiderable Reflection upon the strength and
goodness of their Cause: yet if I thought it might contribute to your farther
Satisfaction, I could give you a signal Instance of some Affinity with the
former, relating to a short Intercourse between my self and a deceased Friend:
the former will indeed have this Advantage, that it wants not your knowledge of
the Person, at least his Character, together with the Circumstances of Time and
Place, as also the very forcible Attestation of several worthy Gentlemen:
whereas this with which I am about to acquaint you, must for its credibility
depend wholly upon your good Opinion of its Relator, since not only the Name
and Place of Residence, but whatever else may tend to his Discovery, are to be
buried in oblivion. Be the Event as it will with relation to your Conjectures.

It is no long time ago that I paid a sorrowful Farewell to a dying Friend, a
Man whom I never adventured to think more than a Deist, and that but nominal: I
knew him to be both a Gentleman and a Scholar, that his Studies had been mostly
Mathematical, and indeed he had made as good proficiency in Physics or Natural
Philosophy, as perhaps almost any Person of his years.

Having the good fortune to find him without Company, the freedom I had
formerly taken with him, excused a farther Ceremony; and I immediately desired
to know (having but little time to tarry) if he would grant me the liberty of
asking him two or three short Questions, which, after his Concession, I put to
him in these words: 1. Whether he conceived his Mind to be now as clear, as
active, and as vigorous as it had been some few days before his Ilness? 2.
Whether he found therein any Perswasives to Repentance, or did believe any
Necessity, by such kind of Atonement, to endeavor an Expiation of his past
Failings and Offenses? 3. If he had, or had not a full Conviction of the Soul's
Immortality? 4. What he thought of the Christian Religion? To all which, when
he had sorrowfully sighed out a Heu! Quam Mutatus, He made answer to this
Effect:

1. That his Reason had as yet suffered nothing of an Eclipse, and that he
found his Understanding (bating the Effect of his present Consternation) as
firm as ever. 2. As for sorrowing for past Errors and Irregularities, he
thought it was no more than natural, and to cry to Heaven for Mercy at the last
Moment, either in Sighs or Words, what the wildest Pagan put in practice: but
that the Contrition of so great a Libertine as himself had been, however
fervent or sincere, yet considering the same proceeded from one unable to sin
longer, to think this available to reconcile such a thoroughly poluted Soul to
the Divine Favor, he looked upon absurd. 3. As to the Substance and Condition
of the Rational Soul, that great Principle and Source of all his Intellectual
Faculties, when he formerly considered the Ignorance and more than brutish
Stupidity of his Infancy, his gradual increase of Knowledge, and the manner of
his collecting Idea's, with their being placed, though he knew not how, in his
Memory, together with his first Attempts to speak by an imitation of those
about him, these put him upon thinking, that the whole Progress had so entire a
Dependence upon the Conformation or Mechanic Structure of the Brain, as to
make him doubtful, whether there was any thing more in his Composition than
Matter under various Modifications; and to believe that which has obtained the
Denomination of Mind or Soul, was only the Result or Completion of the Animal
Organs, or did consist in some subtle Particles of the Blood, after diverse
unaccountable ways exerting their several Functions. But since he had more
warily considered the strength of his own Mind, under a violent and very
sensible Alteration and Decay of the Parts of his Body, that it grew more clear
still as his end approached, and would not let him rest without confessing to
its independency on the Body; since he reflected farther upon its Essence, and
that it was certain its Faults or Imperfections might not be such in it self,
but seem so as it stands related to the Body, in which whilst it is an
Inhabitant and tied to Corporeal Organs, it must act accordingly: since he had
weighed that pertinent and well adapted Simile, That the Soul is no more
blameable for acting disagreeably in a disordered or distempered Brain, than
the Artist who has mist his end only on the account of faulty or improper
Instruments: Lastly and above all, when he considered the Nature of Good and
Evil, the Justice of the Divine Being, in rewarding good Men, and punishing the
wicked; these Rewards not being distributed here; he was persuaded must
undoubtedly ensue hereafter: and that his Soul was truly and really a
Substantial Form infused by a Divine Power, and no Accident of Matter, neither
capable of perishing by the destruction of the Body. Farther, That whatever
Vehicle it might assume in its state of separate Existence, he saw nothing in
the Notion incongruous or absurd, but that without its forsaken Companion it
might very well be capable of an Intuitive Knowledge, and of exercising those
reflex Acts which have no dependence upon gross Material Images, or Coporeal
Idea's. 4. The business of Revealed Religion, he said, had very often startled
him; he gave the less regard to it, because it had never reached to all Parts
of the World: and he did think it too smart a Reflection upon Providence, to be
consistent with the Divine Attributes, that Mankind should not have equal
Advantages, or the same Laws or Rules to govern themselves by. But as for his
own Judgment, he thought it the less valuable; for notwithstanding he did
always believe there was such a Thing as Natural Religion, or a Light set up in
the Soul by which every Man might steer his Course, and that Morality was more
then an empty Sound, yet he had governed himself very little or nothing by the
same. To the Credit of Christianity he offered this, That by how much the less
Reason he had to believe it false, the more he thought himself obliged to think
it true: and indeed, when at sometimes he considered what mighty Gain its first
Founders might make of its Promulgation, or what should be the Motive to induce
any Man to carry on such a Design, these Doubts, he said, he was never able to
resolve; for when (as it was but seldom) he searched the Sacred Writings, and
found, they contained nothing but such Laws and Precepts, as would if carefully
observed, make us truly and completely happy: since they had had the Suffrage
of the most Learned, and all the Sober, and consequently more Considerate part
of the World, he was willing to think, for his part, they were manumitted to us
by a more than Humane Power, and that their Divinity was as well conspicuous in
their Subject as their Style.

He lamented his short Acquaintance with them, and the small Progress he had
made in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers, and all other Ecclesiastic
History: were he to live the latter years of his Life over again, he said they
should be devoted to an Enquiry after the great Founder of the Christian
Religion; for he did believe it a Concern of the highest moment, and that every
Man ought to satisfy himself, so far as he is able, of the Authority of those
Writings, which being once established on a well-grounded Faith, they are and
will be certainly the surest Guide we have to an happy Eternity. As for
himself, he told me, he had many perplexing Thoughts attending him; so that he
must put all upon a mighty Risque; but that he hoped to continue to his last
Breath an unfeigned humble Supplicant for Mercy to the Majesty of Heaven: and
that if he had no right to any Claim by the Death of Christ, the Savior of the
World, which (though on slight Assurance) he earnestly hoped that he had, he must
then take what was allotted for him by the Divine Justice.

Thus I took a vary dismal Vale, after he had closed all with some short and
pithy Expressions relating to my self. I have purposely in this place omitted
the several Interruptions happening in Discourse, since the Contents of the
Replies I made in conference with this my deceased Friend, are some of them
already intersperst in this and my former Letter, and what remains may very
probably be incerted in my next.

I shall give you no more Instances of this Nature, but will only add a word or
two concerning the unequal Distribution of the Goods of Fortune, together with
the Prosperity of the Wicked, and the Afflictions of Good Men: which if they do
not Convince you of the Divine Justice and Goodness, may at least serve to
palliate and to render these General Reflections upon Providence the less
weighty.

But before we speak of Happiness or Infelicity, Prosperity and Adversity, it
behooves us to fix upon some just Method of Discrimination, and that we agree
upon some proper Terms that may significantly express the Nature of Good and
Evil, not as they appear, but as they really and experimentally are found in
themselves: for if you go by the commonly received Opinion, or the Customary
Judgment Men too frequently make, and reckon that Man more happy than your
self, who has more Money, more Attendants, more Admirers, fares more daintily
or deliciously, lives easier, and takes less care. You will quickly find the
Fallacy, and a very little Thoughtfulness will give you to understand, that
notwithstanding these, there is no Man can have more of solid Happiness,
Content and Satisfaction, then he has of Honesty, Justice, Temperance and
Sobriety; for if instead of laying out his Wealth, to the Honor of that Being
by whose Permission he enjoys it, he either locks it up in his Coffers, or
makes no other use of the same, than by furnishing himself with the means of
Intemperance and Excess: If he lays it out upon sumptuous Furniture, numerous
Attendants, in Gaming, Drunkenness, Sensuality, and the Satisfaction of every
other brutish Passion, you will find the Possessor of this kind of Happiness, a
greater and fitter Object for your Pity than your Emulation.

However the Notion might be carried too far by the Stoics, in their
Supposition of a perfect Apathy, yet undoubtedly they were right in their
founding True Felicity upon Contentment, or for that they placed the same in
the Peace and Satisfaction of a calm and serene Mind, neither capable of an
exalted Pride in the Enjoyment of Abundance, nor of Anxiety or Perturbation in
what the World calls Poverty.

If this be the Criterion or adequate Measure of true Happiness, we shall find
those who have been generally accounted happy, to be of all others the most
miserable. You may easily conceive the wealthy Miser can have but little of
this solid Peace and Tranquillity; for what with his Pain and Care to increase
his Treasure, his denying himself the convenient and even necessary Supports of
Life, together with the perpetual Disquiet and Anxiety that attends his Fear of
losing what he has got; there is scarce an hour in the whole compass of his
miserable Life that is truly happy; even his Rest is not refreshing, like that
of other Men's, but his Soul is like a troubled Sea, and his last Moments in his
unwillingness to surrender and leave his Muck behind him (setting aside his
Thoughts of Futurity) openly declare his Misery.

From him we may take a prospect of the Prodigal Libertine, the other President
of mistaken Happiness, and here the genuine Consequences are both a disordered
or infirm Body, together with a perplexed and disturbed Mind: for however the
make or temperament of some Men's Bodies gives them the opportunity of
continuing a longer Course: yet their Souls are still perpetually clouded, and
the tottering Carcass must at length fall a Victim to their adored Bacchus or
admired Venus: and indeed, supposing the best of them that we can, we shall
find nothing like a solid Satisfaction, even in the height of what they call
Enjoyments. If we view them diverting themselves in Gaming; here we find (not
to mention the impairing their Estates, the beggering themselves and Families)
every cross or adverse hit of Fortune transforms them into so many Furies, and
raises such impetuous Storms and Tempests in their Breasts, as can be vented no
other ways than in the most horrid Oaths, Execrations and Imprecations of the
Divine Judgments upon themselves and others. If we inspect their dishonest
Embraces, their Whoredoms and Adulteries, tho never so secure and secret, yet
the loss of Reputation by discovery in some, the fear of Infection in others,
or perhaps of a Conception: but above all, that Fear (which will very commonly
crowd in even upon the Infidel himself) that it is possible there may be an
after-reckoning; these, I say, do generally combine to imbitter the Delights of
their Lascivious Acts; but if the brutish Appetite be allayed, if the Guilt be
stiffled by an habitual Repetition, if neither Body nor Reputation suffer,
which is a very great hazard, yet may we find many of the more thinking sort of
these Persons declare their Dissatisfaction, and heartily acknowledge it one of
the greatest Follies of which a wise Man can be guilty.

If we follow them to a Debauch of Drinking, here we shall find even the
Sensitive Appetite presently satiated, its Satisfaction no longer lasting than
the fleeting Gust; their Minds soon obnubilated, and themselves not Masters of
their Actions, nor yet their Passions, their Conversation grows burdensome,
and truly they have little left but Shape to difference them from Brutes:
these, with the result of such a Crapula, viz. violent ensuing Hemicran's, loss
of Appetite and general Lassitudes, will, I Am certain in the estimate of every
judicious Man, make Bedlam preferrable to their Bacchanalia, and the Lunatic
for the time a happier Man than the Drunkard.

It Is plain from hence, that we are mightily out in our Accounts of Happiness,
or the supposed Prosperity of the Wicked, and the Adversity of Good Men: Vid.
Charlton's Darkness of Atheism.
For whatever Blessings the Bounty of Divine Providence has ordained for our
Refreshment and Consolation, in this Pilgrimage on Earth, and furtherance
toward an easy purchase of after Happiness, such as Vigor, Health and Beauty
of Body, Ingenuity of Disposition, Longaevity, Multitude of Friends, Equality
in Marriage, Fertility of Issue, Education in Civility and Learning, Science,
Wealth, Nobility of Blood, Absoluteness in Power and Government, etc. when
these come into the poluting hands of vicious Men, they instantly suffer not
only a diminution of their Goodness, but even a total depravation of their
Benignity, and degenerate into perfect Curses: the possession of them raise^
incessant Tempests and distracting Storms of Passions in the Region of their
Minds, not permitting that comfortable Sun of true Content to shine clearly
forth, or to make so much as one fair Day during their whole Lives.

To all which may be superadded this, That the brightest and longest Days of
Fortune have ever closed in the blackest and most tragical Nights of Sorrow:
that the Plays of Libertines have always proved Comae Tragedies; and their
pompous Masks finished in dismal Catastrophy's; nor can the Records of the
whole World produce one Example of sinful greatness, that has not either
before, or at his Eternal Adieu, by woeful Experiment manifested the Truth of
this Maxim, In Vertute Sola, Salus: or that none can ever arrive at the Elysium
of true Felicity, who constantly pursue it through the Gardens of Sensuality,
that the Rose of Happiness grows on the prickly Stem of Virtue, and that the
just Discharge of our Duties to God and Man, to the utmost of our Abilities, is
the only means of acquiring a durable Content and Satisfaction.

I shall conclude with this necessary Caution, That we take not too bold a
Freedom in our Reflections upon Providence, or Repining at some particular
Dispensations toward us: It is the greatest Imprudence we can be guilty of, to
expect either that Virtue should be immediately rewarded, or Vice immediately
punished: for this would not only destroy a Life of future Retribution, but if
Punishments were immediately to be inflicted upon Delinquents, our Obedience
would cease to be a Virtue, as proceeding from our Fear more than our Choice.

Besides, we are by no means to pass Sentence upon the Providence of God,
without a Prospect of them from the Beginning to the End: Providence is one
entire System, nor can we judge of the parts, but in relation to the whole; for
what at first we could give no account of, we are very often brought to approve
by a subsequent Course of Dispensations: and we do as frequently understand,
that had our Desires been gratified, or our Expectations answered in some
particular Cases, the same would have proved troublesome, if we had not been
quite ruined or undone by them.

Excuse the Imperfection of these incoherent Thoughts, and believe me to be
(what I am)

Land. Jan. 26. 1696/7. Your Friend in all good Offices.

LETTER III. Of the Immortality of the Soul. To Mr. -- etc.
My very good Friend,
WHatever Success my last met with, I am emboldened to believe my time not
altogether misspent, it is not out of a Presumption that I am able to deliver any
thing extraordinary, or more than many others might say upon these weighty
Subjects: but out of I know not what kind of Belief and Expectation, that you
will more considerately peruse, and attentively examine them, as the
Performances of a Friend (who you may easily assure your self writes neither
for Secular Interest, nor Popular Applause, but truly and unfeignedly with a
pure Design of discovering the Truth) than if the same were delivered by those
whose Interest we might judge it is to keep us under a slavish Subjection, and
who make it the proper and sole business of their Lives, to furnish out such
Maxims, Arguments and Precepts, as they themselves (too many of them) are
unmindful to observe; so that, what is much to be bewailed, when Men look upon
the Priests as of a quite different make from the rest of Mankind, neither
subject to the same Desires, natural Inclinations and Passions of other Men:
when they view them living as it were separate from the World, perpetually
conversant in Prayer, Fasting, Religious Contemplation and Divine Meditations,
they, by a kind of implicit Faith (especially the common People) rely upon the
Certainty of the Things delivered to them, without ever seriously enquiring or
searching into the Nature of the Truths themselves: Hence it is that the
generality of them are no longer Religious, than that they find their Pastor to
square his Life by his Doctrine, and every Immorality discovered in their
Teacher, they make the sufficient occasion of Absolving them, not only from
their Regard or Respect to him, but even God himself.

Thus amongst some sensual inconsiderate Men, I have frequently met with such
pitiful Argumentation as this. They knew a Dr. of Divinity that was Drunk: They
heard another Swear: A third they found in Secret with a Prostitute: A fourth
they saw Gaming: A fifth they heard was Covetous, and a miserable Oppressor,
etc. And presently follows this Ergo, All Religion in gross, is no more than
Priest craft, the Body of Divinity a well contrived Romance, the great and
mighty Props of it are all presently shook to pieces, and our Belief of a God,
his Providence and the Souls separate Existence or Independency, are now
ridiculed for mere Fables. The Sum of all is this, The Parsons Preach for
Money, get many Livings and grow Rich, whilst they in the mean time, till they
discovered the Cheat, were hindered from the Pursuit of their natural Desires,
and kept under Apprehension of Invisible Powers, a Life to come, and they know
not what frightful Bugbears, Heaven and Hell, Devils and damned Spirits, which
they now find to be a Dream: for since the slip of the Clergyman has opened
their Eyes, they find nothing but Nature: Time and Chance, say they, attends us
all. And here the words of Solomon come pat to their purpose, which he gives
us, as the natural Arguments of wicked Men for the overthrow of Religion: Eccl.
3.18.
I said in my heart concerning the estate of the Sons of of Men, that God might
manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are Beasts: for
that which befalls the Sons of Men befalls Beasts, even one thing befalls
them; as the one dies, so dies the other; yea they have all one breath, so
that a Man has no pre-eminence above a Beast; for all is vanity. All go unto
one place, all are of the dust: and all turn to dust again. Who knows the
Spirit of Man that goes upward, and the Spirit of the Beast that goes
downward to the Earth? Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better then
that a Man should rejoice in his own works, for that is his Portion: for who
shall bring him to see what shall be after him?

This is now become the common Language of the Libertine, and if the intestine
Dictator Conscience, takes the advantage of some lucid Interval, and whispers
them in the Ear with what is to come: their Hearts-ease is still ready, and a
Post Mortem nihil est, or their Sempiternal Hush lulls all asleep.

I would by no means have you to take this, as a Reflection in general upon the
Pastoral Function; for, God be thanked, there are many of them as remarkable
for their Learning, as conspicuous for their unfeigned Piety: and did their
Adversaries come up with some of the meanest of them in the Government and
Conduct of their Lives, they would think it an insupportable Grievance to their
Natures, to be abridg'd their Liberty, or tied to the Exercise of almost any
single Act of Mortification and Self-denial; whilst at the same time every
little Immorality in these Men is looked on through a Magnifying Glass; and the
same which they account a Venial Fault or Peccadillo in themselves, must be
deemed in the other a Crime of the first magnitude, an unpardonable
Transgression.

Being obliged in prosecution of the following Discourse to remove what
Difficulties I could out of the way, and to mention at least some of the mighty
Obstacles of our Faith: amongst others I have been necessitated to touch upon
the Clergy, whom we are too prone to follow blindly, and when once our great
Opinion of their Learning and Piety has placed them in the Chair of
Infallibility; the first false step they make, at once subverts our Faith, and
taking all before for granted which they delivered to us, we now dispute the
Verity of those Doctrines we had inbib'd from them.

Bad Presidents are always very prevalent Contagions amongst our Equals; but
when we find our Pastors or our Parents, our Masters, our Governors, or our
Princes infected with any manner of Vice, we quickly become their Apes, and
readily excuse our selves, because we do but imitate those, whom we imagine to
know better than our selves.

Thus many Men have had their Faith staggered by a View of the Profaneness and
Impiety of Learned and Great Men; by the dissolute Lives of the Gentry and
Nobility in the Countries where they live: as if these by their vicious
Practices could alter the Nature even of Good and Evil; or if it was possible
that Men immerst in Matter, though never so profoundly skilled in Science, could
regulate their Lives by the Laws of God, whilst they contemn the Divine Aid,
and regard not his Assistance. Instead of this, it is become the Fashion of the
Town to ridicule Virtue, and render Vice as amiable as they can; and if they
find it possible to prevail upon some simple Clergyman (who is naturally as
loose as themselves) to be Drunk, to Whore, to Game, to Curse and Swear
profanely, there are many Men so extravagantly proud of such a Conquest over an
hypocritical Sinner, as to think they give hereby a fatal stroke to all true
Piety, as if the very Essence of God, the Condition of the Soul, and every
other Sacred Truth, were by such trivial and childish Instances to be
obliterated or wiped out.

I have premised this by way of Anticipation, or to Caution you how requisite
it is before you set up for a Libertine, to go upon sure grounds: for
undoubtedly it is unbecoming any Pretender to Reason, to run a hazard,
especially one of this Consequence, or to declare himself either openly or
privately for the Cause of Atheism, till he has positively assured himself,
beyond contradiction, that there is no Superintendent Power takes notice of his
Actions; or if there should, that he is above the reach of his Justice, and
that his last Breath will carry all into perpetual Oblivion; for if he goes not
farther than probability that Matters may be so, yet if there remain the least
doubt that they may not, he forfeits at once both his Reason and Security, and
'twill be a pitiful Satisfaction, that the greater part of the World have
involved themselves with him in the same Misery.

It is the less admirable that Men should so very easily give up the Cause of
Religion, who never examined their first Principles; whose Faith is no
otherwise founded than on the Custom of their Country, the Credit of their
Ancestors, or the Example of those under whose Guardianship and Tutelage they
have been brought up: And truly, in one sense, what the Poet remarks is a
certain Truth, By Education, most have been misled; Hind and Panther.

So they believe, because they so were bred:
The Priest continues, what the Nurse began,
And thus the Child imposes on the Man.


He who never considers the Why or Wherefore, nor so much as once ever rightly
weighed the Motives of his Belief, becomes a perfect Weathercock, every Blast
of a new Doctrine carries him to and fro, till at length, being unsettled, he
despise^ all.

This is what I have thought necessary by way of Introduction to my Discourse
of the Immortality, which I intend the subject of this present Letter: for
having in the two former, endeavored to establish those two great Truths of
the Divine Being and his Providence, Order requires that I take notice how far
we are concerned, if we concede or admit the foregoing Propositions. For if we
lie under no Obligation to, or have no future Dependence upon God or his
Providence, it is a Matter purely indifferent, whether we believe them or not;
what Advantage can I have by my belief in God, if I am secure that he has left
me to my own disposal, and inspects not any of my Actions? or why should I deny
my self the Satisfaction of my Desires, how exorbitant soever they may be,
since I know the worst, and that if Death will at length come and put an end to
my Delights, it will likewise finish all my Trouble and Disquiet?

However I may resign up my own Reason, or betray the Weakness of my Judgment,
I must confess to you, that when I have very often seriously reflected upon
this Subject, and once admitted a Supreme Intelligent and Powerful Cause of all
Things, I presently found my self under a kind of irresistible Necessity, to
believe our Souls must be Immortal: and the Supposition of a down right
Necessity that it should be so, without any respect to Arguments, either Sacred
or Profane, that it is so* does at this time overcome me: for however short of
Demonstration they may prove, we must take up with the most notorious Absurdity
imaginable, if we persuade our selves that there can be an All-wise, Just, and
Omnipotent God, and yet notwithstanding that Thefts, Rapines, Murders, and all
other the most egregious Vices should go unpunished, both here and hereafter.
However this be, the Result of my own Thinking, and a Consequence which it is
possible you may not allow, I speak it not by any means to prepossess your
Judgment; neither do I desire you should look upon the same, either as Matter
of Fact, or so much as Rational Evidence.

Vid. Willis de A^^m.
It will add little to the Illustration of my present Task, that you are
informed at large with the Opinion of the Ancients concerning the Humane Soul:
let it suffice you to understand that as some of them affirmed the some to be a
Substance existing of it self and Immortal; so there were others who denied
that it had any Substance, but was only an accidental Form.

The Platonists and Pythagoreans opin'd that the Souls of all living Creatures
were a part of the Soul of the World^ that they were immerged in Bodies as in a
Sepulcher, and that when the Bodies died, they were by a various (...)
Inhabitants or Guests to other Bodies; sometimes to those of Men, at other
times to those of Beasts.

The Manich^es supposed that all Souls in general were taken out of the
Substance it self of God, that they actuated Te^restrial Bodies, and going from
hence again returned into God himself.

The Originists, That all Souls were created from the beginning of the World,
at first to subsist of themselves, then as occasion served that Bodies being
formed, they entered into them, actuated them during Life, and at length
returned into their primitive and singular Substances.

Others have affirmed, That the Soul of Man does arise up of her own accord,
from power only of Matter rightly disposed, making her to be no more than a
Temperament resulting from the Mixture, which as it adds nothing substantial to
the Prae-existing Matter, the Soul it self seems to be from thence a mere Ens
Rationis, or only an Extrinsic Denomination.

Whoever makes a scrutinous Enquiry into their Sentiments, will find this the
beloved Opinion, not only of our Modern professed Atheists, but of those also who
have skreen'd themselves under the less harsh and more acceptable Name of
Deists.

If you think fit to pay any Deference to Men, not only on the account of their
Sobriety, but for their profound Learning and Metaphisical Acquirements, the
two following, I doubt not, are unquestionable for both I mean Dr. Moor and Mr.
Robert Boil: The first of them defines the Soul of Man ( i.e. the Rational) to
be an immaterial Substance, endowed with Life and the Faculty of Motion,
vertually containing in it Penetrability and Indiscerpibility. The judicious
Esquire History of Qualities and Forms
Boil has been pleased to own, That he knew of nothing (naturally speaking)
that was composed of Matter and a Substance distinct from Matter, except Man,
who is made up of an Immaterial Form and a Humane Body.

It were endless to cite the Opinions of all Learned Men, who have delivered
their Sentiments about this Subject. I find in the general, with very little
variation, they have concluded thus, That the Superior or Rational Soul in Man,
is a most pure Substance, Immaterial, Penetrable and Indivisible, Essentially
Vital, Perceptive and Appetitive, animating an Humane organized Body.

Before I set about the justifying this Definition, I conceive it requisite
that we have a right understanding, not only that there is an essential
Difference between ou^ Souls, and those of other Creatures, but wherein also
the same consists: For give me leave to take notice to you, I am apt enough to
believe, with a certain late See a Discourse of the Nature of Rational and
Irrational Souls by M.S.
Author, That the Cart^sian Hypothesis, which allows Brutes to be no more than
insensible Mac^i^^s, has been very injurious to our rightly conceiving the
reasonable Soul of Man; for indeed the Notion in it self, notwithstanding its
many Favorites, is so repugnant to common Observation and Experience, and
withal so very harsh and incredible, that had it not been for the blind respect
which is paid by most Men to its Founder, on the account of his Ingenuity and
Penetration of Thought, it could never have so long imposed upon the Credit of
his Disciples.

Neither is it to be thought strange, That Carts, who had denied the
possibility of sensible Atoms, should start this Assertion concerning Brutes
for the support of his Hypothesis: for when he had allowed but one Principle,
both of Sense and Reason to Man, and endeavored to prove this Principle
superior to any Power in Matter, when after this the whole stress of our
Immortality was laid upon the Immateriality of the Soul, he did well enough
foresee, that by granting Sense to Brutes, he must also grant them actuated by
a Principle above Matter, and Immateriality being his grand Proof of
Immortality, they must necessarily come in with Man for a share in this
Prerogative: To avoid which Absurdity, being at the same time unable to
understand that mere Matter, however modified, should be capable of Sensation,
he fixes upon one as great, and tells us there is none but Man amongst the
Creatures, that is both capable of Sense and Reason, and that Brutes are only
some of the more curiously contrived Machins, devoid of Sense, Feeling or
Perception.

Thus much may indeed be said in the behalf of this great Man, That it is
really unaccountable to Humane Reason that Matter should be sensible: but yet
it was too bold an Adventure, utterly to deny its possibility, when at the same
instant we have a full Assurance that it is so.

It is altogether as unintelligible, that Matter and Spirit should influence,
and have such mutual Commerce with each other as we experience in our selves.
However inconsistent both may seem to our finite Understandings, they are by no
means to be thought so with a Divine and Infinite Capacity or Power: upon which
account, and the certain assurance that Brutes are capable of Sensation, those
who allowed hereof, but yet would have Sense and Reason to arise from the same
Source, were reduced to that miserable Subterfuge, That it was possible the
Souls of Brutes were but so many particular Eradiations or Effluxes from the
Spring of Life above, when and wheresoever there is any fitly prepared Matter
capable to receive them, and to be actuated by them, to have a sense and
fruition of themselves in it so long as it continues such, but so soon as ever
those organized Bodies of theirs, by reason of their Indisposition, become
incapable of being farther actuated by them, then to be resumed again, and
retracted back to their Original Fountain.

In supposing thus we must believe, both a prae and post Eternal Existence of
brutal Souls; but if this will not do, there are others who would persuade us of
the probability that the Souls of Brutes, as they are created out of nothing,
may be annihilated by the same Power, and so with as much likelihood may the
Soul of Man.

These are some of the dangerous Consequences and Inconveniences attending
that monstrous Opinion, That Reason and Sensation are Affections of one and the
same Soul. To remove which Difficulties, and in order to our arrival at a
clearer Knowledge of our whole Compositum, I shall as briefly as I can, attempt
a Proof that the Soul of Brutes, although sensible, is Corporeal.

That Brutes are sensible (says a late M. S.
Author) we have the same certainty as one Man can have that another Man is
sensible, supposing that other Man were Dumb. I cannot feel the Impressions
made upon another Man of Pain, Hunger and Thirst, but must judge of them by
outward Indications: and I have all the same outward Indications that Brutes
feel all these, as I have that any Man feels them; and therefore it would be
ridiculous to go about to prove this by particular Instances.

That the Brutish Soul is Material, See Gibson's Epit. Anat.
I come to understand because it is extended and divisible, being made up of
the Vital Spirits and the Arterial Blood their Vehicle, and by the Rivulets of
the Nerves they are communicated from the Brain to all the Sentient parts of
the Body, which therefore are endowed with the power of performing Animal
Actions.

If you object, That this will prove no more than that the Immaterial Substance
is so closely united to the Material, that it perceives every impression made
upon the Body. I reply, That we could not then feel distinct Pains in several
parts, but the Pain must be equally felt over the whole Body; for the Soul
b^ing indivisible, it cannot feel in parts, but the whole must feel, and
con^equ^ntly the whole Body seem in equal pain: Neither, if this were true,
could there be any degrees of Pain in the S^nti^nt Parts, but a Cut in the
Flesh would s^art as much as a Cut amongst the Nerves, for there can be no
Reason assigned why i^ should be otherwise, but because there is more of the
sensible Nature in one part, than there is in another, but how can there be
more or less when the whole fe^ls both? wherefore if there are degrees of Pain
in the Sentient Parts, if we c^n feel pain in this part, and none in the other,
and can at once feel several distinct Pains, in several distinct parts, then
the Soul must either feel by parts, which an Indivisible cann^t, or Sensation
must belong to another Principle whose Properties are Extension and
Divisibility, and if those Properties do not belong to Body, or can belong to
Spirit, we have no Notion either of Body or Spirit.

Whoever thoroughly considers this Argument, will find that the Judgment of most
Learned Physician* concur with this Opinion, of the Corporiety of the Souls of
Brutes; and that the same is plainly hinted in those places of (...) v. 1, 1^,
1^, 1^, 14.
Scripture which relate to the Jewish Prohibition of Eating Blood, because the
same contained the Life or Soul. For as our Animal Spirits (...) off by what we
call the insensible Transpiration, we are sensibly enfeebled, and grow unactive
till there are new ones ma^e out of the Arterial Blood, which Blood must be
again s^p^ly'd by Corporeal Nourishment. Thus we see Bodies, un^^^ustom'd to
hot Countries, in those places their Po^es are so much opened as to cause the
Spirits, flying away in such quantities that the Life would soon expire,
without the assistance of spi^^tuous Liquors, which give a speedy supply of
Spirits. On the other hand we find, Dormice will sleep whole Months without the
help of Food; but if you observe those Creatures in their sleep, they are stiff
and cold, their Pores are so contracted, that the Life cannot fly off, and
therefore they want no Recruit; but when warmth awakens them, whereby their
Pores are opened, they can fast no longer than other Creatures: therefore if
the Animal Life flies off by parts, which are again renewed by Corporeal
Nourishment, it is a clear Evidence that the Soul of Brutes, or Animal Life, is
Corporeal; and by this we come to a plain and true Notion of Death, that it is
not (as usually defined) a Separation of the Soul and Body, which is but a
Consequence of Death but an absolute Extinguishment of the Animal Life or Vital
Flame. For to suppose that mere Animals are a Compound of Matter and Spirit,
and that Death is only a Separation of them, is to ridicule all the Natural
Arguments for Man's Immortality, by making them hold as strong for the
Immortality of Brutes; which is both against Divinity and Common Sense. And
indeed, the reason why some Physicians (who of all Men should admire most the
wonderful Works of Creating Wisdom) have been Atheistically inclined, is,
because they are able to demonstrate that Sense is made by Matter and Motion,
and therefore have carelessly concluded Reason to spring from the same
Principle, and all our Actions to be accounted for by Mechanism: and those Men
help much to the Confirmation of this Opinion, who assign the Office of
Sensation to the Rational Soul, and allow Reason to other Animals; there is no
Adversary to Religion, but will readily grant the Animal Life and Rational Soul
to be the same thing; and that all Animals are Rational; but then he subjoyns
that the Animal Life is Corporeal: and therefore concludes that Rationality is
no Argument either of Immateriality or Immortality.

My Lord Bacon upon this Subject delivers his Opinion in the following words:
The sensible Soul, or the Soul of Beasts, Ad L. 208, 209.
must needs be granted to be a Corporeal Substance, attenuated by Heat, and
made invisible: let there be therefore made a more diligent Enquiry touching
this Knowledge, and the rather for that this Point, not well understood, bath
brought forth superstitious and very contagious Opinions, and most vilely
abasing the dignity of the Soul of Man, of Transmigration of Souls out of one
Body into another, and lustration of Souls by Periods of Years, and finally of
the too near affinity in evey point of the Soul of Man with the Soul of Beasts.
This Soul in Beasts is a principal Soul whereof the Body of the Beast is the
Organ; but in Man th^s Soul is it self an Organ of the Soul Rational.

Having made this Enquiry into the Soul of Brutes, and given, I hope,
sufficient proof that the same is Corporeal, we shall next inform our selves
what Knowledge they are endowed with, and enquire whether or no there is a
Principle of Reason in the most subtle of their Actions.

Author of the Discourse of Rational and Irrational Souls.
Our common Observation may assure us, That all the Actions of mere Animals are
either the Effects of a bare Sensitive Nature, which in various degrees is
common to all; or of Sensitive Creatures, as they are framed of this or that
peculiar Species or Kind: for what those Creatures act according to the Nature
common to all, is plainly the Effect of bare Sensation: We see Idiots do as
much, who have no use of Reason; they distinguish who feeds them, and fear who
beats them. Outward Objects must affect the Animal Spirits, the Animal Spirits
must make Traces in the Brain, and lodge those Idea's, and so far Will and
Reason have nothing to do.

And although the Actions of mere Animals, as they are of this or that peculiar
Species or Kind, seem somewhat agreeable to Reason, yet they prove only a wise
Author of their Beings, and that the more strongly, because it is visible that
those Actions are not the Effects of a reasoning Principle in those Creatures,
for Actions that are constantly agreeable to Reason must be somewhere directed
by Reason, but they are not the Effect of Reason in those Creatures.

In earthly created Beings, we find Reason is improved by degrees, from a
Series of Observations or from Information: Men cannot conclude or reason about
any thing but a Posteriori, from the operation and effects of things; but mere
Animals act according to their Nature, immediately and without observation;
which are so many Demonstrations that they are instructed by a secret Instinct,
and not by Reason, or a Knowledge of what they do, for they ever act according
to their Natures, when by plain and visible Accident they act against the most
apparent Reason. One would think a little, very little Reason would instruct
Creatures that they could not eat when their Mouths are sewed up, at least a
trial might learn them that knowledge; yet stitch up the Mouth of a Ferret day
after day, and for all that he will as warmly pursue the Rabbits for his food, as
if his Jaws were at liberty. Farthermore, Mere Animals must act according to
their kind, when so acting is visibly their certain ruin. Take a Bull-dog and
muzzle him, throw him Bones that he may find he cannot open his Mouth, ^^t
after that show him a Bull, and he shall as boldly attack the Bull, as if he
had no Muzzle on.

Again, It is certain that young Birds bred in Trees, will starve with Meat
before them if it be not put into their Mouths, whereas those whose Kind breed
on the Ground, can never be taught to gape for their Food, but so soon as
batch't betake themselves to seek out and pick up their food. These I say, with
a thousand Instances of the like nature, are evident Marks of a Providential
Wisdom, because they are Rational Actions, many of them at least performed not
accidentally, but constantly, by Irrational Agents.

Understanding being got by a Series of Experiments, Observations or
Information, therefore it is some old Arts are improved, some quite lost, some
new ones found out, but all mere Animals act the same yesterday and to day;
thus far they always went, and no farther: which fully proves they were
originally compel d and limited to act according to their Kind, and had
nothing to do with Will or Reason.

It may be objected, That several sorts of Animals are very d^cible Creatures,
and learn several things, by the Discipline of Mankind, which would make one
ready to think that those Creatures have some degrees of Reason. To which, I
say, thus far is proved that those Creatures do act artificially, and for ends,
without Deliberation and Knowledge; and those being the chief ends for which
they were made, we cannot reasonably suppose that they should blindly act that
part, and yet have the use of Reason in things of lesser moment. It must
therefore be concluded, that the utmost extent of their Ability is to do, and
not to know; and therefore though by the Impressions made upon the Senses, they
may be forced to do what their Nature is capable of doing; yet this is all from
the Senses, and Reason but begins where the Senses end. To do and to know why
we do, proceed from different Principles: it is true, the most docible Creatures
may mimick several things they see Men do, yet can they give us no Indication
that they know why or to what end they do them: for that their Souls being
Corporeal, it follows necessarily, that all their Motions must be made either
by an External or Internal Force or Impulse; whereas Will and Reason can be no
other than the Powers of a self-moving Principle, which is a spiritual
immaterial Essence. Sense and Imagination can conceive nothing but what is
Corporeal; and the highest Conceptions which depend on Sense, amount no higher
than Imagination, which likewise is unable to receive any other than Corporeal
Idea's: Nor can it reflect or make any Conclusions about what it perceives. So
that Brutes may very well be thus far endowed without any such thing as a
Rational Exertion. For a farther Explanation hereof, I shall give you the
Descriptton of a Learned Man of the Mechanic Process by which Brute Animals
come by all their Habits, and that acquired seeming Knowledge which though in
some degrees it surpasses their Natural Instincts, is however most strictly
tied to Sense and Imagination.

Vide Willis de Anon. (...).
When the Brain, says he, in the more perfect Brutes grows clear, and the
Constitution of the Animal Spirits becomes sufficiently lucid and defaecated,
the Exteror Objects being brought to the Organs of the Senses, make
Impressions, which being from thence transmitted for the continuing the Series
or Order of the Animal Spirits inwards toward the streaked Bodies, affect the
common Sensory, and when as a sensible impulse of the same, like a waving of
waters, is conveyed farther into the callous Body, and thence into the Cortex
or shelly substance of the Brain, a Perception is brought in concerning the
Species of the thing admitted by the Sense, to which presently succeeds the
Imagination, and Marks or Prints of its Type being left, constitute the Memory:
but in the mean time, whilst the sensible Impr^ssion being brought to the
common Sensory ^ffects there the Perception of the thing felt, as some direct
Species of it tending farther creates the Imagination and Memory, so other
reflected Species of the same Object as they appear either Congruous or
Incongruous, produce the Appetite and local Motions its Executors: that is, the
Animal Spirits looking inwards for the Act of Sension, being struck back, leap
toward the streaked Bodies, and when as these Spirits presently possessing the
beginnings of the Nerves irritate others, they make a Desire of flying from the
thing felt, and a Motion of this or that Member or Part to be stirred up; then
because this or that kind of Motion succeeds once or twice to this or that
Sension, afterward for the most part this Motion follows that Sension as the
Effect follows the Cause, and according to this manner, by the admitting the
Idea's of sensible things, both the knowledge of several things, and the habits
of things to be done, or of local Motions, are by little and little produced.
For indeed from the beginning almost every Motion of the animated Body, is
stirred up by the Contact of the outward Object, viz. the Animal Spirits
residing within the Organ are driven inward, being stricken by the Object, and
so (as we have said) constitute Sension or Feeling, then like as a stood
sliding along the banks of the shore, is at last beaten back: so because this
waving or inward turning down of the Animal Spirits, being partly reflected
from the common Sensory, is at last directed outward, and is partly stretched
forth even into the inmost part of the Brain, presently local Motion succeeds
the Sension, and at the same time a Character being affixed on the Brain, by
the sense of the thing perceived, it impresses there Marks or Vestigia of the
same for the Fantasy and the Memory then affected, and afterward to be
affected; but when as the Prints or Marks of very many Acts of this kind of
Sensation and Imagination, as so many Tracts or Ways are engraven in the Brain,
the Animal Spirits oftentimes of their own accord, without any other
forewarning, and without the presence of an Exterior Object, being stirred up
into Motion, forasmuch as the fall into the footsteps before made, represent
the Image of the former thing, with which, when the Appetite is affected, it
desiring the thing objected to the Imagination, causes spontaneous Actions, and
as it were, drawn forth from an inward Principle. As for Example sake; The
Stomach of an Horse feeding in a barren Ground or Fallow-land, being incited by
Hunger, stirs up and variously Agitates the Animal Spirits flowing within the
Brain; the Spirits being thus moved by accident, because they run into the
footsteps formerly made, they call to mind the former more plentiful Pasture
fed on by the Horse, and the Meadows at a great distance: then the imagination
of this desirable thing (which at that time is cast before it by no outward
Sense, but only by the Memory) stops at the Appetite: that is, the Spirits
implanted in the streaked Bodies are affected by that Motion of the Spirits
flowing within the middle part or marrow of the Brain, who from thence
presently after their formerly accustomed manner, enter the Origines of the
Nerves, and actuating the nervous System after their wonted manner, by the same
Series produce local Motions, by which the hungry Horse is carried from place
to place, till he has found out the imagined Pasture, and indeed enjoys that
good the Image whereof was painted in his Brain.

After this manner the sensible Species, being intromitted by the benefit of
the Exterior Organs in the more perfect Brutes, for that they affix their
Characters on the Brain, and there leave them, they constitute the Faculties of
Fancy and Memory, as it were Storehouses full of Notions; farther stirring up
the Appetite into local Motions agreeable to the Sensions, frequently they
produce an habit of acting, so that some Beasts being taught or instructed for
a long time, by the assiduous Incursions of the Objects, are able to know and
remember many things, and learn manifold Works, i. e. to perform them by a
complicated and continued Series and Succession of very many Actions. Moreover,
this kind of acquired knowledge of the Brutes, and the practick Habits
introduced by the Acts of the Senses, are sometimes promoted by other means to
a greater degree of Perfection.

Living Brutes are taught by Example, by the Imitation and Institution of
others of the same, or of a diverse kind, to perform certain more excellent
Actions. Hence it is that the Ape so plainly imitates Man, that by some it is
thought a more imperfect Species of him: for this Animal being extremely
mimical, as it is endowed with a most caepactous and hot Brain, it imitates to
an hair almost all the Gestures that it happens to see presently, with a ready
and expeditious composing of its Members, and is furnished with a notable
Memory, and retains all its Tricks which it has once acted, very firmly
afterward, being wont to repeat them at its pleasure. Yet notwithstanding it is
very clear and apparent, that Brutes are directed to all things which belong to
the Defense and Conservation of the Individuum, and that are to be done for the
Propagation of their Kinds by a natural Instinct, as it were a Law or Rule
fixed in their Hearts, when as therefore we behold for these ends, ordained by
Divine Providence, Brutes to order their Matters wisely, and as it were by
Counsel, no Man esteems this the Work of Reason, or any Liberal Faculty; for
they are led into these Enterprises by a certain Predestination, rather than by
any proper Virtue or Intention.

Having given you this Account of the Soul of Brutes, proved the same a
Corporeal, Divisible Substance, whose peculiar residence is in the Blood and
Spirits, and evinced their knowledge not to exceed the powers of Sensation and
Imagination, it is time that we return to discourse of the Rational Soul of
Man; and if it can be discovered that there is a Principle of Action in him
which proceeds from a different way of Operation than Sensation does, and that
there are such Operations of this Soul which are not Imaginations, it will be
then as clear that there is a Principle in Man higher than Matter and Motion,
and impossible, without a spiritual immaterial Being, to solve those
Appearances in him which thus transcend the Power of Imagination.

Vide Gas. Phy. sect. 3. lib. 10, 11.
The renowned Philosopher Gassendus has given sufficient proof, That the
Sensitive Soul in Man is exactly the same with that of Brutes, Corporeal,
Extended, Native, and Corruptible: but that the Rational is a Substance purely
Incorporeal and Immortal.

Dr. Hammond in his Notes upon Thessalonians, v. 23. says Man consists of three
Parts: First the Body, which denotes the Flesh and Members. Secondly the Vital
Soul, which Animal and Sensitive Soul is common to Man and Brute. Thirdly
Spirit, which is the Rational Soul. This Division he confirms by the Testimony
of Heathen Authors and ancient Fathers. So that those who disregard the
Scriptures, may in these admirable Authors be furnished with other Authorities;
but those who do, may consider what the Apostle says in the forementioned
Text, viz. I pray God your whole Body, Soul and Spirit be preserved: to which
we may add what he says in another place, Heb. 4.12.
The Word is sharper then a two edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow. The meaning whereof
is, Let things be never so closely united, God can separate them; but then they
must be in their nature separable, or else it implys a Contradiction. So that
if the Soul and Spirit are separable, we have gained our Point; if they are
not, the Apostle has told us that can be, which cannot be. But further; This
Truth that there is two distinct Souls in Man, is by the Apostle demonstrated
from the dictates of Internal Sense: I find (says he) a Law, Romans 7.21, 22, 23.
that when I would do good evil is present with me, for I delight in the Law of
God after the inward Man. But I see another Law in my Members, warring against
the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of Sin, which is
in my Members. So then with my Mind I my self serve the Law of God, but with
the Flesh the Law of Sin.

Now what can be more expressive of two several perceptive Souls in Man, See
the Discourse of Rational and Irrational Souls.
whose Natures and whose Laws are contrary to each other? But perhaps you will
say, These contrary Laws do indeed arise because Man is a Compound of contrary
Natures, yet there is but one perceptive Nature in him: but that Nature having
the several Faculties of Reason and Sensation, and being united to Flesh,
whereby the Sensitive Faculty may be gratified, hence arises the War between
Sense and Reason. To which I answer, Thus far then we are agreed, that Sense is
the Source of all Carnal Delights, Pains and Aversions, therefore Sense is no
Faculty of the Spirit, or all Carnal Delights, Lusts and Passions spring from
the Spirit: and what excellent sense would this make the Apostle speak, I find
a Law in my Mind warring against the Law of my Mind; so then with the Mind I my
self serve the Law of God, but with the Mind the Law of Sin: for if Sense be a
Faculty of the Mind, the Laws of Sense are are as much the Laws of the Mind as
the Laws of Reason.

The Soul and Spirit, by reason of their close unaccountable Union, have also
unaccountable mutual Influences upon each other; but for all that, their
contrary Natures are very discernable: and to make Sense and Reason Faculties
of the Spirit, is to make the Spirit as the Man, a Compound of contrary
Natures; for that Sense and Reason are of contrary Natures, is discernable from
the natural and constant strugglings and contentions between them. Secondly,
From the natural Fruit they bring forth, which is certainly contrary if Good
and Evil are so: wherefore we may with all imaginable certainty, affirm the
Souls of all mere Animals, and the Sensitive Soul of Man, to be Corporeal, but
the Rational Soul of Man to be truly a Spiritual Immaterial Substance, if there
were not such a Substance in him distinct from the Sensitive Soul of Brutes,
and a Power Superior to Sensation, we might reasonably interrogate with the
Judicious Willis, Willis de Anum.
Cur non Quadrupedes aeque ac Homo Intellectu and Ratiocineo polleant, immo
Scientias and Arts discant: quandoquidem in utriusque preter Animas pariter
Immateriales, eadem prorsus fit Conformatio Organorum Animalium, a quibus sane
Animam rationalem dum in Corpore est, quoad Actus and habitus suos pondere
constat, quoniam laesis aut impeditis Organis, horum privatio aut Eclipsis
succedit: Quamobrem quod Bruti Anima iisdem ac Homo Organis utens, nihil
praeclare scire nec supra Actus and Objecta materialia assurgere potest, plane
sequitur illum ab Anima rationali diversam, insuter long inferiorem and
materialem esse. But to proceed,

Those who hold no difference between the Soul of Man and Brutes, with respect
to Essence, and at the same time will allow Sacred Authority, would do well to
consider whether it be reasonable to think the latter were endowed with that
Divine Spiraculum, which the former was honored with in his Creation: if they
think it reasonable, they strike at the Mosaic Relation; if they do not, let
them tell me what that Spiraculum was, if not the Rational Spirit. And indeed,
if this alone were well considered, we should hear no more of the Rationality
of Brutes, from those who acknowledge the Truth of Revelation.

But farther; That this Reasonable Soul is a Spiritual Incorporeal Substance,
we have this to allege, for that it is Rational and has a freedom of Choice,
neither of which can possibly belong to Matter, for all the Motions of Matter
are necessarily made, no Choice but Force must make its Motion, and that Force
must be immediate, for Matter moves no longer than the Impulse lasts: but to
deliberate and judge of a Train of Consequences, is no immediate impulsion of
Matter, for those Consequences are not yet in Being, but only such as will be
upon our acting thus or thus; nay, perhaps only such things as may, but never
will be; but to choose to act (as such power we have, and every Man feels it
within himself) purely in regard to those Consequences, is many times to act in
opposition to all the immediate and strong Impresses of Matter; and hence it is
apparent, that neither Will nor Reason do belong to Matter, but to something
vastly different.

Again, The Animal Spirits make no other Impression on the Brain, than as
things appear not always as they are, which Error is corrected; yes, you will say,
but it is corrected by the Senses themselves. But what puts the Senses in the
way and method to correct themselves? If the Senses are their own directing
Power, then all Creatures that are alike sensible would be alike knowing; and
mere Animals would be daily finding out new Arts and Inventions as well as Man.
It is impossible to give the least shadow of a Reason why it should be
otherwise, unless we allow a Principle in Man which Brutes have not: we see,
except Man, all Creatures of the same kind run in one constant and settled
Method, whilst he is not only learning from every thing he sees, but invents
how to learn and try the Truth or Falsehood of this or that Invention by
Experiments; and sometimes he finds himself in the right, sometimes in the
wrong: Now, though in these Cases the Truth or Falsehood of this or that Invention
is proved by the Senses, yet the Invention preceded the Proof, and therefore
could not be from the Information of the Senses. Besides, it is yet more evident
those Inventions are not from the Senses, but from another Principle, because
the same are sometime, false, and will not hold; but when we come to prove
them, our Senses will bring in no such Appearances: For although we know nothing
but a posteriori from the Operations and Effects of Things, yet from visible
Operations and Effects, we can consider and reason about the Nature of the
Invisible Operator, as from the Beauty and Order of the Universe, we reason
that there must be a mighty Wise and Invisible Power that framed and continues
the same. Now the Impressions of Matter upon Sense go no farther than so these
Appearances are, and here of necessity we should ever rest, had we no other
Principle but Matter, and could never enquire how or why things come to be so;
but when we advance to the Notion of an Invisible Operator, then certainly we
outfly our Senses, unless our Eyes are so good as to see an Invisible Object:
But suppose there is no such Invisible Object, but that all our Notions
concerning such a Being are but mere Chimaera's, let us for Argument sake
suppose all that, however whether the Notion of an invisible Incorporeal
Operator be true or false, so much is true, that there is such a Notion amongst
Men, and that it is a full Evidence that there is an incorporeal Principle in
Man, because Matter cannot possibly impress or be impressed with any other but
material Idea's; therefore were Man's whole Compositum pure Matter, he could
not possibly stir beyond material Idea's, and the World had never heard of
Immaterial Substance. To confirm this, I shall here add the Opinion of one
whose Sentiments upon other Matters I have elsewhere made bold with.

See Charlton upon the Soul's immortality.
The Considerations (says he) which may be alleged in favor of the Soul's
Immortality, are either Physical or Moral: The former are such as arise from
the Nature of the Soul her self, and do all of them seem to refer to this one
Capital Argument, The Reasonable Soul of Man is Immaterial, and therefore
Immortal: The reason whereof is, what wants Matter wants likewise Parts into
which it might be distracted or dissolved; and what is incapable of being
dissolved, must of necessity always continue to be what it is: for whatever is
of a Nature free from the Conditions of Matter or Body, does neither carry the
Principles of Dissolution in it self, nor fear them from External Agents.

There are but two ways comprehensible by the Understanding, how any thing that
has Existence in Nature can perish; the one is by the Exolution and
Dissipation of the Parts of which it was composed; the other by an absolute
Adnibilation of its Entity, as the Schoolmen phrase it. The former way of
destruction is peculiar to Corporeals, and the latter may be competent to
Incorporeals: But to argue a possi, ad esse, that God does, or will adnihilate
any thing, because it as in his power, is much below any good Logician to
infer: nor are we to suppose any Innovation in the general state of things; but
that the Course of the Universe does constantly and invariably proceed in the
same manner or tumor of method, which was at first instituted by the Wisdom of
the Creator.

Now to prove that there is a power in us above the sensitive Soul or
independent of Matter, notwithstanding this great Man was in some things
tainted with the Cartesian Principles, he thus rightly argues, That if all our
Cognition does proceed originally from our Senses, as is affirmed by Aristotle
in his Maxim of Nihil in intellectu, etc. and that Intellection is made by
Analogy, by Composition, Division, Ampliation, Extenuation, and the like ways
of managing the Species or Images of things immitted into the common Sensory by
the External Senses; then certainly we can have no knowledge of any thing
whereof we have no Image, and consequently without Imagination there is no
Intellection; so that in fine, to imagine and understand a Thing will be all
one; whereas to answer this we may affirm, that no Corporeal Image or Species
is ever received into the Mind, and that pure Intellection as well of a
Corporeal as Incorporeal thing is made without any material Image or Species at
all. As for Imagination, to that indeed is required the presence of some
Corporeal Image to which the Mind might apply it self, because there can be no
Imagination but of Corporeal things, and yet nevertheless that Corporeal Image
does not enter into the Mind. The truth is, the Intellect also makes use of
Images conceived by the Fancy (and therefore called Phantasms) yet only as
certain means or degrees, that progressing through them, it may at length
attain the knowledge of some things which it afterward perceives as
sequestered, and in a manner sublimed from those Phantasms: but this is that
which does sufficiently argue its being Immaterial, because it carries it self
beyond all Images material, and comes to the Science of some things of which it
has no Phantasms.

All the particular Knowledges that Man has, or can have, concerning finite
and complete Entities (except only the Notion of Being) are only certain
comparisons or respects between particular things; but of respect there can be
no Image or Representation at all in the Fancy, and therefore our Knowledge is
without Images. All the particular Notions we have (except of Being) do belong
to some one of the ten Praedicaments, all which are so manifestly respective,
that no Man doubts them to be so: In particular, Substance has a respect to
Being: Quantity does consist in a respect unto Parts: Quality has a respect
unto that Subject which is denominated from it: Action and Passion result from
the Union of Quality and Substance: Relation denotes the respect betwixt the
Relatum and Correlatum: Ubi and Quando arise from Substance considered with the
Circumstances of Place and Time: Situation is from the respect of parts to the
whole: Habit is a respect to the Substance wherein it is, as being the
Propriety by which it is well or ill, conveniently or inconveniently affected,
in regard of its own Nature. If you question the verity of the foregoing
Assertion, exercise your Mind in seriously reviewing all these things that have
been derived from the Senses, and see if you can find among them any such thing
as we call a respect; it has neither Figure nor Color, nor Sound, nor Odor,
nor Taste, and so cannot possibly be represented to the Sense or Imagination:
hence, I think, there is no need to doubt that the Notions of things in the
Intellect or pure Understanding, are extremely different from whatsoever is
immitted into the Mind by the mediation of the Senses, and so that the
Intellect has a knowledge of some things independent of Corporeal Images or
Idea's. For in simple Imagination the Mind does always apply it self to the
thing speculated, or the Image rather of that thing; but in pure Intellection
in quitteth the Image, and converteth it self upon it self; the former Act
being still accompanied with some labor and contention of Mind, the latter
free, easy and instantaneous.

Now in the Fancy of Beasts, there is always a Conjunction of the Image of
that particular good or harm they have formerly received from such or such
things with the Images of the things themselves, which is all that can be said
to render the subtilest of them Conscious, and is indeed the Cause of all those
so much admired Effects called Sympathys and Antipathys amongst Animals of
different kinds.

Another sort of Actions evincing the Soul's Immateriality, are those whereby
we do not only form to our selves Universals or Universal Notions, but also
understand the reason of Universality it self; for it being evidently
impossible that any Corporeal thing should be exempted from all material
Conditions and Differences of Singularity, as Magnitude, Figure, Color, Time,
Place, etc. and undeniably certain that the Understanding has a power to
divest them of all and every one of those Conditions and Circumstances, and to
speculate them in that abstracted state devoy'd of all Particularities, it
follows necessarily, that the Soul which has this power so to abstract them,
must it self be exempt from all Matter, and of a Condition more eminent than to
be confined to material Conditions.

To these few Reasons of the Immateriality of the Humane Soul, defumed from the
Excellency of her Operations, I might here add a multitude of others of the
same Extraction and equivalent Force, as in particular that of the Existence of
Corporeal Natures in the Soul by the power of Apprehension: that of her drawing
from Multitude to Unity: her apprehension of Negations and Privations: her
containing of Contraries without Opposition: her Capacity to move without being
moved her self: the Incompossibility of opposite Propositions in the
Understanding, and sundry others, the least whereof is of Evidence and Vigor
sufficient to carry the Cause against all those Enemies to her Immortality who
would degrade her from the Divine Dignity of her Nature, to an equality with
the Souls of Brutes, that are but certain Dispositions of Matter, and obnoxious
to Dissolution upon change of the same by contrary Agents.

But farther, There is no Corporeal Faculty but what is confined to the
Perception of only some one certain Genus of things, as in particular the Sight
to Visibles, the Hearing to Sounds, etc. and though the Imagination seems to be
extended to very many kinds, yet all those are contained under the Classis of
Sensibles, and thence it comes that all Animals, endowed only with Fantasy,
are addicted only to Sensibles, no one affecting the knowledge of any thing
which falls not under the Sense: but the Intellect alone is that which has
for its Object, Omne verum, and as the Schoolmen speak, Ens ut Ens, every Being
in the Universe, and therefore has no mixture of Matter, but is wholly free
from it and Incorporeal, a Truth so clearly revealed by the Light of Nature,
that Anaxogoras and Aristotle both subscribed, Esse intellectum necessario
(...) immistum, (...) quoniam intelligit Universa.

That Incorporeals are within the Orb of the Intellects Activity, and do not
escape the apprehension of this unbounded and universal Capacity, needs no
other proof besides that of our own sublime Speculations concerning the Nature
of God, of Intelligencies, of Angels, of the Humane Soul, and whatever else
belongs to the Science of Metaphysics, which teaches us to abstract from all
Matter and Quantity. Nay, I presume it will not be accounted Paradoxical in me
to affirm, that Immaterial Objects are most genuine and natural to the
Understanding, especially since Carts has irrefutably demonstrated that the
knowledge we have of the Existence of the Supreme Being, and of our own Souls,
is more certain, clear, and distinct than the knowledge of any Corporeal Nature
whatever, according to that Canon of Aquinas, Nulla res qualiscunque est, etc.

The Moral Considerations, usually brought in defense of the Soul's
Incorruptibility, are principally three: 1. The Universal Consent of Mankind.
2. Man's inseparable Appetite of Immortality. 3. The Justice of God in
rewarding good Men, and punishing evil Men, after Death. Now as Cicero
judiciously observes, Omni in re, consentio omnium Gentium, Lex naturae putanda
est; and thus the Notion of the Soul's Immortality is so implanted in the
Nature and Mind of Man, that whosoever denies it does impugn his own Natural
Principles.

As for that common Objection the Alteration observable in Infancy and old Age,
we may answer with the great Master of Nature ( at least one so esteemed by
some) Innasci, autem Intellectus videtur, and substantia quaedam esse, nec
corrumpi, nam si corrumperetur quidem id maxim fieret ab habitatione illa,
quae in Senectute contingit: nunc autem res perinde fit ac in ipsismet sensuum
instrumentis; si enim Senex, Occulum Juvenilem reciperet, non secus ac ipse
Juvenis videret, unde and Senectus non ex eo est, quod quidquam passa Anima
sit; fed quod simile aliquid ac in Ebrietate morbisque eveniat, ipsaque
intelligendi and contemplandi functio, propter aliquid aliud interius corruptum
marcescit, cum ipsum interim cujus est passionis expers maneat. Which words
considered, we have good reason to affirm, that all that Change which the
Epicurean would have to be in the Rational Soul or Mind, during the growth of
the Body in Youth, and decay of it in old Age, does not proceed from any
Mutation in the Soul it self, but some other Interior thing distinct from it,
as the Imagination or Organ of the common Sense, the Brain, which being well or
ill affected, the Soul it self suffers not at all, but only the Functions of
it flourish or decay accordingly; for as the Philosopher remarks, if it were
possible to give an old Man a young Eye, and a young Imagination, his Soul
would soon declare by exquisite vision and quick reasoning, that it was not she
that had grown old, but her Organs; and that she is capable of no more Change
from the impairment of the Body, than is usually observed to arise (pro
tempore) from a fit of Drunkenness, or some Disease of the Brain: so that it is
evident from hence, that whatever Change Men have thought to be in the Soul by
reason of that great decay, generally attending old Age, to not really in the
Soul, but only in the Imagination and the Organs thereof, which are not so well
disposed as in the Vigor of Life.

In like manner are we to understand that the Soul, when the Members grow cold
and mortified, does then indeed instantly cease to be in them, yet is not cut
off by piecemeal, or diminisht and gradually dissipated, but the whole of it
remains in so much of the Body as yet continues warm and perfused by the Vital
Heat, until ceasing longer to animate the principle Seat of its Residence,
whether the Brain or Heart, it at length bids adieu to the whole, and
withdraws it self entire and perfect: so that Death is an Extinction of the
Vital Flame, and not of the Soul, which, as Solomon calls it, is the brightness
of the Everlasting Light, the unspotted Mirror of the Power of God, and the
Image of his Goodness, and being but one, she can do all things, and remaining
in her self, she makes all things new.

The like may be said with relation to those failings observable in swooning
fits, which fall not upon the Soul, but on the Vital Organs, at those times
rendered unfit for the uses and actions to which they were framed and
accommodated: and if the Causes of such failings should happen to be so violent
as to bring on a sudden Death, then the Soul must indeed depart; yet not by
reason of any dissolution in its Substance, or imbecility in it self, but for
want of those dispositions in the Organs of Life, by which she was enabled to
enliven the Body.

Now if (says this Author) in such a Thesis or Proposition, which is not
capable of being evinced by Geometrical Demonstration, there can yet be
expected such substantial and satisfactory Reasons, Physical or Moral, as may
suffice to the full establishment of its Truth in the Mind of a reasonable Man:
If this be granted, I thence argue that the Soul is an Immortal Substance, and
that its Immortality is not only credible by Faith or upon Authority Divine,
but also demonstrable by Reason, or the Light of Nature.

To be convinced of our Immortality, and satisfactorily persuaded whether or no
there is any thing in us, which shall not perish with the Life we are shortly
to lay down, is of so great and so important Consequence, that I can readily
expect your forgiveness, if I trespass upon your Patience, and enlarge a little
farther upon this weighty Argument.

That there is somewhat in us, essentially differing from, distinct and
superior to other Animals, or that the Rational Soul of Man bears no Analogy
with the Souls of other Creatures, is farther elegantly touched upon in these
words of Dr. Willis.

The Eminency of the Rational Soul above the Brutal or Corporeal, De Anim.
Brutorum.
shines clearly by comparing either both as to the Objects, and to the chief
Acts or Modes of Knowing. As to the former, when^^ every Corporeal Faculty is
limited to sensible Things, the Object of the Humane Mind is every Ens, whether
above or subl^mary, material or immaterial, true or fictitious, real or
intentional. The Acts or Degrees of Knowledge common to either Soul, are
vulgarly accounted these three; to wit, Simple Apprehension, Enunciation, and
Discourse: How much the power of the Rational excels the other which is
Corporeal, we shall consider, 1. The knowing Faculty of the Corporeal Soul is
Fantasy or Imagination, which being planted in the middle part of the Brain,
receives the sensible Species first only impressed on the Organs of Sense, and
from thence by a most quick irradiation of the Spirits delivered inwards, and
so apprehends all the several Corporeal Things according to their Exterior
Appearances, which notwithstanding, as they are perceived only by the Sense
(which is often deceived) they are admitted under an appearing, and not always
under a true Image or Species: for so we imagine the Sun no bigger than a
Bushel, the Horizon of the Heaven and the Sea to meet: the Stars not to be far
distant from us in the Horizon, that in respect of us there are no Antipodes.
Farther, we may think the Image in the Glass, or in a Fountain delineates it
self, that the Echo it self is a Voice coming from some other place; that the
Shore moves when we are upon the Water; yea, and many other things being
received by the Sensories, whilst Fancy is the only guide, seem far otherwise
than indeed they are. But the Intellect presiding over the Imagination beholds
all the Species deposited in it self, discerns or corrects their Obliquities or
Hypocrisies, sublimes the Fancy there drawn forth, and divesting it from
Matter, forms Universal Things from Singulars. Moreover, it frames out of these
some other more sublime Thoughts, not competent to the Corporeal Soul, so it
speculates and considers both the Nature of every Substance, and abstracted
from the Individuals of Accident, viz. Humanity, Rationality, Temperance,
Fortitude, Corporiety, Spirituality, etc. being carried higher it contemplates
God, Angels, it Self, Infinity, Eternity, and many other Notions far remote
from Sense and Imagination. And thus as our Intellect in these kind of
Metaphisical Conceptions, makes things almost wholly naked of Matter, or
carrying it self beyond every sensible Species, considers or beholds them
immaterial and immortal, because if this aptness or disposition were Corporeal,
as it could conceive nothing Incorporeal by Sense, so would it suspect and deny
that there were any such thing in the World. 2. It appears clearly that
Fancy, or the knowing Faculty of the Corporeal Soul, does not only apprehend
simple things, but also compose and divide many things at once, and from thence
makes Enuntiations because living Brutes in various Objects together, which are
for food, discern things convenient from others inconvenient or unfit;
moreover, they choose out of these, things grateful, before others less
grateful, and get them sometimes by force, sometimes by cunning, and as it were
by stealth. A Dog knows a Man at a great distance, if he be a Friend he runs to
him and fawns on him; if an Enemy and fearful, he barks at him, or flies at
him; but if armed, or threatening him, he flies away from him. These kind of
Propositions the Brutes easily conceive, forasmuch as some Species of the
sensible Thing being newly admitted, meets with Species of one thing or other
before laid up in the Memory, or being suggested by a natural Instinct,
associates with them, or repulses them.

But indeed, how little is this in respect to the Humane Intellect, which not
only beholds all Enuntiations conceived by the Fancy, but judges them whether
they be true or false, congruous or incongruous, orders and disposes them into
Series of Notions accommodated to Speculation or Practice. Moreover, it
restrains the Fancy it self, being too unstable, and apt to wander through
various Fantasies, it calls it away from these or those Conceptions, and
directs it to others; yea, it keeps it within certain limits at its pleasure,
least it should expatiate and divert too much from the thing proposed, which
without peradventure clearly indicates a Superior Soul in Man, that moderates
and governs all the Faculties and Acts of the Corporeal.

Again; The Humane Intellect not only eminently contains every Virtue of the
Fancy, but from the Species perceived in it, deduces many other Thoughts
altogether unknown to the Sense, and which the Fancy of it self could no way
imagine: For besides that it conceives the formal Notions of Corporeal Things,
and abstracted from all Matter, and attributes to them Praedicates merely
intentional, yea and understands Axioms or first Principles alone, and as it
were by a proper Instinct, without recourse to Corporeal Species, the same Mind
also beholds it self by a reflected Action, it supposes it self to think, and
thence knowing a proper Existency not to be perceived, neither by Sense nor
Fantasy, when in the mean time neither Sense nor Imagination (of which no
Images are extant) do perceive themselves to know or imagine. The Rational Soul
comprehends moreover, as it were by its own proper Light, God to be Infinite
and Eternal, that he ought to be worshipped, that Angels and Spirits do inhabit
the World, Heavens and Places beneath the Earth, that there are Places of
Beatitude and Punishment, and many other Notions merely Spiritual, by no means
to be learnt from Sense or Fantasy.

3. The Prerogatives of the Rational Soul, and the differences from the other
Sensitive and Corporeal, may be yet farther noted, by comparing the Acts of
Judgment and Discourse or Ratiocination, which it puts forth more perfectly,
and oftentimes demonstratively; when these kind of Acts from this power in the
Brutes are drawn forth imperfectly, and only analogically. We have already
declared the utmost that Brutes can do, and how far they can go toward the
Exercise of Reasoning and Deliberation, through innate Faculties and acquired
Habits: which truly, if the whole be compared with the Functions of the Humane
Intellect and its Scientific Habits, it will hardly seem greater than the Drop
of a Bucket to the Sea.

For to say nothing of that Natural Logic, by which any one endowed with a
free and perspicatious Mind probably, and sometimes most certainly concludes
concerning Doubtful Things, or Things sought after, if we mind how much the
Humane Mind, being adorned by Learning, and having learnt the Sciences and
Liberal Arts, is able to work, understand, and search out, it would be thought,
though in a Humane Body, to be rather living with Gods or Angels; for indeed here
may be considered the whole Encyclopaedia, or Circle of Arts and Sciences,
which (excepting Divinity) have been the Product or Creatures of the Humane
Mind, and plainly argues the Workman, if not Divine, to be at least a Particle
of Divine Breath, to wit, a Spiritual Substance, wonderfully Intelligent,
Immaterial, and which therefore for the future must be Immortal. It would be
tedious to rehearse the subtle Wiles of Logic, and the extremely curious Web
of Notions, or of the Reason of Essences or Beings, where the things of Natural
Philosophy being unfolded by their Causes, are dissected as it were to the
Life, the most pleasant Speculations, the profound Theorems, or rather
Caelestial, of the Metaphysics or Supernatural Things; yea, and the grand
Mysteries of other Learning, first found out by Humane Industry: But above the
rest, is it not truly amasing to see the most certain Demonstrations of the
Mathematics, and therefore akin and greatly alluding to the Humane Mind, its
Problems and Riddles, how difficult soever, to be extricated with no Labor,
yea, and many things of it attained, and most glorious Inventions? What is it
below a Prodigy, that Algaebra, from one Number or Dimension, which at first
was uncertain and unknown, being placed, should find out the quantity of
another altogether unknown? What shall I say concerning the Proportions of a
Circle, a Triangle, a Quadrangle, and other Figures, and of their Sides and
Angles variously measurable amongst themselves, being most exactly computed?
What besides that the Humane Intellect having learnt the Precepts of Geometry
and Astronomy, takes the Spaces of inaccessible Places and their Heights, the
Floor or Breadth of any Superficies, and the Contents of Solids, yea, the
Dimensions of the whole Earthly Globe: measures exactly the Spaces of Hours and
Days, the Times of the Year, the Tropicks by the Progress only of a Shadow;
yea, it measures the Orbs, Magnitudes, and Distances of the Sun and Stars, for
a long time to come calculates and exactly foretells their Risings and Settings,
Motions and Declinations, and Aspects one to another. We should want time,
should we set about to enumerate the several portentous Things, either of the
Practice or Speculation in the Mathematics: Then, if passing over to
Mechanics, we consider the several Works and Inventions of Men, wonderfully
made, there will be no place for doubting but that the Humane Soul, which can
so curiously understand, invent, find out, and effect, I had almost said
create, Things so stupendous, must needs be far different from the Brutal,
and, as before is said, Immortal: especially for that living Brutes obtain only
a few and more simple Notions and Intentions of Acting, yea, and those always
of the same kind, not determined but to one thing altogether ignorant of the
Causes of Things; they know not Rights or Laws of Political Society; they are
ignorant of every the most intelligent Mechanic Art; neither can they, unless
taught by Imitation, till how to number Three. Since therefore, in few words,
we have plainly detected in Man, besides the Corporeal Soul, such as is common
with Brutes, the prints of another merely Spiritual, we have abundant reason to
conclude the same Immortal.

Thus, Sir, have I endeavored to prove the Reasonable Soul a Substance
independent of Corporiety, and that it is not only possible, but certain, that
unless it shall please the Power who at first infused it, to annihilate its
Being, it must outshine the Extinction of the Vital Flame, and can receive no
Injury in its Substance, by the Destruction of that Body in which it had its
Residence.

The Arguments I have brought, are such, whose Solidity every Man may judge of,
who is capable of a very little Reflection or serious Application of Mind: Though
they are not all my own, yet are they such as naturally arise from a
Philosophical or Physical Enquiry, such as have been approved by the far
greater number of Learned Men, and such whose Evidence it is impossible to
withstand, without some secret reluctance in our own Minds, and without ever
being able to demonstrate that they are not true. The Sum of all that has been
said upon this Matter will rest here, That since there is nothing more certain
than this, that there is a Power in Man superior to that of all mere Animals,
and superior also to that Power which Man himself has as related to those
Creatures, in their Capacity to be Sensible and to Imagine: It is necessary to
consider seriously, what that Power can be, and in what Subject the same is
placed. If you say you apprehend it to be no more than a mere Temperament, a
Harmony, or you know not what kind of Disposition resulting from the Matter of
his Composition, I would then beg you to remove my Doubts, and to satisfy me
how it comes to pass that Brutes are not thus endowed with the same? For if
this high Prerogative of Reason had its dependence, as Sense and Imagination
have, upon a Conformation or Mechanic Structure of the Animal Organs, most
certainly other Creatures must be alike dignified whose Brains bear so exact
Affinity, and in the Parts of which there is so great Analogy, Resemblance, or
Similitude: For here your Anatomical Disquisition will inform you, that if you
consider its outward Coverings and Vessels, they have (at least some of them)
the like Membranes, viz. the Dura and Pia Matter, the like Veins, Arteries and
Nerves: If you consider its Division, there are the like Hemispheres or Lobes,
the like Gyrations or Convolutions in its Surface, the same double Substance,
viz. Cortical or Marrowy, the same common Basis, the Medulla Oblongata: If you
consider its inward Substance, the like Ventricles, Glandules, Pinealis or
Pituitaria, Nates and Testes, the Fornix, the Infundibulum, the Corpora
Striata, etc. the like make also of the Cerebellum, where Sense and Motion, as
also the Passions and Instincts merely Natural, According to Wi^^s.
though in some measure they depend upon the Brain, are more properly performed
here, and in the Medulla Oblongata.

The Brain then of Brutes thus exactly corresponding with the Humane, and the
Sensations being alike Mechanically performed in both, since the former show us
not the least footsteps of any Capacity to Will or Reason, which are so
eminently conspicuous in the latter; the Power which exerts the same, must be
more than Temperament, or any Privilege of Conformation, which is so near
alike in both, and which in its greatest Latitude can reach no higher than
Sense, Imagination, Memory and Appetite: for it seems, says the Learned
Doctor, that the Imagination is a certain Undulation or Wavering of the Animal
Spirits, begun more inwardly in the middle of the Brain, and expanded or
stretched out from thence on every side, toward its Circumference. On the
contrary, the Act of the Memory consists in the Regurgitation or Flowing back
of the Spirits from the Exterior compass of the Brain toward its middle. The
Appetite is stirred up for that the Animal Spirits being some how moved about
the middle of the Brain, tend from thence outwardly toward the Nervous System.

Now till you can make it out, how or in what Mechanic Structure or Disposition
of the Brain and Animal Organs the Rational Faculty lies concealed, and prove
to us by Dissection, that there is any such part in the Humane Brain, whereof
the more perfect Brutes are destitute, and wherein it is likely the Acts of
Reason should be performed. Till this, I say, be done, it becomes you as a Man,
as well as a Religionist, to believe with more than three parts of the Learned,
as well as the unlearned World, That the Principle of Reason is placed in a
Spiritual Indivisible Substance, or in something which neither depends on, nor
can be the Result of any Material Disposition.

Let me beg you (Dear Sir) to consider thoroughly the foregoing Paragraph. If it
contains a Truth, I am sure it is one of the highest Importance, and I must
solemnly protest to you, that it seems to me almost a perfect Demonstration. It
is no ways improbable but I may be deceived; which if you surmise, or believe,
let me request you, or some of your more Learned Friends the A -- ts, to
furnish me with some certain knowledge, That Mankind have been for some
Thousand years imposed on, deluded and abused, and that the Phenomenon of Will
and Reason are at length intelligibly solved, without the Supposition either of
Spirituality or Immortality.

I must confess it is some Men's Interest that the Rational, as well as Sensitive
Soul, should be Material, and that both should have their entire dependence on
the Organization of the Brain. But it is no Man's desire, nor yet his belief,
that it is so, can make it so, if it be otherwise. You your self must
acknowledge it a very pitiful and weak Argument, that because you have reason
to fear your Soul should be Immortal, or for that you would by no means have it
so, therefore it is not so. And truly (however vain and triffling it appear)
this with a Grimace, a profane Witticism, or an impious Scoff, serve the far
greater number of our Modern Infidels, instead of solid Proof and
Demonstration; but I expect a better Treatment from my Friend.

There remains one thing to be taken notice of before I conclude, relating to
the Power that a Man has over his own Thoughts, or the freedom he has to act
without an Impulse upon his Will; and this, I think, seems the more necessary
to be discust, because, if as some contend, Man has not an Internal Principle
of Freedom, but is confined, restrained, or forcibly determined to act by an
Impulse out of his own Power, I see not what great Advantage can redound to him
from his being a Reasonable Creature, how he is to be accounted deserving
Commendation or Dispraise, Rewards or Punishments, or indeed in what he differs
from the Brutes themselves.

I have neither room enough, nor yet at present any desire, to take notice of
the perplexing Disputes and Arguments which some Men have raised upon our
Liberty, or the want thereof: most of which, as I have reason to think, have
been founded on Men's Ignorance in the Method of the Divine Understanding, for
believing the Supreme Being has praedetermin'd all Things from Eternity, not
being able to reconcile Voluntary and Contingent Actions to his Praescience,
they will not therefore by any means allow Man to be a free Agent.

See Charlton's Darkness of Atheism.
Dr. Charlton in his Reply to the Fatist, speaks pertinently to our present
purpose. 1. Says he, We are to abominate that execrable Opinion of Democritus,
not only because it is incapable of due Consistence with the Sacred and
Indubitable Principles of Religious Faith, which ascertain that the Creation,
Molition, Conservation, and constant Administration of all Things are
impossible rightly to be ascribed to any Cause, but the Supreme Being alone:
but also because it is e Diametro repugnant to the Evidence of that Infallible
Criterion the Light of Nature, which demonstrates the Soul of Man to be an
arbitrary uncoacted Agent; for that Man has in himself a Power of Inhibiting
or Suspending his Assent unto, and Approbation of any Object, the verity of
whose Species is not sufficiently clear, but dubious, is a perfect
Demonstration of the Indifferency or Liberty of his Intellect, and so also of
its Charge, the Will or Faculty Elective. See Carts his Princip. Philos. Part
1. Sect. 6.

Nor is it a legal Process in the Pleas of Reason, to argue thus, That God has
left us to act our own Parts in the World, therefore he takes no farther care
of us; all the Occurrences of our Lives being either the necessary Subsequents
or collateral Adjuncts of our own, either Natural or Moral Actions. For tho it
be most true, that he has endowed us with an absolute freedom of our Wills (an
Evidence of his exceeding Grace and Benignity) and that indeed which supports
the necessity of our Rationality; for if our Wills were subject to Compulsion,
undoubtedly we should have little or no use at all of our Reason (since then
our Objects would be then both judged of and elected to our hands) and so
permitted us the enjoyment of our own entire Liberty; yet has he out of a
compassionate Praenotion of the Deceptibility of our Judgment, prescribed us
Rules whereby our Understandings may be directed in the Selection of Good, and
Devitation of Evil; or to speak more expressly. He has set on our right hand
real and true Good, on our left only specious and apparent; the Election of
either is dependent on our Will; our Will is guided by our Judgment, and our
Judgment is the Determination or Resolve of our intellect (for without dispare,
though common Physiology has founded this Liberty on the Indifferency of the
Will, yet is it radicated in the Indifferency of the Intellect or Cognoscent
Faculty primarily and secondarily only in the Will, insomuch as that ever
follows the Ma^^duction of the Intellect) but yet that he might in a manner
direct as to our Choice, He has annexed Happiness as a Reward to invite us to
the one, and Misery as a Punishment to deter us from the other.

I have acquainted my self with the Opinions of very many Learned Men upon this
Subject, and indeed I know of none of them who has written more satisfactorily
than the Ingenious Mr. Lock; a short Summary of whose Discourse on this
particular Point, is in the following words.

Liberty consists in a power to act or not to act, Essay of Humane
Understanding.
according as the Mind directs. A power to direct the operative Faculties to
Motion or Rest in particular Instances, is that which we call the Will. That
which in the train of our voluntary Actions determines the Will to any Change
of Operation, is some present uneasiness, which at least is always accompanied
with that of Desire. Desire is always ^^^oe^ by Evil to fly it, because a total
freedom from Pain always makes a necessary part of our Happiness: But every
Good, nay every greater Good, does not constantly move Desire, because it may
not make, or may not be taken to make a necessary part of our Happiness: for
all that we desire is only to be happy; but though this general Desire of
Happiness operates constantly and invariably, yet the satisfaction of any
particular Desire can be suspended from determining the Wilt to any subservient
Action, till we have maturely examined, whether the particular apparent Good we
then desire, make a part of our ^^al Happiness, or be consistent or
inconsistent with it, the result of our Judgment upon that Examination, is what
ultimately determines the Man, who could not be free if his Will were
determined by any thing but his own Desire guided by his own Judgment.

But farther; In our enquiries about Liberty, I think the Question is not so
proper, whether the Will be free, but whether the Man be free: Thus, I think,
that so far as any one can by the Direction or Choice of his Mind, preferring
the Existence of any Action, to the Nonexistence of that Action, and vice
versa, make it to Exist or not to Exist, so far he is free: For if I can by a
thought of my Mind, preferring one to the other, produce either Words or
Silence, I am at liberty to speak or hold my peace; and as far as this power
reaches, of acting or not acting, by the determination of his own Thought
preferring either, so far a Man is free; for how can we think any one freer
than to have a power to do what he will; so that in respect of Actions within
the reach of such a power in him, a Man seems as free as it is possible for
freedom to make him. Yet the inquisitive Mind of Man, willing to shift off from
himself, as far as he can, all thought of Guilt, though it be by putting himself
into a worse state than that of fatal Necessity, is not content with this, will
have this to be no freedom, unless it reaches farther; but is ready to say, a
Man is not free at all, if he be not as free to will, as he is to act what he
wills. Concerning a Man's Liberty therefore, there yet is raised this farther
Question, whether a Man be free to will; which, I think, is what is meant, when
it is disputed whether the Will be free. As to that, I imagine, That willing or
choosing being an Action, and Freedom consisting in a power of acting or not
acting, a Man in respect of willing any Action in his power, once proposed to
his Thoughts, cannot be free. The Reason whereof is very manifest; for it being
unavoidable that the Action depending on his Will, should Exist or not Exist;
and its Existence or not Existence following perfectly the determination and
preference of his will, he cannot avoid the willing the Existence or not
Existence of that Action, it is absolutely necessary that he will the one or
the other, i. e. prefer the one to the other, since one of them must
necessarily follow; and that which does follow, follows by the determination
and choice of his Mind, that is, by his willing it; for if he did not will, it
would not be: so that in respect of the act of willing, a Man is not free;
Liberty consisting in a power to act, or not to act, which, in regard of
volition, a Man has not, it being necessary and unavoidable (any Action in his
power being once thought on) to prefer either its doing or forbearance, upon
which preference the Action or its Forbearance certainly follows, and is truly
voluntary. So that to make a Man free in this sense, there must be another
antecedent Will to determine the Acts of this Will, and another to determine
that, and so in Infinitum; for wherever one stops, the Actions of the last Will
cannot be free: nor is any Being, so far as I can comprehend Beings above me,
capable of such a freedom of will, that it can forbear to will, i. e. to prefer
the Being or not Being of any thing in its power, which it has once considered
as such.

This then is evident, A Man is not at liberty to will or not to will any thing
in his power that he once considers of; Liberty consisting in a power to act or
not to act. Since then it is plain, a Man is not at Liberty whether he will
will or no (for when an Action in his power is proposed to his Thoughts, he
cannot forbear volition he must determine one way or the other) the next thing
to be determined is, whether he be at liberty to will which of the two he
pleases, Motion or Rest. This Question carries the Absurdity of it so
manifestly in it self, that one might thereby be sufficiently convinced that
Liberty concerns not the Will in any case; for to ask whether a Man be at
liberty to will either Motion or Rest, Speaking or Silence, which he pleases,
is to ask whether a Man can will what he wills, or be pleased with what he is
pleased with. A question which, I think, needs no Answer: and whoever can make
one of it, must suppose one Will to determine the Acts of another; and another
to determine that, and so forwards. To avoid these and the like Absurdities,
nothing can be of greater use than to establish in our Minds clear and steady
Notions of the Things under consideration: If the Idea's of Liberty and
Volition were well fixed in our Understandings, and carried along with us in
our Minds, as they ought, through all the Questions are raised about them, I
suppose a great part of the Difficulties that perplex Men's Thoughts, and
entangle their Understandings, would be much easier resolved, and we should
perceive where the confused signification of Terms, or where the Nature of the
Thing caused Obscurity.

First then, It is carefully to be remembered, that freedom consists in the
dependence of the Existence or not Existence of any Action, upon our Volition
of it: and not in the dependence of any Action, or its contrary, on our
preference: Or our freedom consists in our being able to act, or not to act,
according as we shall choose or will.

Secondly, We must remember that volition or willing is an act of the Mind,
directing its Thoughts to the Production of any Action, and thereby exerting
its power to produce it.

Thirdly, The Will being nothing but a power in the Mind, to direct the
operative Faculties of a Man to Motion or Rest, as far as they depend on such
Direction. To the Question, what is it determines the Will? the true and proper
Answer is the Mind: for that which determines the general power of directing to
this or that particular Direction, is nothing but the Agent it self exercising
the power it has that particular way. If this Answer satisfies not, it is plain
the meaning of the Question, what determines the Will? is this, what moves the
Mind in every particular Instance to determine its general power of directing
to this or that particular Motion or Rest. And to this I answer, The motive for
continuing in the same state or action is only the present satisfaction in it:
The motive to change is always some uneasiness; nothing setting us upon the
change of state, or upon any new action, but some uneasiness. This is the true
Motive that works on the Mind to put it upon action, which for shortness sake
we call determining the Will.

I shall not descend farther into the Particulars of this Learned Discourse; if
you look it over, you will find many curious Thoughts, particularly in his
Enquiry, Why the greatest positive Good determines not the Will, unless that
our Desire be raised proportionably, and makes us uneasy in the want of it:
for we must by no means confound our Will with our Desire. Desire it self being
an uneasiness.

Before I finish this Argument of the Power and Freedom which we experience in
our selves, and that manifest liberty we have to assent, to deny, to choose or
refuse what is presented to our Fantasies, I shall endeavor to solve some of
those many Doubts, which seem to relate to the Moral conduct of our Lives, by
which the wretched Subterfuge of the Libertine Coaction or Compulsion will be
plainly refuted, and himself in all respects chargeable with his own
Commissions, Omissions, or the Impiety of his Actions.

That this may appear evident, I must desire you to keep in mind the following
Proposition, That though the first Motions of our Minds are but little in our
Power, and that we have not a perfect liberty to suppress every sudden Thought,
Apprehension, Passion or Desire which are excited in our Minds, by unexpected
Objects presented to our Imagination. If we are not able to stop them from
appearing to us; or cannot hinder them from coming into our Minds, yet is it in
our power to deny our consent, or to assent unto the same: and in this very
Assent or Denial are laid the Foundations of Vice and Virtue, and accordingly
hereunto we must expect our Thoughts deserve the Character of Good or Evil.

As for instance; When I behold a beautiful Woman, although at the presentment of
such an Object unforeseen and unexpected, I am perhaps unable to prevent some
libidinous Idea in my Mind, yet is it wholly in any power to choose whether or
no I will indulge the Thought, or take all Opportunities to continue the lewd
Fancy; or whether I should make it my business to satisfy my Concupiscible
Appetite by a Carnal Embrace or Contact.

Again, Supposing it impossible I should keep my Thoughts from Wine, which at
one time or other may be presented to me, yet have I full liberty to refuse
Drinking, to consider whether any Prejudice may arise from it, or whether it be
necessary I should impair my Health, or brutifie my Nature, by its extravagant
use. I have the rather taken notice of these two Particulars, because I find
Men so apt to cry out upon the Corruption of their Nature, the Frailty of their
Composition. The Lascivious Man pleads the prevalency of the Temptation, which
was too powerful for his Resistance, he could not withstand it. So likewise
says the Drunkard, he cannot help it, it is a natural Infirmity out of his
power to overcome.

In handling this Subject, the Learned In his Sermon upon the Government of of
the Thoughts.
Archbishop of York has thus excellently delivered his Thoughts: When
Temptations are presented unto us, though we cannot perhaps avoid the feeling
some irregular Passion, Motion or Inclination within our selves, upon occasion
thereof: yet is it ever at that time absolutely in our power, whether we will
comply with those Passions or Inclinations, or not; whether we will consent to
them or not; whether we will pursue them farther or not: Now if we do not
consent, but endeavor to stop, to stifle and resist so soon as we are aware of
them, there is yet no harm done, our Thoughts, how indecent or irregular
soever, are but Infirmities: But if on the other side, we consent to any wicked
Motion or Inclination that arises in us, let it come how it will, never so
suddenly, never so unexpectedly, if we close with any Thought that prompts us
to evil, so as to be pleased with it, to delight in it, to think of pursuing it
till it be brought into action; in that case it is a folly to plead our Original
Corruption, for in that very instant we become Actual Sinners, and
Transgressors of the Law of God, the Obligation of which reaches to our very
Hearts and Thoughts, as well as Actions, though yet we are not so great
Transgressors, so long as our Sin is only in Thought or Desire or Purpose, as
if it had proceeded to outward Action. All this is taught us for true Divinity
by the Apostle James, in the first Chapter of his Epistle, v. 13, 14, 15. Let
no Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God tempts no Man;
but every Man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lust and enticed.
Then when Lust has conceived it brings forth Sin; and Sin when it is
finished, brings forth Death. Which passage contains these three
Propositions: 1. That no Man is drawn to commit Sin, by any state or condition
that God has put him into; no nor by any Temptation either outward or inward
that is presented to him. It is not a Sin to be tempted, nor yet to feel that
we are tempted by some disorderly Inclination that arises in our Minds
thereupon. But secondly, then our Sin begins, when we yield to the Temptation,
when we are drawn away by our own Lusts, when they get the Victory over us, and
we do consent to them, then Lust has conceived, and brings forth Sin. But
thirdly, Though the very consent of our Wills to a Temptation, be a Sin in us,
yet is not that Sin so great as it will be afterward when it is brought into
Action: Sin in the desire or purpose is but an Embryo, or the first Rudiments
of Sin, but when it comes to be acted it is then a Sin in its full Dimensions,
and the Consequence of it will be fatal without Repentance; for Sin when it is
finished brings forth Death.

Having thus hinted to you the power we have not, or in what our liberty does
not consist, I will just mention to you the power we have over our own
Thoughts, and take notice to you wherein that power or liberty consists: For
if, say you, we be such Slaves to our Thoughts, and as it were necessarily
subject to them, and passive under them, where is our freedom? To this I
answer, That we have not only a liberty of thinking, and can choose our own
Thoughts; but that liberty and freedom which we have in thinking, does consist
in that, if we so please we may apply our Minds more vigorously to one sort of
things than to another, and according to this application so will the most of
our Thoughts be. It is in our power, amongst the multitude of Objects that
present themselves to our Minds (as for Instance, God, Virtue, Holiness,
Heaven, Wealth, Power, Greatness, Preferment, fine Clothes, splendid Equipage,
Sensual Pleasures, Recreations, Divertisements, Knowledge, Learning, Arts, and
the like: I say, amongst all this Multitude of Objects that present themselves
to our Minds) it is in our power to determine our selves which of them we will
dwell upon and make a business of, and accordingly, when at any time we have
pitched upon any of them as a business, it is in our power to mind that
business either more or less diligently: and if it be such, as that we mean in
good earnest to concern our selves about it, it will then so fill our Minds, as
that by its attendance we shall either prevent in a great measure other
Thoughts from coming into our Heads, or if they do come in, they will not long
stay there, but speedily give place to that which we make our more important
business at that time: and the reason of this is plain, because our Natures are
of that make, that two things at once cannot well possess our Minds; and
therefore, if we be intent about one thing, we cannot have much room or leisure
for Thoughts of another Nature.

I have spoke the more upon this Principle of Freedom, the mighty Privilege of
Man above his Fellow Creatures, because I conceive it a Matter of the highest
Consequence; for if Man be not a free Agent, free to assent and free to deny,
free to love, to fear, to hate, to admire, etc. we at once unhinge the
Foundation of all true Religion, and put the most contemptible Brute in
competition with him: we destroy the very Nature of Rewards and Punishments
founded upon his Actions, and take every thing from him commendable or
praiseworthy. But, says the Atheist, we would have had him placed in such a
Condition, that he should only have had a power or freedom to do everything he
ought, but never to have had the liberty of forfeiting his Future Happiness.

The Absurdity of this Desire or Expectation is so palpably conspicuous, that
there is no Man can consider it without perceiving it: For if Mankind had been
compelled to the Duties of Religion, whether they would or no; or had there
been a perfect Impossibility that any Man should fall into Infidelity, in what
I pray had layn the Advantage of a Religious Faith; if Men, though never so
desirous, could not be vicious, where had been the Benefit or the just Reward
of Virtue; if they had never the power of degrading their Natures, and falling
into Luxury, Epicurism and Sensuality, who had ever heard of Temperance and
Sobriety. Where would be our Christian Fortitude and Magnanimity, if there were
no Difficulties to be encountered, or Dangers to be overcome; or in a word, what
reason have we to value our selves for our Honesty, Justice, Charity, Patience,
Resignation, if all these stood but for so many Ciphers or empty insignificant
Sounds, as they must be, did we suppose our selves in such a state as this
where we are hurried on by some unseen Impulse or Coaction, independent on the
Powers or Faculties of our own Minds.

I must confess there are some Places or Texts in the Sacred Writings, which
seem at first sight to countenance this Opinion, That Man is not a free Agent,
or invested with this Power which we contend for: But whoever will take the
trouble of collecting the several Expositions, not only of Divines, but
Philosophers, will find them all satisfactorily explained, their Scruples
fairly removed, and the more natural and genuine Sense of them demonstratively
asserted.

See a Treatise of Liberty and Necessity by Mr. Hobbs.
There is no Person, that I know of, has made so much Noise in the World about
Liberty and Necessity, or about our acting necessarily, as Mr. Hobbs. That Man,
says he, is free to do a thing, that may do it if he have the will to do it,
and may forbear if he have the will to forbear; and yet if there be a necessity
that he shall have the will to do it, the Action is necessarily to follow: and
if there be a necessity that he shall have the will to forbear, the forbearing
also will be necessary. The Question therefore is not, Whether a Man be not a
free Agent? that is to say, whether he can write or forbear, speak or be
silent, according to his will? But whether the will to write, or the will to
forbear, come upon him according to his will, or according to any thing else in
his own power? I acknowledge this Liberty, that I can do if I will; but to say
I can will if I will, I take to be an absurd Speech.

Again says Mr. Hobbs, Every Effect must have a Cause to produce it; that
Cause must be sufficient to produce it, otherwise it had never been produced:
if that Cause be sufficient, it must likewise be necessary to produce it; for
if any thing were wanting that was necessary to the Production of the Effect,
it could not be effected, and thus the Effect comes to be produced necessarily,
or of pure necessity. The Comparison stands thus; The Will of Man must have
some Cause, that Cause must be sufficient, if sufficient, likewise necessary,
Ergo, Man's Will is necessitated. Whoever will trouble himself with a little
Reflection, may easily unriddle this Mystery, and prove the Argument to be a
mere Sophism, however strenuous it appear at the first view. The judicious Mr.
E -- d has done it already to my Hand, and therefore I shall refer you to his
Dialogues for a Solution. In the interim I shall be plain with you in this
particular, That whatever Applause this Author may have gained in the World,
and how much soever extolled for a Man of profound Thought, or a deep Judgment,
I see nothing in him more taking than his manner of Expression; in which he was
indeed so peculiar and singularly fortunate, that many Men have been hereby so
soothed and tickled into an Opinion of his Judgment, as to take all he says for
granted, and to believe every thing new, till a farther Consideration discovers
to them, that there is nothing more so than his style and the order of his
Thoughts.

I have some reason to believe you tainted with this Man's Principles, on which
account, as an Antidote against the Rest of his Heretical Opinions, I would
recommend you to the Writings of Bishop Lucy, my Lord C -- n, Mr. W -- and
particularly to the lately mentioned E -- d.

When Men have degraded themselves into Beasts by practice, they would have it
thought by any means that it is unavoidable for them to act otherwise than they
do: From hence they take the Measures of their Opinions, and will allow of no
Difference betwixt themselves and the pittiful^st Brute, but that Matter in
them is fallen into a more lucky Texture and Modification. And indeed, the
Brutish Soul will very well serve all the ends of some Men, who to justify
their Sensuality, earnestly contend that they have nothing more to indulge, or
gratify besides their Animal Inclinations.

But notwithstanding, whatever these Men think, this is a most undoubted
Verity, That next to the Belief of the Being of God, the Persuasion of the
Soul's being Immortal is the great Basis of all true Happiness, the Hinge upon
which all Religion turns: It Is this that leads us both to contemn the
Gratifications of the Flesh, and to be solicitous about a Happiness hereafter,
though it be with undergoing some present Inconveniences; nor is there any Truth
whatever that has a more powerful Influence upon the whole Course of our
present Lives.

Men may study to palliate and ease the Disquiet of their troubled Souls after
what manner they please, yet still there will be some lucid Intervals, which
will discover to them the possibility of a Life to come, and put them upon
questioning the Certainty of their Souls perpetual Sleep, which, should it
happen to be a mistake, will prove one of the most dangerous and pernicious
Consequence.

Sic mihi (says the Eloquent De Off. lib. 1.
Cicero) persuasi, sic sentio, Cum tanta celeritas sit Animorum, tanta memoria
praeteritorum, futurorumque prudentia, tot Arts, tot Scientiae, tot Inventa,
non posse eam Naturam, quae eas res contineat esse Mortalem; cumque Animus
semper Agitetur, nec principium motus habeat quia ipse se moveat, nec finem
quidem habiturum esse motus, quia nunquam se ipse sit relicturus, and cum
simplex Animi sit Natura, neque habeat in se quidquam admistum dispar sui,
atque dissimile, non posse cum dividi: quod si non p^ssit, non p^ssit interire.

There is a very remarkable Account I have somewhere read, of one whom we might
reasonably believe, if he had ever heard of such a thing as Priestcraft, was
above the reach of its Infection, and too well acquainted with the Knowledge of
Material Powers (at least in his own Conceit) to admit or suffer an Imposition
upon his Reason: not to keep you in suspense, it is Aristotle I mean, of whom
Averroes, one of his Commentators, gives this Encomium: Complevit Arts and
Scientias, and nullus little qui secuti sunt cum usque ad hoc tempus quod est
mill and quingentorum Annorum quidquam addidit, nec invenies in ejus verbis
Errorem alicujus quantitatis, and talem esse vertutem in Individio uno
Miraculosum and Extraneum existit: and haec Dispositio cum in uno Homine
reperitur dignus est esse divinus magis quam humanus. In another place he
speaks thus: Landemus Deum qui seperavit hunc Virum ab aliis in perfectione,
appropriavitque ei ultimam dignitatem humanam quam non omnis Homo potest in
quacunque aetate attingere. Again, says he, Aristotelis Doctrina est summa
veritas, quoniam ejus Intellectus fuit finis humani Intellectus, quare been
dicitur de eo quod ipse fuit creatus and datus nobis ut non ignoremus
possibilia sciri. Yet this wonderful Philosopher (if we may credit this
Character) who has set so many Learned Men contesting about his Principles, and
diving into his Opinion of the great Soul of Man, notwithstanding he had
thought of all the subtle Subterfuges his Wit could devise, to evade
acknowledging its distinct Subsistence, and amongst others had invented (for he
owns himself its first Broacher) that impossible Notion of the Worlds Eternity,
yet is it reported of him, that he was so fully convinced of the separate Being
of his own Soul, that immediately before his Exit he is said earnestly to have
cried out to this purpose, En dubitans vixi, moriensque, Animae quid accidet
sum ignotus, Tu ergo Domine Essentiarum (...), Miserere mei.

I hope now the preceding Passages will in some measure convince you of this
great Truth, That it has been not only the Opinion of particular Men, but a
kind of Universal Belief in Mankind that their Soul's would survive their
Bodies, and that the very Ethnicks themselves, who were capable of an
abstracted Speculation, and thoroughly acquainted with the Powers of their own
Minds, have by Evidence from Natural Light subscribed this Confession, either
openly in words, or secretly, by their apparent Doubts and Fears of a Life to
come.

To conclude, Let me request you, when your Soul is the least ruffled with
Anxiety or Perturbation, and your rational Faculties with Sensual Delights and
Satisfactions: when your Mind is most serene, most Calm and Lucid, to divest
your self but for some few Moments of all gross Ideas and material Images, and
perhaps by the free and considerate Exercise of some Reflex Act, that Intuitive
Knowledge may so inlighten your Understanding, as I hope to convince you that
the Rational and Thinking Part of you, which enjoys this great Prerogative,
must be infinitely above the Powers of Matter, under whatever Modification: and
that your Capacity to know things by this kind of Reflection, which have no
manner of Relation to Material Idea's, neither yet are represented in the Brain
by any Corporeal Image, is perfect Demonstration that there are Beings of a
Spiritual Incorporeal Nature, that your Superior or Rational Soul is of this
Class, infu^^^^^ thereinto by the Almighty Author of all Things.

I remain (my very good Friend) most affectionately Yours.
London, Jan. 30. 1691. POSTSCRIPT.
THat the preceding Discourse may be the more entertaining, I have here taken
an opportunity of presenting you with an Epitomy of the Sentiments of two
famous Men. The Hypotheses are both new, or at least were never, as I have
heard, delivered to us before in such Regular Systems: the First is that of
Monsieur Malebranch, where discoursing of our Sensations, he endeavors to
establish the following Notion, That they are neither such as we have all along
accounted them, nor do they at all reside in those Parts we have supposed; or
to speak more intelligibly, That our Sense, whether of Heat, Colors, Tastes,
Sounds, etc. is nothing real in the Object, nor yet in the Part which is
believed the Sentient. To instance in one of these, that upon the approach of
your Hand to the Fire, the Heat you apprehend, is neither in the Fire nor in
your Hand, but a pure Modification of your Soul it self, which is thus
variously modefy'd by the Supreme Being at the presentment of the several
Objects.

In his Explaining this, he takes notice to us that in this approach of the
Hand to the Fire, there is nothing but an invisible Motion in the Fire or Hand:
in the former, by the continual Expulsion of igneous Particles against the
Fibers of the Hand; and in the Hand a Motion or Division of the same Fibers, by
the intrusion of the fiery Particles. And thus, vid. Malebr. de veritat.
inquirend.
says he, that we may not neglect the Care and Preservation of the several
Parts of our Bodies, it has pleased the Almighty Maker of them to new modifie
our Souls, after so wonderful a manner, that when any Danger approaches, which
would prejudice their make or structure, we should apprehend our Pains and
Disorders, and feel them as it were in those places where the Danger lies,
without conceiving at the same time the Modification of our Souls; and this
will hold in every of our Sensations, which are nothing real any where, unless
in the Soul it self.

This may now inform us that we should be very cautious in giving Credit to the
Testimony of our Senses, which do for the most part involve us in most of our
Mistakes; for these are not given us to inform us of the Truth of Things, but
only as they stand related to the Preservation of our Bodies. That this
Argument may be enforced with a farther Perspicuity, here is another signal
Instance of the general Errors into which (amongst the other Senses) our Sight
betrays us, in reference to Light and Colors.

When we have looked upon the Sun, for some time, this is what passes in our
Eyes and in our Souls, and these are the Errors we fall into.

Those who know the first Elements of Dioptricks, and any thing of the
admirable Structure of our Eyes, are not ignorant that the Rays of the Sun are
refracted in the Crystaline and other Humors, and that they meet afterward
upon the Ret^^^, or Expansion of the Optic Nerve, which, as it were, furnishes
with Hangings all the bottom of the Eyes, even as the Rays of the Sun, which
pass through a Unequal Glass, meet together in the Focus at two, three, or four
Fingers breadth distant, in proportion to its convexity. Now Experience shows,
that if one put at the Focus of the Unequal Glass a little piece of Stuff, or
brown Paper, the Rays of the Sun make so great an impression upon this Stuff or
Paper, and agitate the small Particles thereof with so great a violence, that
they break and separate them from one another: in a word, they burn them, or
reduce them into Smoke and Ashes. Thus we must conclude from this Experience,
that if the Pupil through which the Light passes, were so dilated that it would
admit an easy passage for the Rays of the Sun, or on the contrary, were so
contracted as to obstruct them, our Retina would suffer the same thing as the
Paper or piece of Stuff, and the Fibers would be so very much agitated that
they would soon be broken and burnt.

It is for this Reason that most Men are sensible of a Pain, if they look upon
the Sun but for one moment, because they cannot so well close up the Orifice of
the Pupil, but that there will enter sufficient Rays to agitate the Strings of
the Optic Nerve, with much violence, and not without danger of breaking them.
The Soul has no knowledge of what we have spoke, and when it looks upon the Sun
it neither perceives its Optic Nerve, no^ any Motion in it. But that is not the
Error, it is only a simple Ignorance. The first Error it falls into is, that it
judges the Pain it feels, is in its Eyes.

If immediately after looking upon the Sun, we go into a dark place with our
Eyes open, the Motion of the Fibers of the Optic Nerve, caused by the Rays of
the Sun, diminishes and changes by little and little: this is all the Change
that can be perceived in the Eyes; however, it is not what the Soul perceives
there, but only a white and yellow Light. Its second Error is, it judges that
the Light it sees is in the Eyes, or upon the next Wall. In fine, the Agitation
of the Fibers of the Retina always diminishes and ceases by little and little;
for when a Body has been shaken, nothing can be perceived in it, but a
diminution of its Motion: but it is not that which the Soul perceives in its
Eyes; it sees the White become an Orange color, afterward Red, and then Blue;
and the reason of this Error is, that we judge there are Changes in our Eyes,
or upon the next Wall, that differ much as to the more or less, because the
Blue, Orange, and Red colors which we see, differ much otherwise amongst
themselves, besides in the more or less. These are some Errors which we are
subject to in reference to Light and Colors; and these Errors beget many
others.

Thus the Learned and Devout Father proceeds in this Sublime and Curious
Speculation, and whatever Consequences may be drawn by designing Men from the
Modification of our Souls by the Supreme Being, as might be instanc't in some
few Particulars, yet most certainly there are many weighty Truths, depending on
this noble Theory: and whoever dives into the bottom of the Notion, may not
unlikely find (that however some Superficial Wits may calumniate and despise
it) his Divine Faith may be exalted, and a more profound Esteem and Veneration
raised for that Power, from whom is derived all the Benefits we can enjoy.

By a serious Enquiry of this Nature, we might undoubtedly arrive at a more
certain Account of the Nature and Usefulness of that infinite number of little
Beings, which we call Species and Idea's, which are as nothing, and which
represent all things that we create and destroy when we please, and that our
Ignorance has made us imagine to render a Reason for Things that we understand
not: we should likewise be enabled to show the solidity of their Opinion, who
believe God is the true Father of Light, who only instructs all Men, without
whom the most simple Truths could not be intelligible, nor would the Sun, how
bright soever, be so much as visible to us. And of theirs who acknowledge no
other Nature than the Will of God, and who upon such like Reflections have
confessed, that the Idea's which represent the Creatures to us, are only the
Perfections of the Divine Being, which answer to those same Creatures, and
represent them to us.

The second of these new Hypotheses, though I conceive its first rise from the
same Fountain with the former, yet I find the same very strenuously pleaded for
and judiciously vindicated by our Countryman Mr. Norris: and this is the
Doctrine of the Divine Light, as it relates to the Humane Intellect: of which
that I may give you a short Specimen, or briefly hint to you, I must take
notice that in one part of his Treatise he cites Monsieur Malebranch, who
considering with himself all the possible ways of Humane Understanding, or
whereby we come to have the Idea's of things without us, makes this Division or
Enumeration of them. 1. It is necessary that these Idea's should either proceed
from the Objects: Or, 2. that our Mind has a power of producing them: Or, 3.
That God should produce them either with the Mind when he creates it, or
occasionally as often as we think of any Object. 4 Or that the Mind should
possess in it self all the Perfections which it sees in things. Or 5thly and
lastly, that it be united to some absolutely perfect Being that includes in
himself all the Perfections of Created Beings. After this Enumeration, I find
that both the Father, and after him Mr. Norris, have pitched upon the last of
these, as the only Expedient to help us in the manner of our Knowledge or
Understanding, and it is on the same Basis that the latter has erected the
following Scheme.

See Mr. Norris of the Divine Light.
I. Whereas, says he, the Qu -- rs talk of this Light within as of some Divine
Communication or Manifestation only, I make it to be the very Essence and
Substance of the Deity, which I suppose virtually to contain all things in it,
and to be intimately united to our Minds.

II. They represent this Light within as a sort of extraordinary Inspiration
(whence they have the name of Enthusiasts) whereas according to my Notion, it
is a Man's natural and ordinary way of Understanding.

III. Farther (if I mistake not) They confine their Light within to some
certain Objects, namely Moral and Spiritual Truths, in order only to the
Direction of Practice, and accordingly make it a Suppliment to Scripture, which
they say is not sufficient without it, nor indeed any more than a mere dead
Letter. On the other hand I appropriate not this Divine Light to Moral or
Spiritual Truths or Things, but extend it as far as all Truth, yea as far as
all that is intelligible, which I believe to be perceived and understood in
this Divine Light as I explain it.

IV. They ( viz. the Q -- rs) make their Light within, a special Privilege of
a certain Order of Men, their own Party, not indeed as to the possibility,
because they suppose all Men to be indifferently capable of this Divine
Illumination, as may appear from their contending against Predestination, and
for Universal Grace; but though they do not make it a special Privilege as to
the possibility, yet they do as to the act; making none but those of their own
way to be actually inlighten'd by it: whereas, according to my Principles, this
is no special Privilege, but the common and universal Benefit of all Men, yea
of all the Intelligent Creation, who all see and understand in this Light of
God, without which there would be neither Truth nor Understanding.

V. Again, By their Light within they understand some determinate formed
Dictate or Proposition, expressly and positively directing and instructing them
to do so or so. Now according to my Notion, this Divine Light is only the
Essential Truth of God, which indeed is always present to my Understanding, as
being intimately united with it, but does not formally enlighten or instruct
me, unless when I attend to it, and read what is written in those Divine Ideal
Characters.

VI. And lastly, they offer not any Rational or Intelligible account of the
Light within, neither as to the thing, nor as to the mode of it, but cant only
in some loose general Expressions about the Light, which they confirm with the
Authority of St. John's Gospel, though they understand neither one nor the other:
Whereas I have offered a Natural, Distinct, and Philosophical way of Explaining
both, namely by the Omniformity of the Ideal World, or the Divine (...), who
has in himself the Essences and Ideas of all things, and in whom the same are
perceived by us and by all Creatures.

I shall not detain you, with my own Comments hereupon, any otherwise than by
informing you, that so far as I am able to apprehend the same may be a solid
Truth, I mean Mr. Norris's Explanation of the Divine Light. Futurity will make
us all wiser, and open a Door to those recluse Arcana or hidden Mysteries which
in this Life are likely to be veiled from our Eyes.

Adieu.



LETTER IV. Of Religion. To Mr. -- etc.
The certainty of Revelation in Time past: The Fallacy of Modern Inspiration;
and the Danger of Enthusiasm.

My good Friend,
IT is with no small concern, that I have left my former Argument of the Soul,
and yet methinks I am not perfectly without hopes that you will find something
therein to evidence its Immortality; for although the one half of what may be
alleged in its Vindication, cannot be reduced to the narrow limits of an
Epistle; yet if I mistake not, there are some few of the Physical Arguments do
manifestly evince, that without supposing it to be a Spiritual Incorporeal
Substance (whatever Jargon this may seem to the absolute Corporealist) there
are many of its Phenomenon will be eternally incapable of any tolerable or
allowable Explanation. I shall therefore earnestly request you that you live
not in a contempt of it; for notwithstanding the Powers of Sense and
Imagination may so obscure and darken the pure Acts of the Mind, as to persuade
you that Will and Reason arise from the same Principle; assure your self that
an immediate prospect of another Life, will change the Scene: the intercepting
Curtain will open and represent the Antichamber of Death, where you will find
your self in the midst of such Confusion, Horror, Consternation and
Perplexity, as nothing will be able to mitigate but a sincere Penitence or
fervent Contrition, a devout and humble Prosternation of your Soul to the Power
offended: and if the dread of this being insufficient still highten your
disturbance, you may taste perhaps that Hell you so very lately had ridiculed by
way of Anticipation, before your fatal Leap from the dismal and horrid
Praecipice of Life.

1.
Norris's Miscellan.
It must be done, my Soul, but it is a strange,
A dismal and mysterious Change:
When thou shall leave this Tenement of Clay,
And to an unknown somewhere wing away:
When Time shall be Eternity, and Thou
Shall be thou know not what, and live Thou know not how.
2.
Amasing State! no wonder that we dread
To think of Death or view the Dead;
You Are all wrapped up in Clouds, as if to Thee
Our very Knowledge had Antipathy;
Death could not a more sad Retinue find,
Sickness and Pain before, and Darkness all behind.
3.
Some Courteous Ghost, tell this great Secrecy,
What it is you are, and we must be:
You warn us of approaching Death, and why
May we not know from you what it is to dye,
But you having shot the Gulf, delight to see
Succeeding Souls plunge in with like uncertainty.
4.
When Life's close knot, by Writ from Destiny,
Disease shall cut, or Age untye,
When after some delays, some dying strife,
The Soul stands shivering on the ridge of Life,
With what a dreadful Curiosity,
Does she launch out into the Sea of vast Eternity.
5.
So when the spacious Globe was deluged over,
And lower Holds could save no more,
On the utmost Bough the astonished Sinners stood,
And viewed the Advances of th'encroaching Flood:
O'retopt at length by The Elements increase,
With Horror they resigned to the untried Abyss.
Thus has the ingenious Mr. Norris most livelily represented the frightful Exit
of the departing Soul: but to avoid any farther Interruption, I shall hasten to
my intended Discourse, with this Expectation, if not Assurance, that on
whatsoever side you find right Reason, you will make no Opposition: or where
the Light of your Understanding shines clearly forth, that you by no means
stifle, or study to obscure the same.

Whoever then has once admitted, and does unfeignedly believe the Truth of
these Three Propositions, ( viz.) That there is a most powerful and wise Being,
the first Cause of all things. That the same Being does inspect or take notice
of the Actions of Mankind, and will retribute to every one according to those
Actions, in a Life to come: whosoever, I say, has granted these, will find himself
at no great loss, to conceive that it highly behooves him to have a regard both
to his Thoughts and Actions: to do naught indeliberately, but to regulate the
Conduct of his whole Life, by some such certain, just, and immutable Rule, as
he foresees is most likely to tend to his Security and Well-being.

Now it having pleased this All-wise Being, to endow his darling Favorite Man
above the other Creatures, with a Principle of Reason, and to be himself a
Light unto his Soul, wherein he may Contemplate those other. Beings which
surround him; we need not dispute but that by a devout consulting this
Intestine Director or Dictator, we may come to understand what Measures are to
be taken for our Information. If by the alone assistance of this Natural Light
in the Understanding, we find it neither practicable nor possible, to invent
any such Laws or Rules as would be agreed unto by the Body of Mankind, or such
as would never need any Alteration, but be complied with and understood, and
all this while contain every thing necessary to the discharging of our Duty to
our God and to each other: If Humane Reason, or the Light of Nature, is
insufficient to direct us to such a uniform and steady Rule, or System of Laws;
or if it could, since the greater part of Men would think themselves
unconcerned, or under no necessity to observe them, on the account of a
Deficiency in Authority, or a want of a Divine Sanction or Manumission: it is
reasonable, as well as natural, for us to wish and expect upon these accounts,
that our Maker would in some manner reveal Himself unto us, that He would
prescribe our Laws, and stamp the same with some Divine Impression, whereby we
might be enabled to discover their Authority, and read in them the Characters
of a more than Humane Contrivance or Composition.

See Dr. S -- ts Letter to a Deist.
Whether or no this Almighty Being has made any such Discovery of his Will to
the World, or revealed to them such Laws or Rules of Worship, as will be most
acceptable to Him, is the Business of our present Enquiry: for let me tell you,
whatever Noise our Deists have made in the World about the Sufficiency of
Natural Religion, we have very little reason to think them in good earnest.

If their Natural Religion does oblige them to believe in God, and to confess
the Truth of the Souls Immortality, how comes it to pass that the Result of
such a Faith is so little conspicuous in their Lives and Conversations, and why
I pray is it that the Precepts of Christianity, which aim at nothing more than
the Happiness of Mankind, and contain the compleatest System both of Moral and
Divine Laws to direct us in our Duty, should be no more regarded? It Is plain
enough to every sober and judicious Man, that there is nothing in revealed
Religion, that can seem harsh even to a real Deist: He that is a Deist in good
earnest, will find it his highest Interest and Concern, to do every thing which
Christianity has enjoined: upon which score since we find it otherwise, we have
abundant cause to think with a Mr. Bently
Learned Man, That Revelation in it self is not the stumbling Block; it is not
the Fundamentals of the Christian Doctrine, nor yet the Articles of her Creed;
it is the Duty to God and our Neighbor that is such an inconsistent incredible
Legend.

He who is more than a Nominal Deist, must heartily subscribe this following
Confession, which that you may be the better opinion'd of, I shall give you in
their own words. Letter to the Deists, p. 125.
We do believe that there is an infinitely powerful, wise, and good God, who
superintends the Actions of Mankind, in order to retribute to every one
according to their Deserts: Neither are we to boggle at this Creed; for if we
do not stick to it, we ruin the Foundation of all Humane Happiness, and are in
effect no better than mere Atheists.

Whatsoever is adorable (says another of them) aimiable and imitable by
Mankind, is in one supreme, infinite and perfect Being, Oracles of Reason, p.
88.
which we call God; who is to be worshipped by an inviolable adherence in our
Lives, to all the things (...), by an imitation of all his infinite
Perfections, especially his Goodness, and believing magnificently of it.

Again, in their new Scheme of Natural Religion, I find acknowledged the
following Particulars.

1. That there is one Infinite, Eternal God, Creator of all things. Ibid. p.
195.


2. That he governs the World by Providence.

3. That it is our Duty to worship and obey Him as our Creator and Governor.

4. That our worship consists in Prayer to Him, and Praise of Him.

5. That our Obedience consists in the Rules of Right Reason, the Practice
whereof is Moral Virtue.

6. That we are to expect Rewards and Punishments hereafter, according to our
Actions in this Life.

7. And lastly, When we err from the Rules of our Duty, that we repent us, and
trust in God's Mercy for our Pardon.

Now show me the Man, who acts according to this Faith, and let him be never so
well opinion'd of Natural Religion, I make it no question but he will readily
acknowledge (as the most considerate and judicious of them have always done)
that Christianity, however mysterious, is indisputably the best method of
cultivating Men's Minds, and manuring their Consciences.

I must confess with Miscel. p. 212.
Mr. Norris, were we to consult the perverse Glosses and Comments of some
Christian Rabbis, and to take our Measures of this Religion, from those
ill-favored Draughts of it, we may sometimes meet with; we should be induced
to think, that as some Christians are the worst of Men, so will their Religion
appear to be the worst of Religions; an Institution unworthy the Contrivance
even of a wise Politician, much less of Him who is the Father of Wisdom. And
indeed, whatever Declamations are made against Judaism and Paganism, the worst
Enemies of the Christian Religion are some of those who profess and teach it:
for if it be in reality, as some of those who call themselves Orthodox describe
it, we may boldly say that it is neither for the Reputation of God to be the
Author of such a Religion, nor for the Interest of Men to be guided by it.

Those of whom this Author more particularly takes notice, as the
Misrepresenters of Christianity, are first of all the Antinomians, who are
impudent and ignorant enough, in express terms, to assert that the Sacrifice
and Satisfaction of Christ does wholly excuse us from all manner of Duty and
Obedience. Secondly the Solifidians, who under pretense of Advancing the Merits
of the Cross, and ^he Freeness of the Divine Grace, require nothing of a
Christian in order to his Justification and Acceptance before God, but firmly
to rely on the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ; and without any more to do to
apply all to himself. And thirdly, Those who have a share in the forementioned
Charge, are such who make Christianity a Matter of bare Speculation, rending
and dividing themselves from one another, by those unhappy and dangerous
Disputations which instead of making Proselytes to the Truth of Christianity,
have drawn Men first of all to Deism, afterward to Skepticism, and thence by a
very easy step to Infidelity and Atheism. These are they who think all
Religion absolved in Orthodoxy of Opinion, that care not how men live, but only
how they teach; and are so over-intent upon the Creed, that they neglect the
Commandments, little considering that Opinion is purely in order to Practice,
and that Orthodoxy of Judgment is necessary only in such Matters where a
Mistake would be of dangerous influence to our Actions, that is in
Fundamentals: so that the necessity of thinking rightly, is derived from the
necessity of doing rightly, and consequently the latter is the most necessary
of the two.

Having touched on some few of those particular Opinions which have brought a
Scandal upon Revealed Religion, and very much obscured its glorious Luster, it
behooves me to say something to Revelation it self, See the Interest of Reason
in Religion; A Discourse by Mr. F.
which I shall do in the words of a late Author.

As all Mankind have agreed in this, that besides the Light of Reason, there
ought to be some Supernatural Revelation of the Will of God; so being imbued
with the Persuasion that there is a God, and that He ought to be worshipped,
they are convinced also that all the Religion of Men at present toward God, is
the Religion of Sinners: in all the Addresses of the Sons of Men to God, they
constantly apply to Him under a sense of Defilement and Guilt: in all their
transactions from time to time with the Deity, They have been studying how to
purge and cleanse themselves, to atone and appease Him.

Now Sinners can perform nothing duly in Religion toward God, without a
knowledge of the Subordination we were created in at first to Him: his Right
and Authority to prescribe Laws to us, the Capacity we were in both of knowing
and keeping them: the way and means by which Sin entered: that God will not
desert the work of his hands, to that Ruin which it has incurred by its own
folly, but that He is yet appeasable toward us, and will accept a Worship and
Service at our hands, with the ways, means and terms: that He will receive us
again into favor, and rescue us from the defilement we labor under. Without
some information in every one of these, there is no solid foundation for
Sinners to apply in way of Religion to God at all; and should they attempt it,
they will do nothing but prevaricate.

Seeing then the Experience of some Thousands of years, have evidenced the
ineffectualness of Natural Light to instruct the World in any one of these
things; we may from hence infer the necessity that there seems to be of
Supernatural Revelation.

The Writings of the Heathen, whether Poets or Philosophers, are certainly void
of all pretense of admission for Supernatural and Divine Records: and our
Reason is able to give us the like demonstrative Evidence, that this Claim is
also most unduly ascribed to the Alcoran. It Is true that Mahomet pretended to
have received it by inspiration: most think that he counterfeited in his
pretense; and it is certain, that as to receiving it by inspiration from God,
he did so: but that there was not an immediate interposure of the Devil in the
case, so that he was deceived himself, e're he went about to deceive others, is
not so certain. The Epileptical Distemper to which he was subject, has in
others been attended with Diabolical Insinuation. The Age in which he lived was
Enthusiastically inclined, and the grosness of the Arabian Wits, together with
the subserviency of Ethnic Idolatry, which remained up and down among them,
might encourage Satan to make an Attempt that way among that People. But
whether it was indeed so, or whether the whole be singly to be attributed to
himself, and one or two Impostors more that assisted him, is not material, nor
makes to the business it self.

Mahometism began not till the Sixth Century, about which time and for a
considerable Season before, the whole East was sorely infected by Heresies, and
rent by Schisms: which, together with the impure Lives of the Professors of the
Gospel, both there and in the West, might justly provoke God to permit this
Deceiver to accost the World; but obtruding a new Religion, and such a one too
as neither Reason nor any former Revelation of God befriended: it concerned him
to have justified his Mission, by some Miracle or other, as to what he went
about: and these himself plainly disclaims; for though some of his Followers
ascribe such to him, yet there is so little brought in proof of them, and
withal they are so silly and ridiculous in themselves, that they serve for
nothing but to disparage both the Person and the Cause in whose behalf they are
brought.

I know that all Persons, who have spoken immediately from God, have not had
the Attestation of Miracles: nor was it always needful, especially when they
only called Men to obedience to that which had been sufficiently so attested
before: In such a Case it became the Wisdom of God to be sparing of Miracles,
and indeed be thereby better provided for the Credit of those Doctrines, as
were either really or only in appearance new, and also more served the interest
of Mankind, than if he should have wrought Wonders in attestation of every
ordinary Messenger or Familiar Truth. And this may be a reason why none of all
the Penmen of the Scripture are reported to have wrought Miracles, save Moses
the Giver of the Law, and the Apostles the Promulgers of the Gospel.

But though every Herald of Heaven had not the Attestation of Miracles, yet no
one came inspired by God, who had not some Testimony or other born to him, to
distinguish him from an Impostor: either the Doctrines they delivered were of
that Sublimeness, that no finite Understanding could have invented them, and
yet when discovered were so correspondent to our Rational Desires, and so
perfective of our Natural Light, that being duly weighed, the Reason of Man
acquiesceth in them, and says this is what I looked for, but could not find: or
else they made known some present Matter, which lay out of the reach of all
Humane Knowledge, such as the Secrets of the Heart, or declared some Fact done
either at a distance, or with that secrecy, that no Man could know it: or else
they foretold some future Contingent soon after to come to pass, which
accordingly fell out in every Circumstance. Nor is it unlikely, but that most,
if not all the Old Testament Prophets, had their Missions confirmed by the
Prediction of something future, which Humane Prudence could not foresee: or
else they were born witness to by the prevalency and immediate success of their
Prayers, or the preventing some impendent Judgment, or in the procuring some
needful Mercy; for thereby was declared either their foresight of what God was
ready to do, or the interest favor, and power they had with him: nor is it
without probability that most of the Prophets under the Mosaic Dispensation,
justified their Missions by some such thing. But as for Mahomet, though he not
only pretended to speak immediately from God, but withal introduced a Doctrine
really new, yet he came authorized by no Miracle, Sign or Badge by which he
might be distinguished from an Impostor. Yea, whereas he owns that both Moses
and Christ were sent from God, it is an infallible Argument that he was not,
their Doctrine and his being altogether inconsistent. Besides, it has been
generally acknowledged, not only by Jews and Christians, but by Heathens, and
that agreeably to the Light of Reason, that prophetic Illapses never befell
impure and unclean Souls, and that God never made an unhallowed Person his
Oracle, at least that never any such were employed for the Divine Amannenses.
Now if we examine the Alcoran by this Prophetic Text, we find the Author of it
to have been a Person lustful and tyrannical; made up of nothing but Blood and
Dirt, grossly Sensual and prodigiously Cruel, which plainly demonstrates how
unfit he was to lay claim to the Prophetic Privilege and Dignity. If we
consult the Doctrine of the Alcoran, we have all the Evidence that the Reason
of Man can desire, that it neither did nor could proceed from God. It is true,
there are some things in it stolen from the Scripture, but even those are so
perversely related, and so wretchedly corrupted with Fables, that they lose the
very similitude of Truth, through the villainous management of them. Persons
are so misnam'd, Times are so mistaken, the whole so interlarded with
Contradictions, and disguised with Absurdities, that we must needs say the
Contriver had a bad Memory, and a worse Understanding. In a word, the whole
Alcoran is nothing but a Cento of Heathenism, Judaism and Christianity all
miserably corrupted, and as wildly blended together. The Doctrines of it are
for the most part, either impossible, blasphemous or absurd. The Rewards
promised to the Embracers of it, are impure and foolish. The whole was at first
invented out of Pride and Ambition, propagated by Violence and Rapine, and is
still maintained in the ways it was established. Profound Ignorance, Sensual
Baits, and force of Arms gave it its first Promotion, and do still maintain its
Credit in the World. Thus the meanest Reason, if duly exercised, is able
manifestly to disprove the Divinity of the Alcoran.

This Business of Revelation has been of late so curiously handled by the B --
of C -- that I can do no less then recommend to you a perusal of those his
Excellent Discourses at Mr. Boyle's Lecture; where I am ready to believe you
will find but little wanting to a Demonstration of the Necessity of Revealed
Religion; of a possibility for the Almighty to reveal his Will; and lastly, not
only the Probability, but the Certainty that he has revealed his Will to
Mankind; and that this Revelation is the same which is contained in the two
Testaments. For the ^leing all which Truths, ( viz.) the Possibility,
Expedience, Usefulness, Necessity, and the Certainty of Divine Revelation, he
has offered such Evidence, Rational, Natural, Traditionary and Supernatural, as
may suffice for the Conviction of the unprejudiced Infidel, and will be found
too strong to be made void, or overthrown by the subtilest of the Hellish Tribe.

Our Belief of the Scriptures being a Divine Revelation, does inde^d suppose
the Existence of a God, and therefore our Knowledge of his Being, must precede
our Faith of the Divine Authority of the Bible. I grant the Scriptures may be
brought, not only to such as own their Truth, but even to Infidels, as a proof
of a Deity; but then it must not be upon the score of their naked Testimony,
but on the account of their being of such a Frame, Nature and Quality, that
they can proceed from no other Author: and thus may we arrive by the Scripture
at an assurance of God's Existence, as we do at the Knowledge of a Cause by its
Effect. But so far as we assent to any thing upon the credit of the Scriptures
mere testification, we are necessitated to presuppose the Existence of a God,
it bring only on the account of his Veracity in himself, and that the Bible is
a Divine Revelation that we do, without the least guilt of vain Credulity,
because upon the highest Reason, implicitly believe it.

Again, Those who owe their Belief of the Bible's being the Word of God, to
mere Report, to Principles of Education, the Felicity of their Birth, or the
Clime where they were born, receive the Scripture upon no better Motives, than
the Turks do their Alcoran. If pretended Inspiration may pass for the
Demonstration of the Truth of what every bold Pretender will obtrude upon us,
we must expose our selves, not only to the belief of every groundless
Imagination, but of innumerable Contradictions: for not only the grossest
Follies, but Doctrines palpably repugnant both to Reason, and one another, have
been delivered by Enthusiasts and pretended Inspirato's. I grant that the
Testimony of the Holy Ghost in the Souls and Consciences of Men to the Truth of
the Scriptures, is the most convincing Evidence that such Persons can have of
its Divinity. But 1. the Holy Ghost convinces no Man as to the belief of the
Scripture, without enlightening him in the Ground, and Reasons upon which its
proceeding from God, is evidenced and establish^. There is no Conviction begot
by the Holy Ghost in the hearts of Men, otherways than by Rational Evidence,
satisfying our Understandings, through a Discovery of the Motives and
Inducements that ascertain the Truth of what he would convince us of. 2. No
Man's particular assurance obtained thus in way of Illumination by the Holy
Ghost, is to be otherwise urged as an Argument of Conviction to another, than
by proposing the Reasons on which our Faith is erected. The way of such Men's
Evidence is communicable to none, unless they could kindle the same Rays in the
Breasts of others, which have irradiated their own: and therefore they must
deal with others by producing the Grounds of their Conviction, not pleading the
Manner of it; for that another is convinced and persuaded by them, depends
wholly on the weight and momentousness of the Reasons themselves, not on the
manner that such a Person came to discover them: for should he have arrived at
the discerning them by any other means, they had been of the same significancy
to the Conviction of an Adversary. 3. The Holy Ghost, as a distinct Person in
the Deity, is not a Principle demonstrable by Reason, seeing then it is by the
Scripture alone that we are assured of the Existence of the Divine Spirit, as a
distinct Person in the Godhead, therefore his testimony in the Hearts and
Consciences of Men to the Scripture, cannot be allowed as a previous Evidence
of its Divinity. To prove the Divine Authority of the Scripture, by the
Testimony of the Holy Ghost, when we cannot otherwise prove that there is a
Holy Ghost but by the Testimony of the Sc^ipture, is to argue circularly and
absurdly. So that in short, when we have to do with such, as either question or
deny the Authority of the Scripture, we are to prove it by Ratiocination, from
common Principles received amongst Mankind, and by Topics that lie even and
proportionate to Intellectual Natures. Our Reason is here justly to be
magnified as highly subservient to Religion, in that it can demonstrate the
Divine Authority of the Scripture, upon which our Faith, as to all particular
Articles and Duties of Religion, is grounded. This, I say, our Reason can do to
the Conviction of all, who are not wilfully obstinate, and for such there is no
means, either sufficient or intended by the Almighty, to satisfy them. For it
is certain, that partly through the Weakness and Darkness which have arrested
our Understandings, partly through the Nature, Quality, Extent and Arduousness
of Objects, and our inadaequate Conceptions of them, partly through
Prepossessions, Prejudices, and the Bias of Lusts and Passions that we are
subject to; partly through Supineness, Sloth and Inadvertency, we do often
prevaricate in making Deductions and Inferences from Self-evident and Universal
Maxims; and thereupon establish erroneous and mistaken Consequences as
Principles of Truth and Reason. But then this is the fault of Philosophers, not
of Philosophy, or of Philosophy in the Concrete, as existing in this or that
Person, not in the Abstract, as involving such a Mischief in its Nature and
Idea. Our Intellectual Faculties being vitiated and tinctured with Lust,
inthralled by Prejudices, darkened by Passions, engaged by vain and corrupt
Interests, distorted by Pride and Self-love, and fastened to Earthly Images, do
often impose upon us, and lead us to obtrude upon others absurd Axioms for
undoubted and incontestable Principles of Reason. It is this (...), this
adulterate Reason which is both unfriendly and dangerous to Religion; it is to
this that most of the malignant Heresies which have infected the Church, do owe
its rise; and whoever will trace the Errors which have invaded Divinity to
their Source, may resolve them into false Reasonings or absurd Maxims of
Philosophy, which have been by their Founders superscribed with the venerable
Name of Principles of Reason.

Indeed whatever can be made appear to lie in a Contradiction to right Reason,
we may profess our selves ready to abandon and disclaim: but we are satisfied,
and do fully believe, that a great deal which only crosses some false and
lubricous Principles that Dogmatists have given that name to, falls under the
Imputation of Disagreement with Reason: the Repugnancy of Reason fastened upon
some Tenets, is rather the Result of Ignorance, Prepossession, and sometimes
Lust, than their contrariety to Universal Reason, or any genuine Maxims of it.

Farther, It must be granted, and has always been judged that the
Incomprehensibleness of a Doctrine, through the Sublimity and Extension of its
Object, is no just bar to the Truth of it. And indeed it is to be wondered,
that any who have studied the Weakness of their discursive Capacity, the
Feebleness of Intellectual Light, how soon it is dazzled with too bright a
Splendor, the Confinement and Boundaries our Understandings are subject to,
together with the Majesty of the Gospel Truth, the Immensity of the Objects of
the Christian Faith, should think the arduousness of framing distinct and
adaequate Conceptions of them, a sufficient ground for their being renounced
and disclaimed. Yet this is the Standard by which some Men regulate their
Belief.

As to the Bible, 'tho every thing in it be not alike necessary, yet every
thing in it is alike true, and our Concernment lies more or less in it. There
is no other Rule by which we are to be regulated in Matters of Religion besides
this; and therefore the import and meaning of its Terms can be no other ways
decided, but by their habitude to their Measure. For this end did the Almighty
give forth the Scripture, that it might be the Foundation and Standard of
Religion, and thence it is we are to learn its Laws and Constitutions. The
instructing Mankind in whatsoever is necessary to his present or future
Happiness, was our Makers design in vouchsafing to us a supernatural
Revelation: and foreseeing all things that are necessary to such an end, the
Respect and Veneration which we pay to his Sapience and Goodness, oblige us to
believe that he has adapted and proportioned the Means thereunto. Now the
Doctrines of the Bible are of two sorts: 1. Such as besides their being made
known by Revelation, and believed on the account of Divine Testimony, have also
a Foundation in the Light of Nature, and there are Natural Mediums, by which
they may be proved: Of this kind are the Being of, or Attributes of God, the
Immortality of the Soul, the Certainty of Providence, the Existence of a Future
State and Moral Good and Evil. 2. Such as have no Foundation at all in Nature,
by which they could have been found out or known, but we are solely indebted to
Supernatural Revelation for the discovery of them; their Objects having their
Source and Rise only from the Will of God; a Supernatural Revelation was
absolutely expedient to promulge them: and these also are of two sorts. 1.
There are some Doctrines, which though our Understandings by Natural Mediums
could never have discovered, yet being on^e ^evealed, our Minds can by
Arguments drawn from Reason, facilitate the Apprehension of them, and confirm
it self in their Belief: Of this kind are the Resurrection of the Body, and
Satisfaction to Divine Justice in order to the Exercising of Forgiveness to
Penitent Sinners. There are others, which as Reason could never have
discovered, so when reveald, it can neither comprehend them, nor produce any
Medium in Nature, by which either the Existence of their Objects can be
demonstrated, or their Truth illustrated: Of this kind are the Doctrines of the
Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God; of these our Reason is not able
to give us any adaequate Conceptions: and yet these are by a clear and
necessary connex^on united with other Doctrines of Faith, which Reason
enlightened by Revelation can give a Rational account of. For the Mystery of
the Trinity has a necessary Connection with the Work of our Redemption, by the
Incarnation of the Son of God: and the Work of Redemption by the Incarnation of
an Infinite Person, has the like Connection with the necessity of satisfying
Divine Justice, in order to the dispensing of Pardon to repenting Offenders:
And the necessity of satisfying Divine Justice for the end aforesaid, has a
necessary Connection with the Doctrine of the Corruption of Mankind; and this
Corruption is both fully confessed and easily demonstrated by Reason.

Thus though all the Objects of Faith have not an immediate Correspondence with
those of Reason, yet these very Doctrines of Faith, which lie remo^est from the
Territories of Reason, and seem to have least affinity with its Light, are
necessarily and clearly connected with those other Principles of Faith, which
when once discovered, Reason both approves of and can rationally confirm it
self in. I need not add, that the most mysterious Doctrines of Religion, are
necessarily connected with a Belief of the Bible's being the Word of God, and
that is a Truth which right Reason is so far from rejecting, that it is able to
demonstrate the same.

Now if in Explaining the Phenomenon of Nature, which is the proper Province of
Reason, the most that a discreet Philosopher will pretend to, is to declare the
possible ways by which a Phoenomenon may be accounted for, without presuming to
say that it is only performed in this way, and that there is no other in which
it may be explained: much more does it become us, in the great Mysteries of
Revelation, to abstain from defining the Manner how they are, and to content
our selves with what God has been pleased to tell us: for in such Doctrines
these things appertain to Reason, 1. To show that it is not required to
comprehend them: whatever God has said is to be assented to, though we cannot
frame adequate Notions of the Thing it self, nor understand the Manner how it
should be. It Is as much against Reason as Faith, to think to fathom the
Perfections, Councils, and Works of God; seeing Reason acknowledges him to be
infinite, and it self finite. 2. If we will pretend to Reason in Religion, we
are to believe whatever God has said to be true, this being the greatest
Reason that He, who is Truth it self, cannot lie: there is nothing more
consonant to the transcendency of so high a Nature as that of God, than that it
be acknowledged Incomprehensible; nor is there any thing more agreeable to his
infinite Wisdom, than that his Designs and Contrivances should be held past
finding out. It Is as well irrational, as unjust, to think that Man should
penetrate those Depths and Abysms, which the Angels desire only (...) to look
into, as veiled and hidden from sight.

But on the other hand, though there are many things contained in Holy Scripture
which are above our Reason, yet most certainly there is nothing therein which
is contradictory thereunto. To admit Religion to contain any Dogm's repugnant
to right Reason, is at once to tempt Men to look upon all Revelation as a
Romance, or rather as the Invention of distracted Men: and withal to open a
Door for filling the World with Figments and Lies under the Palliation of
Divine Mysteries.

We cannot gratify the Atheist and Infidel more than to tell them, that the
prime Articles of our Belief, imply a Contradiction to our Faculties. In a
word, this Hypothesis, were it received, would make us renounce Man and espouse
Brute in Matters of the chiefest and greatest Concernment: for without debasing
our selves into a lower Species, we cannot embrace any thing that is formally
impossible. And when Men have filled Religion with Opinions contrary to common
Sense and Natural Light, they are forced to introduce a suitable Faith, namely,
such an one that commends it self from believing Doctrines repugnant to the
Evidence and Principles of both. Thus the first Heretics that troubled the
Christian Church, under the pretense of teaching Mysteries, overthrew common
Sense, and did violence to the universal, uniform, and perpetual Light of
Mankind: Some of them having taught that all Creatures are naturally Evil;
others of them having established two several Gods, one Good, another Bad:
others having affirmed the Soul to be a Particle of the Divine Substance; not
to mention a thousand Falsities more, all these they defended against the
Assaults of the Orthodox, by pretending that they were Mysteries about which
Reason was not to be hearkened to. Thus do others to this day, who being
resolved to obtrude their Phansies upon the World, and unable to prove or
defend what they say, pretend the Spirit of God to be the Author of all their
Theorems: nor can I assign a better reason for the Antipathy of the Turks to
Philosophy, than that it overthrows the Follies and Absurdities of their
Religion; this themselves confess, by devoting Almansor to the Vengeance of
Heaven, because he has weakened the Faith of Mussel-men in the Alcoran,
through introducing Learning and Philosophy amongst them.

In brief, Though we make not Natural Light the positive Measure of things
Divine, yet we may safely allow it a Negative Voice: we place it not in the
Chair in Councils, but only permit it to keep the Door to hinder the Entry of
Contradictions and irrational Fancies disguised under the name of Sacred
Mysteries. And it is necessary also to be remarkt, that when we say there is
nothing in Religion which is truly repugnant to Principles of Reason, we do not
by Principles of Reason, understand all that this or that sort of Men vote or
receive for such. The Universal Reason of Mankind is of great moment, but
mistaken Philosophy, and false Notions of Things, which this or that Man admits
for Theorems of Reason, are of very small importance; Men being misled by their
Senses, Affections, Interests and Imaginations, do many times mingle Errors and
false Conceits, with the genuine Dictates of their Minds, and then appeal to
them as the Principles of Truth and Reason; when they are indeed nothing else
but the vain Images of our Phansies, and the Conclusion of Ignorance and
Mistakes. So that in reading the Holy Scriptures, it highly concerns us to be
very careful that the proper and original Sense of the Words be not neglected:
there have been those, and yet are, who will hardly allow any Text of Scripture
a proper Sense, but do every where obtrude an Allegoric meaning, as if that
alone were intended by the Holy Ghost, and nothing else: but such kind of
Expositors do in effect little less than undermine the whole Scripture, betray
Religion, and turn the Sacred Oracles into Burlesque: Nor is there any Notion
so Romantic, which the Scripture by a luxuriant Fancy, may not at this rate
be wrested and debauched to give countenance to: yea, a very small measure of
Wit will serve to pervert the plainest Scripture Testimony, to quite another
Sense than ever was intended by the Writer of them. An Instance of this we have
in those, who by turning the whole Scripture into Allusions, have wrested the
Revelations of the Word to justify their own wild Phantasms, and framed the
words of Scripture (...), to their own private Notions, and thereby evacuated
the Sublimest Doctrines and most glorious Actions, into empty Metaphors and
vain Similitudes: thus the Person of Christ is allegorised into themselves, and
the Birth, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior are construed
after the manner of Aesop's, or Phylostratus's Fables, into useful Morals; as
if these were intended only to declare what is to be done in us by way of
Allusion. But leaving these, and supposing only for the present, that there has
been a Supernatural or Divine Revelation of the Almighties Will to Mankind,
which every Moral Man will find his interest to believe and embrace, if it were
upon no other account than the Extraordinary Advantage it affords us toward
the securing both a Temporal and Eternal Felicity, by those Excellent Precepts
it contains above what is discoverable in Natural Religion: Supposing this, I
say, it is reasonable for us to think, that there can be nothing in this
admirable System essential to a Saving Faith, or fundamentally necessary to our
future Welfare, but what is as intelligible as legible to every Reasonable
Creature; See a late Treatise of Humane Reason.
Most certainly the Essentials of Religion consist not in any intricate or
perplexing Theory's, but in the Practice of our Duties. The Lord has showed
thee, O Man, says the Prophet, what is good; and what does he require of thee,
but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. Again, says
another of them, Pure Religion and undefiled before God the Father, is this, to
visit the Fatherless and Widows in Affliction, and to keep our selves unspotted
from the World. And it is in consequence of this Principle (says the Of this
Treatise.
Author) that the whole Tenure of the Scripture declares unto us, that we shall
be judged, not according to our Belief, but according to our Works; witness
abundance of Passages both in the Old and New Testament, particularly that of
St. Paul, where he says that we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may recive the things done in his Body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Religion lies not in the barely
embracing this or that Opinion however Orthodox, neither yet in associating our
selves with this or that Sect of Professors, in admiring or following this or
that Doctor, though even he were a Paul, an Apollos or a Cephas; but its
important Work is to draw us from that which is Evil, and to engage us in the
practice of that which is good.

It is a wonderful thing to consider the Heats and Animosities which are sprung
up in the World, from difference in Opinion in what we call Articles of Faith:
Every Man will have his own to be the only true ones; nay some (alas too many)
are so barbarous, that they not only condemn others to Death, but deliver them
also by their Anathema' s (as much as in them lies) to the Devil and Damnation
for difference of Opinion in some Metaphisical Speculations. It is nevertheless
certain that neither Christ nor his Apostles have tied the Salvation of Mankind
so indispensably to the particular Belief of any incomprehensible Mystery, as
some of the present Doctors of his Church now do. We read that our Lord himself
pronounced St. Peter blessed upon the bare declaration, that he believed him to
be the Christ the Son of the living God. St. Philip in like manner baptized the
Eunuch upon no other Profession of his Faith than in the terms of this short
Symbol, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. St. John teaches us
plainly, that to confess that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is a certain
Characteristical Mark of the Spirit of God, and St. Paul explains himself in
this point yet more particularly telling us, That if we confess with our Mouths
the Lord Jesus, and believe in our Hearts that God has raised him from the
dead, we shall be saved.

This simplicity of the Scriptures in those Articles of Belief, which they
propose to us as necessary to Salvation, may justly raise our Astonishment at
the imprudence of those Men who have perplexed all Matters of Faith with so
many inexplicable Difficulties, not content with what the Scripture teaches of
Christianity, they have had recourse to a wordy Philosophy, thereby to refine
their Notions and adorn them with the Luster of seemingly mysterious
Expressions; insomuch that a great Palav.
Cardinal has not stuck to acknowledge, That without the help of Aristotle we
should have wanted many Articles of Faith: and that which aggravates yet more
the Extravagance of these Dogmatisers is, that they themselves acknowlenge the
Incomprehensibility of those very things which they undertake to explain with
such Critical Exactness, as if they had entered into the very Councils, and
fathomed the Depths both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God; we may therefore
without Danger shake off the tyranny of those Prejudices that have possessed us:
the Names of Orthodox and Heretic are too partial and illusory any longer to
deceive us, they have these many Ages been made use of with so much
Irregularity, Interest and Passion, that the ordinary Application of them
cannot at this day be any just ground either of Assurance or Fear.

We may undoubtedly be assured, that the Righteous Judge of all Men, will not
impute unto us the Guilt of any Criminal Heresy, so long as we sincerely
believe what he has expressly revealed to us: and if peradventure we understand
not clearly the whole sense of every Expression in which those things have been
declared; we ought certainly for that very reason so much the less presume to
alter them, or affect new forms of explaining our selves, and least of all to
impose upon others, any doubtful Inferences drawn from such dark and intricate
Premises.

But with Submission to this great Master of Humane Reason, I shall take the
Liberty to reply this, That as I cannot think every thing a Fundamental in
Religion, which some Men would persuade us; so on the other side, I am
satisfied that there is more required to Salvation, than some others seem to
intimate. I can well enough comply with that Opinion, See the Occasional Paper
Numb. 1.
which supposes there is no more than one Essential in Christianity, to wit,
the Belief that Jesus is the Messiah, provided they take in the Genuine
Consequences, and the Natural Results of such a Faith; such as his Divinity,
his miraculous Incarnation, his Ascension into Heaven, and his coming to Judge
the World at the last Day. Without these Attendants upon this one Fundamental,
the System of Christianity will be lame and incoherent, and it cannot indeed be
known what is meant by saying Jesus is the Messiah: A Man may say so much, and
have no other Notion of him, than the Jews had who expected him a Temporal
Prince; but we must believe that he will raise our Bodies, and judge us at the
last Day; not to instance in all the other Fundamentals which the Apostle
mentions Hebr. 6.1, 2. If we believe him such a Messiah as the Scripture
represents him, such parts of our Belief will have, besides the Explaining of
our Faith, a great Influence on the End of it, viz. the making us good Men: for
he that believes Jesus only a Temporal Prince, to govern him in this World,
will never think himself so much obliged to conform his very Thoughts and
Desires to his Laws, as he that is persuaded that he will one day judge him in
another. Again, we ought above all things to be satisfied in his Divinity; for
if we do not acknowledge him to be one God with the Father, and worship him
accordingly, we neglect a Gospel Duty; and if we do worship any thing but the
one God, we are Idolaters.

As for his Satisfaction, a right Notion of it is of that importance, that
without it he that believes Jesus to be the Messiah, has no Notion for what he
was anointed and sent, or of what he has done for us. These, I say, must all go
along with that one Fundamental; and to our Belief of this, there is nothing
more required, than our Belief of the Authority of Holy Writ, where these
things are plainly revealed to us. If we do believe the Scriptures to be
Authentic, we must believe it our Duty not to dispute the Mysteries of
Christian Religion: it is sufficient for us that we consent in our Hearts to
what is there plainly delivered as to these Points, although we are altogether
unskil'd in the Metaphysics, and unable by the Principles of Philosophy, to
account for the manner of Hypostatic Union, the Trinity or the Resurrection;
for this were to confine Eternal Happiness to the Men of Letters, and to tie
Salvation to the Schools.

It is something pleasant (as a Modern Philosopher has remarkt) to observe now
adays, that the great step which makes an approved Christian as well as a
Philosopher, is to talk unintelligibly, and to solve us one Difficulty by
making twenty more. These, says he, are the Men in vogue, whilst the poor Man,
that gives a plain reason for what he says, is put by for a Coxcomb, he wants
profundity.

But to proceed, should we go about to bring down the Doctrines of Religion to
the Model of our own Reason, we should wholly overthrow our Belief, and pay no
more Respect to the Authority and Testimony of our God, than we would to a Worm
like our selves. If there were no Obscurity nor Difficulty in the Notions of
Gospel Truths, where would our Submission and Humility be, which are the
Qualifications that do most of all recommend us to God, and upon this account,
especially, because they prepare the Mind for Faith, and give Check to all bold
and curious Enquiries.

It is enough, if we can by Rational Proofs demonstrate the Bible to be his
Word, whose Veracity is proportionate to his Wisdom, and both of them infinite:
nor is it needful that its Doctrines should further adjust themselves to our
Understandings. Interest of Reason in Religion.
Our Reason is often non-plus't about its own proper Objects, and the
Phenomenon of Nature, and shall we think it a competent Judge of Objects to
which it never was adapted? for it is below many of the Works of God, and
therefore much more below Mysteries of Revelation: here are many things which
we ought to admire, but must never hope fully to understand; our work here is
to believe, and not to enquire. If our Minds will not submit to a Revelation,
until they see a Reason of the Proposition, they do not believe or obey at all,
because they submit not till they cannot choose. Faith bears not upon
Demonstration, but upon the Authority and Veracity of the Speaker: and
therefore to believe nothing but what we do comprehend, is not to believe but
to argue, and is Science, not Faith. Ye that will believe in the Gospel what
you please, and what ye think fit, ye believe not, but renounce the Gospel,
says Austin to the Manichees, for ye believe your selves, not it. So that to
believe nothing but what we can fully comprehend, is to remonstrate to the
Wisdom and Power of God, at least to challenge to our selves an Omniscience
proportionable to the Divine Wisdom and Omnipotence. Furthermore, it is true
that the Rule and Measure of our Faith must be certain, but no Man's Reason
universally is so; for what one Man's Reason assents to, another rejects: Every
Man pretends to right Reason, but who has it is hard to tell. If it be lawful
for one Man to reject a plain Revelation in one particular, because he cannot
comprehend it, why may not a second do the same with Reference to a Revelation
in another Particular. For as the Socinians by making their Reason the sole
Judge of what they are to believe, will not admit many of the prime Articles of
the Gospel, so some Philosophers would make their Reason Judge of what they
should receive, and their Reason at sometimes will not admit the Gospel at all.

Now the Certainty of Revelation is justly preferred to all other Evidence, and
we are commanded to submit our Reason to the Authority of God in the Scripture,
and by consequence we are not to set up our Reason for the positive Measure of
Religion. The Sacred Writers do every where remit us to the Scripture it self,
as the Rule of Faith, and not to the Tribunal of our own Reason. Herein are the
Socinians justly impeachable, for though sometimes they acknowledge Religion to
be above Reason, yet at other times they speak in a very differing manner. Even
in denying the Divinity of our Savior, and at the same time paying Religious
Worship to any thing which is not God, is acting contrary to the Reason of
Mankind.

It Is a very great unhappiness we labor under through the Difference of our
Religious Opinions, and indeed a Uniformity in Religion is by no means to be
expected till Men grow less Speculative and more Practical. The real and
sincere Practice of Piety, the Loving the Lord our God with all our Hearts, and
our Neighbors as our selves, the keeping our Consciences void of Offense
toward our God and one another, and the holding fast no more than the whole
form of sound words without letting of them slip: these, I say, would quickly
bring us together, and the Names of Sect and Party, of Schism and Heresy,
would be altogether unknown to us.

It Is true, I doubt not of good Men to be found in every Christian Communion,
nor do I look upon it any Scandal to the Profession, that there should be many
Profane Irreligious Persons shroud themselves under it. Yet on the other hand,
though I am persuaded my Charity is well placed in this respect, I must be free
to declare to you my Opinion, that so far as I am able to judge, there is more
of Interest, Singularity of Humor, Influence of Education, Misunderstanding
and Mistake about Essentials as well as Circumstances purely indifferent, than
either a just, or indeed reasonable ground, for any Man to separate from the
present established C -- of E -- I am sure it is thought no Blemish to that
Constitution, that Men should be good and pious; and that they may not only be
so, but have as great helps to their being so, as in any state of Separation, I
am sufficiently satisfied: and I can say, I have met with few Separatists, how
much soever bigoted to Nonconformity, who have not been ready to show a
better liking to this Ch -- than to any dissenting from it, except their own.

But whether or no this, or any other Ecclesiastical Form of Government, comes
up exactly to the Primitive Pattern, I am not enough knowing positively to
determine; yet considering the Nature of a National Church which must be so
contrived and calculated, as to obviate a multitude of Inconveniences, which
cannot happen to any private or single Congregation: A Ch -- which must be
framed for the Reception of all Sorts and Conditions of Men, and the manner of
her Worship adapted to their different Capacities and Understandings: there is
nothing certainly has the Marks of a better or more serviceable Contrivance, to
answer the end of a Religious Institution. I speak in respect of her general
Ecclesiastic Polity: for though there are many particular Flaws therein, which it
were much to be wished were better inspected; though the Pastoral Care is upon
some accounts very deficient, and that there are but too many Enormities, both
in Life and Doctrine, committed by some of those who are entrusted in some
Office under her, and who ought for the same to be Suspended or utterly
Excluded; yet notwithstanding this, her Constitution is truly Excellent and
Noble: and seeing it is impossible for Men to Survey the Secrets of each others
Hearts, or to fathom their Hypocrisy, the greatest part of these Blemishes and
Irregularities, are such as will almost unavoidably creep in to any other
Universal Church.

The great Objections touching Form and Ceremony, are to my thinking no other
than unreasonable Prejudices: and should we, to gratify the Humors of some
inconsiderate Men, dispense with or lay them aside, I may be bold to presage,
with a great Pillar of this Ch -- That Religion it self would quickly dwindle
into Nothing, and there would be no such thing as a Public Assembly met
together for the performance of a Divine Service. As for the Injunction of
prescribed Forms to be made use of in our Public Prayers, Praises and
Thanksgivings to Almighty God, they have beyond Controversy their proper use
and advantage, and will by every impartial Judge be confessed or acknowledged to
be excellently designed: for notwithstanding that frivolous and impertinent
Objection of the Noncon -- that we hereby stint or limit the Divine Spirit, and
set Boundaries to its Power, and that a formal Worship was only invented to
gratify the lazy Humor of the Priests, we have not, according to my
Sentiments, any other way to petition Heaven as we ought, or as becomes the
Supplicants to an Alwise Being, unless with our Modern Visionaries we can
persuade our selves, that we enjoy at those Times some Supernatural Accession
or Influence to inspire us, and that what we deliver, has no dependence upon
our own, either natural or acquired Faculties, but is immediately dictated to
our Minds by the Holy Spirit, and conveyed to our Organs by an extraordinary
Impulse; for otherwise, whatever peculiar Genius, Gift, Talent, Faculty or
Quality some Men are endowed with, of speaking readily without much
forethought, there are few such Discourses, however pleasing to Sense and
Imagination by the Gesture or Deportment of the Speaker, or by his Air and
Manner of Delivery, that will bear the Test of Reason, or be justified for the
Sense and Grammar, even by the Author's themselves: and if so, I see not why
such Men, who labor under the Infirmity of a mean and imperfect Delivery, a
want of thinking rightly, as well as speaking, whose Sermons and Discourses,
Prayers and Thanksgivings are incoherent, a Medly of Confusion, made up of a
useless redundancy, of insignificant words, of Circumlocution, frivolous
Repetition or Tautology, where the whole is downright Nonsense; in such Cases,
I say, I am not able to reconcile the Notion of extraordinary Inspiration.

If we must believe these Men inspired from the Matter or Manner of their
Expressions, here are scarce the footsteps of Humane Knowledge, much less the
Characters of Divinity; and so far are the Discourses of this Nature from
surmounting the Acquirements of Natural Men, or deviating in any thing out of
the common Mode of Understanding, that every Profane Hypocrite may play the
Counterfeit, and the most extravagant Whim suggested to the Fantasy, has an
equal Right of putting in a Plea for Inspiration. If we must believe they speak
or teach by the Dictates of the Spirit, on the account of their more than
ordinary Probity or Moral Honesty, their Devout, Holy and Exemplary Lives and
Conversations, these indeed might sway us, were we not satisfied of the as
strict Sanctity, Sincerity, and undissembled Piety of those, who as they
pretend not to any special Privilege of Supernatural Inspiration, are utterly
averseto Ethusiastic Principles.

Did true Religion consist in an affected Singularity of Expression, in a
rustic or ungenteel Behavior and Deportment, in the Dreams and Rapts of a
deluded Fancy; or (to borrow a Physical term) were its Pathagnomonic Sign any
set Garb or Habit, were a green Apron, a Riding Hood, a short Crevat, or a
Hanging Coat, the only Characteristic Marks of Christianity, These Men above
others, have a just Pretense to the Title of its best and chiefest Votaries:
but if the real Acts of Devotion, such as Watchings, Fastings, Prayers and
Supplications; if Charitable Contributions to the Relief of the Poor and
Indigent; if Mortification and Self-denial in worldly Satisfactions, are as
conspicuous and apparent, perhaps more in some others than in these, I see not
the necessity of admitting them either to speak or act differently from any
other pious and devout Person.

It Is not the Garb or Habit that makes either the true Gentleman or the true
Christian; though most certainly, a decent plainness is very becoming, if not
absolutely necessary to the Profession of the Gospel.

The World, who take their Estimate of Things from Sense, are too apt to value
one the other upon the Lineaments of the Face, or the propotionate Symmetry of
other Parts of the Body, and to measure each others Capacity or Mental
Endowments by their outside Apparel: but these were never over-rated by the
Wise and Prudent. There is indeed an Extreme on either side; and as on the one
hand an extravagant Dress looks ridiculous to the Sober and Judicious Man, and
is very often the signal of Effeminacy, at best a Shallow Apprehension; so on
the other, the stiff and precise Habit is very rarely unattended with a
Spiritual Pride, a secret Desire to distinguish our selves from the rest of
Mankind, and an overfondness to value our selves upon such Indifferencies, and
to believe them in time some of the Essentials of Divinity.

But to return to the prescribed Forms of Religious Worship, and particularly
those enjoined by the Liturgy of the English Ch -- if we our selves, through a
preconceived Prejudice, or the Influence of a different Education, can think
them neither useful nor necessary, nor find our selves edified by the same, it
behooves us however to be so charitable, as not to Condemn or Censure those who
do. There is no Person in this Ch -- was ever, that I heard of, so Childish as
to think the Truth of Religion, or the Advantage to be received by the Practice
of its Duties, did consist in the Verbal Recitation of a Creed, in the
Repetition of some certain Prayers, or the External Compliance with any other
Performance: but since it is by all granted, that true Piety does consist in a
hearty Submission and Resignation of our Wills to God, in the most humble
Elevation of our Minds to Heaven, and in our most fervent Supplications,
Prayers, Praises and Returns of Gratitude: and since it is not only possible
but certain, that in these Forms so well adapted and fitted for our
Necessities, no truly Religious Person did ever rest upon the Form of Words,
but knows his Heart and Tongue must move together; it becomes us to believe
that the Prayers, Responses, and every part of the Service of the Ch -- are
always new to every sincere Christian, and that they loose nothing of their
Efficacy by being common. I shall not here insist upon their Usefulness and
Benefit to the Ignorant and Unlearned; for notwithstanding we are to believe
the God of Heaven will hear our Sighs and short Ejaculations, yet where we have
time and opportunity to present our Petitions, to lay open our Wants, to
acknowledge our Miscarriages, to beg pardon for our Offenses, and Abilities to
overcome the Temptations we may meet with; here, I say, it is expedient that we
set a Watch upon our Lips, that we utter nothing unbecoming the Supplicants of
the Divine Majesty, and that we pray sensibly as well as heartily: if we are so
happy as to do this without premeditation, we are all of us left to our Liberty
in our private Duties: we may pray either with or without a prescribed Form,
which how ridiculous soever it may seem to the Dissenter, it is abundantly more
so in my Opinion, that those very Men who most of all oppose a formal Prayer,
should themselves make use of one; for give me leave to tell you, that little
acquaintance I have had amongst the Separatists, has informed me, that for the
much greater number, those who are conversant in the private Duties of Family
Devotion, do still keep on in the same Road; and though it was first an
accidental Form of Words they light on without forethought, yet that makes the
same no less a Form, which when afterward by the intervention of wandering
Thoughts they at any time deflect from, those very Deviations render them
uneasy, as any of their Hearers may perceive, and the rest is foreign,
incoherent and abrupt, till they fall into their wonted method of proceeding.
This is so very true, that I can speak it upon my own knowledge, there are some
sensible Men, in whose Families I have been for many Months, in some others
Years, and all that time the Subject Matter, as well as Manner of Expression in
their Prayers have been still the same, and wherever there has happened any
little variation by the want of Memory, or the intrusion of other Thoughts,
unless they had a singular readiness this way, their Discourse would make their
Hearers blush for them, if they did not blush themselves.

Extempore Discourses, or such as are unpremeditated, are vastly differing in
different Men: and even amongst the Enthusiastic Spiritati we find it exactly
the same thing, viz. those Men who have the greatest volubility of Tongue, have
collected the greatest number of Idea's, and received the largest helps from
that Learning they at other times decry, speak the best Sense and most to the
purpose; whilst on the other side, such who labor under a want of these, are
scarce able to deliver their own Conceptions, or to let us know what they would
be at; their Discourse proves burdensome, and very often insupportable to
their own Hearers; on which account I have often times admired that there
should be so many sensible Men among them, who have not yet discovered the
Delusion, but are content to saffer such an Imposition upon their Reason.

Whoever rightly considers the force of Imagination, when it becomes heated by
the Frantic Zeal of a mistaken Piety, together with the deep Traces which by
the several Objects are drawn out in the Brains of these Men, affording so many
ready Inlets to the passage of their Animal Spirits, will the less wonder at
their Extravagancies, or be startled at their odd Deportment.

It is well enough known, that there are many of these Men whose Judgments have
been so strangely prevailed on, by the Delusion of some Spiritual Whimsie, that
by the continual indulging a particular Thought, the same has at length cut out
so deep a Trace, or made so strong an Impression upon their Imagination, that
not discovering the Fallacy, they have fallen into a Persuasion of Supernatural
Revelations, Visions, Inspirations and Divine Illuminations.

One of the admirable Instances, and perhaps the most wonderful President of
Enthusiasm, or Religious Phrenzy that has been heard of, was not long since
presented to the World in the Person of Mr. M -- n of Water-stratford in
Buckinghamshire. This Gentleman growing Hypochondriacal, labored under so
strong a Delusion of his Imagination, as to fancy himself by a Special
Revelation from Jesus Christ, to be made acquainted with his sudden coming to
Judge the World: upon which when our Savior (as he thought) had several times
appeared to him, and discourst him face to face, he selected a great number of
ignorant People to be his Followers, who disposed presently of what they had,
and brought their whole Treasure into the Common Stock. Thus were they to
separate themselves from the World, and to spend the very short remainder of
their Lives, in Spiritual Hymns and Prayers, in Watchings and Fastings,
sometimes Singing and Dancing, Playing on Musical Instruments, together with
the most unaccountable Behavior in odd Gestures and Positions of their Bodies.

Thus they continued several days, till this unhappy Gentleman their
Ringleader (whether by the constant Fatigue of his Body, or other ways) was
seized, as I have been informed, with a violent Defluxion upon the parts of his
Throat, together with an Inflammation on the Muscles of his Windpipe. During his
Indisposition, there were some Gentlemen in his Neighbou^hood, with no small
difficulty admitted to see him, in whose presence he behaved himself as he had
always done, with much Sobriety, Gravity and Devotion: his Discourse was
Rational, and betrayed no such Deception of Fancy as he was possessed with: He
told them with a full assurance, and with all the confidence he was able to
express himself, That as sure as Christ had ever been upon Earth, so certainly
he had seen him, when perfectly awake, several times not many days before: and
that he had discourst him concerning the approaching Destruction of the Wicked,
which they would find fulfilled, and our Savior in his Glory before the
Consummation of many Weeks to come.

He had as we have reason to believe, no apprehension that his Distemper would
be Mortal, but seemed persuaded that he should live to see all this
accomplished. But being thus unexpectedly snatched away from his Frantic
Congregation, they were shortly after, to their shame and consternation, made
sensible that all was the Result of a distempered Brain in their Founder, and
that the Infection was communicated to the unthinking Multitude by the Power of
Imagination.

I have thought this Case the more remarkable, because having been acquainted
with a Neghbour of Mr. M -- s, I have received full satisfaction that he was a
Man very unblameable in his Life and Conversation, of tolerable Parts, strictly
just in his Actions, and every way free from the imputation of an Impostor or
designing Counterfeit.

That we may not wholly pass by the Causes of these strange Phenomenon, without
essaying by some means or other an Explication, I shall take the liberty to
assert, that however ignorant we may be of the modification of our Souls, or
the manner of our Perception, we are arrived to some certain knowledge of what
is transacted in our Brains in order to the same: for whatever Objects are
represented to our Phansies, the same do make a more or less durable impression
thereon; or, in other words, they grave as it were Prints, more deep or
superficial, according to our continued view of the said Objects: and hence it
follows that our Animal Spirits have not only a more difficult or ready Inlet,
into the Traces which are cut out, but also into those Nerves which excite the
Motions of our Bodies subservient to us, or by whose assistance we procure to
our selves the desired Object, accordingly as we have indulged the Thought of
prosecuting the same. For the better illustration hereof, If at any time we are
intent upon, or please our selves with any lewd Idea, if we keep the whole bent
of our Minds upon the same, and are both solicitous to obtain, and uneasy till
we have accomplished our impure Designs. We must expect that the same, or the
like Object, will make a very durable Print, or very deep Vestigia in our
Brains; that the Traces into the same will lie always open, and the said Object
is no sooner excited afterward, but the Spirits as it were of their own accord
rush in, and even compel us, almost contrary to our Desires, to will those
Motions of our Bodies which were before employed in its prosecution and
attainment. This is the true Mechanic Process, the Objects that are about us
must excite in us some Sensation or other, and as we pursue or fly its
appearance, or more or less keep up the Idea, there will be consequently the
firmer or slighter Trace drawn out, and accordingly the same will either
continually approach or withdraw from us. So that by the repeated prosecution
of the beloved Object, these Vestigia are so very plain, and open, and afford
so easy a passage to the income of our Spirits, that it is very much, if for a
long time after the same should be obliterated, or the said Avenues blockt up.

Again, It is by the frequent or reiterated Indulgence of our Thoughts, and
cherishing our Idea's, that the Sensitive or Inferior Soul gets the Ascendant
over us: it is by these means that we contract our Habits, and in this the force
of them consists, which when we have done all that lies in our power to highten
and aggravate our unhappy Circumstances, when we have after this manner
suffered an ill Habit to get the Victory over us, and to subjugate our
Strength, to allure our Passions to its free command, we then cry out of the
Frailty of our Natures, exclaim against our Maker, or else justify our
detestable Actions, and foolishly please our selves in thinking, that God
Almighty would not have implanted these Appetites within us, if he designed
that we should not satiate our selves in their Enjoyments: if not, they expect
that however by their own voluntary Actions, they have with their whole
strength heartily embraced the sinful Thought, and as desirously brought the
same into a repeated Act, by which means the Traces in their Brains lie so open
to receive their Spirits: here, I say, they expect Omnipotence to intervene,
and by a Miracle to close up the Prints they have engraven, to snatch from them
the Idea's they are hugging with all their might, or to intercept the passages
of the Nerves, that their Animal Spirits may not fall into those parts, by
which they are to obtain their short-lived Satisfactions.

Surely there is no reasonable Man will countenance the folly of this Plea; nor
can he who rightly considers the Fabric of our Bodies, the Organization of our
Brains, and the necessity for sensible Objects to leave their Marks upon the
same, think it a fair Impeachment of the Divine Wisdom or Justice, especially
if he reflects upon that high Prerogative we enjoy above the sensitive Soul;
and that it is within the Sphere of our Reason to obviate these Disorders, to
correct the Irregularities of our Senses, and by the practice of contrary
Habits to set us out of the reach of those Mischiefs we should be exposed to.
How these Disorders may be corrected, and the Vestigia which have been impressed
by former Objects wiped out, I have touched upon elsewhere: and indeed, were not
Matters thus to be transacted, were our Objects elected to our hands, and we
not able of our selves to choose some and reject others, I see not any business
for the Exercise of our Reason, or any advantage we could brag of above
necessitated Agents.

A considerate view of this kind of Imagery, thus transacted in the Brain, will
not only inform us of the Mode of Imagination, but will also give us some small
insight into the extraordinary Effects of an overheated Fantasy, and direct
us to an Explication of some of the prodigious Phenomenon and extravagant
Actions of our late Visionaries, or wild Enthusiasts: who, by a constant
application of their Minds to some particular Idea, come at length to have the
same so strongly impressed upon their Brains, that the whole Systasis of the Soul
is taken up as it were and loses it self in its Contemplation: the Vestigia
are so deeply cut, and all others at that time effaced, that the tendency of
their Spirits altogether is into these Footsteps, the Acts of Reason and
Understanding are laid aside, the Result is this, They quickly grow giddy by an
uninterrupted Thought upon the same Object, they fall into a sort of Madness
and Delirium, at some times dangerous to themselves and those about them: they
are possessed with invincible Opinions and Conceits of extraordinary
Illuminations, Illapses of the Spirit and Revelations: finally, by the
contracted Disorders of the Nervous System, they are often seized with very
direful Paroxysms, believe themselves in Rapts and Ecstasies, and when the Fit
is over, endeavor to persuade the Bystanders, that they have been the Lord
knows where, and received a Divine Mandate or Commission to do the Lord knows
what.

I was never over-credulous in the business of Possessions, but doubtless,
according to some very impartial and faithful Accounts, some of these I am
speaking of have been pure Daemoniacks, and the unaccountable Phenomenon they
have exhibited, have been clear Indications of a Praestigious Delusion or
Satanical Power.

According to the Relation of a Learned Man, my late Acquaintance, whose
Residence has been for many years in New-Eng -- that Country has been the Stage
on which abundance of these Tragae-Comedies (as he was pleased to call them)
have been acted. He gave me at our last Conference, a very Rational Account of
several Instances of this Nature, particularly two, which I was almost
surpised at: their Names I shall designedly forbear to publish. The one had
been a particular Acquaintance of this Gentleman's for some years past, He told
me he always looked upon him to be as Harmless and Innocent, as he knew him to
be Ignorant: but of late he began to retire more than ordinarily from
Conversation, and betrayed in all his Actions, in his Gesture, Speech, Motion
and Behavior, all the approaching Symptoms of a mad Enthusiast. It was not
long before he betook himself to the Society of half a dozen Women, who seemed
to be at first deluded with the appearance of his extraordinary Sanctity; and
without these he never stirred abroad. It happened at one particular time that
that the Q -- r with his Women very ridiculously habited, drew near to my
Friend's House, and seeing him at his Door cries out in a frantic manner, Stand
still and see Salvation approaches. The Gentleman, not at all surprised at the
Novelty, as having been well acquainted with his Life, and the Whimleys he had
been possessed with, makes toward him, accosts him in a Neighbourly manner, bids
him welcome to his Seat, and kindly desires him to take a Dinner with him;
which the other, after some little Pause and a deep Expiration, assents to, walks
in, and his Women were about to follow him: which my Friend observing, opposed
their Entrance, and would by no means admit them in. He told the Q -- r that
for his part he should be welcome, but he intended not his House, to be a
Receptacle for Mad-women, nor such especially as were kept for a Spiritual
Fornication. The Man could not at first tell how to resent the Affront put upon
his Women; but after some little Pause, walks to them, and orders their
tarrying for him not far off: then returns and enters into my Friend's House,
where they drank a Bottle of the best his House afforded; and till Dinner was
getting ready, he calls for his Violin, begins to tune it, and to strike an
Air: which the Enthusiast perceiving was extremely disturbed, and being about
to depart, the Gentleman told him he would desist, and play an Anthem upon his
Base Viol, which he was sure would not sound harsh: Accordingly he prevails,
sets the Instrument and plays a Psalm, when on a sudden the poor Man falls a
sighing, sobbing, and roaring out. At length he begins to dance about the Room,
and calls for his Women, that they might have the same Spiritual Consolation;
for this he said was all Divine, it favored not as the other did of the Powers
of Darkness, or the Carnal Kingdom. By this time Dinner was brought up, the
Gentleman could scarce persuade his Guest to leave off running about the Room,
and to sit down to Dinner: but at length prevailed; and during the time they
were at Dinner, he was continually throwing out Scripture Metaphors, and would
have every thing from thence, however foreign to the purpose, to be an exact
Simile or perfect Allusion. At length they parted, after a plentiful Repast,
with a great deal of Respect.

The more remarkable Instance, this Gentleman gave me at the same time, was of
another Q -- r in the same Town, who looked upon himself to be of Heavenly
Extraction, continually inspired and abounding in Supernatural Visions and
Revelations. It was customary with this Person, in whatever place he received
either Civility or Disrespect, accordingly to denounce some Blessing or Woe, as
if authorized by Heaven for his so doing. At a certain time he made my Friend a
Visit, and upon the receipt of some slight Courtesy from him, by way of
Requital upon his going forth, fell down on his Back, and there for a
considerable time was most cruelly exercised with such violent Distortions and
throwing about of his Limbs, such incredible Inflations of the Breast and
Belly, such Convulsions of the Muscles of his Face, and forming at the Mouth,
that the Gentleman could scarce persuade himself these Effects could proceed
from any common Disorder of the Animal Economy, or be the Result of any thing
less than a Diabolical Energy. When the Decumbent was almost spent, be lay
quiet for a little while; at length starts up, and in the usual accent of the
Sect, cries out, The Tabernacle, the Tabernacle of the House of God, it shall be
erected in thine House, and the Tents of the Lord shall be transplanted hither.
My Friend hereupon calmly discourst him, and desired to know the occasion of
his extreme disorder. He replied, He had been all this time in Paradise, that
he had discoursed the Lord Face to Face, and had this Message delivered to him.

This Gentleman and my self had a long Conference upon this Subject, together
with the Writings of Mr. B -- and Mr. K -- some of the former, he said, he had
considerately perused in the Latin Tongue. I found by his Discourse that he
had formerly been inclining to the Q -- rs Opinions; and was told by others
that he had been very strict in that way, till finding himself growing:
Melancholy, and likely to be seized with a Spiritual Vertigo, he happily threw
off the Course of his Life, betook himself to the Study of Metaphysics, and
found his Disorder by degrees to wear of, by the help of Physic and the
advantage he had of Conversing with Learned and Judicious Men. He was a little
surprised when he perceived that I offered any thing in the behalf of Q -- sm,
and told me, That on what account soever I espoused their Cause, he was
satisfied that I could not do it without a manifest Imposition upon my better
Judgment. The Experience, says he, I have had of this People, and the intimate
Acquaintance, both with their Principles and Deportment, has enabled me to know
thus much, and I am so bold as to establish it for a solid Truth, that the
perfect Q -- r is either a perfect Lunatic or Daemoniac; and believe me, you
will find this occur to your own observation, that the looser the Q -- r is, I
mean, the less he is tainted with the Rusticity of their Manners, the Stiffness
of their Behavior, and the Ridiculous Gestures that appeared in their
Primitive Constitution, if at the same time he be a Man of good Morals, he is
vastly preferrable in all respects to the Whimsical Precisian.

There are many (continues he) amongst them that I esteem of, as of the devout
and pious Ethnic, they have both of them the same Natural Light to govern
themselves by, they are both of them Men of Conscience and Integrity in their
Dealings: their Conversation is modest, yet withal pleasant, while they keep
within these Bounds; they are some of the best of our Modern Deists; but so
soon as ever they betake themselves to extraordinary Illuminations, to speak by
Inspiration, and to fancy themselves directed in all things by somewhat
differing from the common mode of Understanding, they are involved on a sudden
in inextricable Confusion, plunged in Darkness and miserable Delusion, and
truly it is the great Mercy of God that no more of them lose their Senses. The
Men of Parts and Learning are the least subject to quit their Reason, and to
have their Intellectuals blinded: and generally speaking, the Enthusiast is a
Man of simple Education, an uncultivated Genius, rude and illiterate, of a
sedentary Life, much given to Contemplation, 'tho not able to digest his
Thoughts: and it is no wonder at all, when such People come to be afflicted with
Hypochondriac Melancholy, that they should be seized soon after with a
Religious Phrenzy.

As to their peculiar Claim to the Divine Light, we have as little Reason to
credit them as in their pretended Revelations. The Holy Spirit can neither be
the Author of Absurdity or Incoherency in Discourse, neither yet of Repugnancy
in Opinion, Difference between each other and palpable Confusion amongst them
all. Those who have the Grace of the Holy Spirit, or the Advantage of the
Divine Light, will see a necessity not only to be acted by, but to think more
reverently of the true Revelation of Christ Jesus, of his Incarnation and
outward Sufferings, as well as of his second Coming to Judge the Quick and
Dead. Now whatever these People may insinuate to the World, under the Notion of
their Belief, there are notwithstanding several dangerous Heresies got in
amongst them. They do most of them at the bottom, set up their own Light and
private Inspirations to the written word, which their calling a Dead Letter,
Food for Children, of little use to the Regenerate, or such as are grown in
Grace, do plainly intimate: there are many of them speak slightingly of the
Mosaic History, ridicule the Notion of Original Sin, and disparage or
discredit the manner of its Translation. They have none of them any other
infallible Criterion or standing Rule of Faith, than a mistaken Conscience,
which they Nickname the Divine Light: This is plainly evident by their wild
Enthusiams, the gross Immoralities among some of them, and the intestine
Janglings amongst them all. They do consult the Scriptures in order to an
imitation of the Apostolical Writings; but alas, their high Pretenses and
Conceits are foiled and qua^ht so soon as ever we compare them: and
notwithstanding their strenuous Pleas, with their seeming assurance that they
have the same Prophetic Spirit, and are equally inspired with the Divine
Penmen, I defy the whole Body of Qu -- sm to produce me one single Instance,
of any one of their Prophets that could ever give the Proof and Attestation of
their Inspiration, with the Founders of Christianity: when they come to this,
they most wretchedly prevaricate, and cry out with Mahomet, There is no need of
Signs and Wonders. Believe me Sir, adds he, this late Pretense to Inspiration,
is both the most egregious Cheat that was ever put upon the Christian World,
and the most dangerous and destructive Fallacy that ever the grand Deceiver
could have invented or contrived. Weigh all things fairly and without
prejudice, consider all impartially, and give the greatest scope you can to the
best of their Arguments, you will find all as pure deception, and as certainly
false, as the Divine Illumination of the first Christians was most conspicuous
and demonstratively true. If we consider the tendency of this Notion, we shall
find, that should the World but once comply with, or countenance the same, the
Fundamentals of Government, both Civil and Ecclesiastic, would presently be
unhinged, we should have one Revelation in opposition to another; the Gospel of
our Savior, that Divine System of true Religion, would be trampled under soot,
we should be exposed in our Fortunes to the State of Levellers, in our Minds to
Diabolical Illusions or Phansiful Suggestions: Our Religion would soon grow
volatile and fly away into Air and Spirit, a profound Sign o^ lamentable
Expiration, would be all we should have to do whilst clothed with the Flesh,
and all our Religious Duties, for want of the Support of an established Form,
would quickly leave us: Our helps to Devotion, such as Watchings, Fastings, and
servent Prayers, would be quickly laid aside, and in a little tim^ we should
find our selves in the midst of a destructive Ignorance and barbarous
Confusion. I can the more readily presage this, having been much pestered with
these People in some of the Towns of New-Eng -- though not altogether in such a
manner as Germany has been with the frantic Anabaptists. I shall only take
notice to you in one word more, that when ever you may happen to discourse
these People upon almost any single Article of the Christian Faith, you will
find that there are scarce two of them of the same Opinion: Their Igno^ance in
the Explanatory part of Religion is so great, that for want of a settled Creed
or generally established System, they will unavoidably clash and jar with one
another: indeed, so far as I perceive, they are capable of arguing nothing
solidly but the Principles of Deism: and even their grand Notion of the Light,
is as yet unprincipled, and as Mr. Norris says, unphilosophic, notwithstanding
the two learnedest Props of their Cause have set it out to the best advantage
their Learning could ^nable them. It Is true, there are some of the most
Judicious, who will talk to the purpose for some little time, but there is no
keeping them close to their Argument. The want of Catechistical Exercise to
instill their Principles into those under their Care, has rendered their Religion
rude and ill-shapen; and to me this seems none of the least Causes that the
greater part of them are so very unknowing in Divinity, that they can say
nothing for themselves but this, that they have a feeling Sense of an inward
Light which is sufficient to direct them.

Thus ended my Friend's Discourse, which I shall leave with this short Remark,
That for the most part his Idea's seem to be clear and Rational, his Judgment
sound, and setting aside a little Heat, his Discourse in the main to consist
with Truth, or Matter of Fact and Common Observation.

Whoever consults Antiquity, or the Chronicles of the Times, may find many
Histories of this wild Enthusiasm, and the Extravagancies that have attended
this Whimsical Pretense to Inspiration.

In the Reign of Henry the Sixth, See Baker's Chron. of the Kings of England,
Page 184.
one La Pucel a French Maid was burnt at Roan, she declared that she was sent
from God for the good of her Country to expel the English.

In the Year 1591. and the 34 th of Queen Elizabeth 's Reign, was memorable the
prodigious carriage of one Hackett, born at Oundle in Northamptonshire; a mean
Fellow of no Learning, whose first Prank was this, That when in show of
Reconciliation to one with whom he had veen at variance, he embraced him, he
bit off his Nose: Id. p. 181.
and the Man desiring to have it again, that it might be sewed on whilst the
Wound was fresh, he most villainously eat it up, and swallowed it before his
Face. After this, on a sudden, he took upon him a show of wonderful Holiness,
did nothing almost but hear Sermons, got Scriptures by heart, counterfeited
Revelations from God, and an extraordinary Calling. Thus he grew to be
magnified by certain zealous Ministers, especially of one Edward Coppinger ( a
Gentleman of a good House) and one Arthington a great Admirer of the Geneva
Discipline; insomuch that they accounted him as sent from Heaven, and a greater
Prophet than Moses and John Baptist, and finally that he was Christ himself
come with a Fan in his hand to judge the World. This they proclaimed in
Cheapside, giving out that Hackett participated of Christ's glorified Body, by
his especial Spirit, and was now come to propagate the Gospel over Europe, and
to settle a true Discipline in the Church of England. Farther, That they
themselves were two Prophets, the one of Mercy, the other of Judgment; with
many other such incredible Blasphemies: whereupon Hackett was Apprehended,
Arraigned, and at last Drawn, Hung'd and Quartered; continuing all the time,
and at his Death, h^^ blasphemous Assertions. Coppinger a while after starved
himself to death in Prison. Arthington repented, and made his Recantation in a
public Writing.

P. 403.
In the Third Year of the Reign of King James the First, we have an account of
a knavish Counterfeit, one Richard Haidock, who not only pretended to
Inspiration, and to enjoy Supernatural Visions, but to preach and pray in his
Sleep. This Person was by the King himself detected to be a Counterfeit, and
humbly asking forgiveness, had his Pardon granted on Condition that he should
publicly and openly acknowledge his Offense. P. 423.
In the Sixteenth Year of this King's Reign John Trask was Censured in the
Star Chamber for depraving the Ecclesiastic Government, and for holding diverse
Judaical Opinions; as that it was not lawful to do any thing forbidden in the
Old Law, nor to keep the Christian Sabbath; for which he was set on the Pillory
at Westminster, and from thence whipped to the Fleet, there to remain a Prisoner:
but Three years after he writ a Recantation of all his former Heresies and
Schismatical Opinions.

P. 449.
In the Year 1636. in the Reign of King Charles the First, one Leighton a
Scotchman, published his Zion's Plea, of a very fiery Nature, exciting the
Parliament and the People to kill all the Bishops, and to smite them under the
fourth Rib: He bitterly inveghs against the Queen, calling her a Daughter of
Heth, a Cananite, an Idolatress. For which he was Sentenced to be whipped and
stigmatized, to have his Ears cut off, and his Nose to be slit; all which was
inflicted upon him.

P. 629.
In the Year 1656. in Charles the Second's Reign, most remarkable was the Trial
of James Naylor the great Champion of the Q -- rs who having spread his
Doctrine, and gained many Proselytes to it in diverse parts of the Nation, was
more especially taken notice of at Bristol, and from thence was brougt up to
London, attended by several Men and Women of his Opinion, who all the way they
came (especially the Women) are said to have sung Hosanna 's, and to have used
the same kind of Expressions toward him, as anciently the People of the Jews
did to our Savior, when he road triumphant into Jerusalem. The Parliament took
upon them to judge him themselves, before whom being convened, he was charged
with Blasphemy, for assuming to himself Divine Honors, and such Attributes as
were due unto Christ only. After he had used many cunning Sophisms and Evasions
to clear himself, such as argued him not altogether ignorant of Humane Letters,
he was Sentenced by the House to be first at London whipped, pillory'd and
stigmatis'd as a Blasphemer; then to be conveyed to Bristol, there to be also
whipped; lastly to be brought back to London, to remain in Bridewel during
pleasure: which Sentence was publicly inflicted on him.

The Insurrection of Thomas Venner (in King Charles the Second's P. 734.
Reign 1660.) a Cooper and a Preacher to the Fifth Monarchy Men, is so
prodigious an Example of an overheated Imagination, and a pretended
Revelation, that I am apt to believe no History can parallel. The madness of
these Men (being in all about Fifty or Sixty) extended so far, that they
believed themselves, and the rest of their Judgment, were called by God to
reform the World, and to make all the Earthly Power, which they called Babylon,
subservient to the Kingdom of King Jesus: and in order thereunto, they resolved
never to sheath their Swords till the Carnal Powers of the World became a
Hissing and a Curse; and by a mis-guided Zeal they were so confident in their
Undertaking, that they were taught, and believed One should subdue Ten
thousand; making account, when they had led Captive Captivity in England, to go
into France, Spain, Germany, and other parts of the World, there to prosecute
their Holy Design.

They fought indeed with Courage to admiration, and if they had not been
hindered by the Care of the Lord Mayor from increasing their Numbers, a Thousand
Men so resolved, might have caused such a Disturbance in the City, as would
have had an Influence much farther. Venner himself was very much wounded before
he was taken, and about five or six killed that refused Quarter, of which some
of them were so obscure as not to have their Names known. About eight or ten
days after, Venner with about sixteen or seventeen of the most notorious, were
Arraigned at the Old Baily, found Guilty, and Executed in several parts of
London.

Thus ended (says the Historian) this desperate Enterprise of a formidable
Army of sixty Men, who were insensated to that height of Enthusiastic Valor,
that they thought themselves strong enough to Encounter the whole armed Force
of one of the greatest and most populous Cities in the World. The Prince's
Guards, the General's Troops, the City Trained Bands, were all swallowed up in
Conceit by these Men of Might and little Wit; and it is reported, that they
were so infatuated with their golden Dreams, and so certain of Success, that
they had promised to themselves the Partage of the whole Empire of the World
among them: Thirty being designed for the subduing of the Eastern Parts, and
Thirty of the Western; but see the Disaster which they met with by the way.

In Dr. Featly's History of the Anabaptists, See the Dippers Dipped, by Dr.
Featly.
we have several wonderful Accounts of Enthusiasm, of their strange Phrensies;
their wild Preachings and Practices, particularly those of Muncer, John of
Leyden, Knipperdoling, with the rest of their Followers: So that although at this
time the Q -- rs alone are looked upon to be the chief Enth^siasts, there being
no other Sect besides so particularly pretending to Inspiration and Divine
Illumination, yet within the Compass of the two last Centuries, we have had the
Apostolians, Augustinians, The Silents, Adamites, Melchiorites, Georgians,
Menonists, Catharists, Separatists, Bucheldians, Hutites, etc. who put in for a
share of the same Privileges: and indeed it is to be feared, if not
unquestionable, that the present Countenancing the pious Whims and Dotages of
some Modern Sectaries, who have made such a Noise in the World with their
Special Illuminations, Visions and Revelations, has been none of the most
inconsiderable Occasions of Scandal and Contempt, amongst unprincipled Men, to
the Sacred Writings of the Divine Penmen; on which account it was certainly
well worth the pains of the Learned B -- p of C -- r, to consider and state the
Difference between really Divine Communications, Natural Impressions, and
Diabolical Illusions, whether by Inspiration, Illapse, Vision, Dream, or Voice:
and this, I think, he has admirably done, by showing that there is no proof of
any other Revelation than that in the Holy Scriptures. 2. That there is no need
of any farther Revelation. And l^stly, That the said Book shuts up all
Revelation with it self, so that none other is to be expected beyond it.

William^^s first Sermon. at Mr. Boyle^^ Lect. An. 1696.
I grant, says he, that it is as possible in it self for God to reveal himself
at some time hereafter, as it was for him to have revealed himself heretofore;
but he that will assert the Futurity of this, must have more to prove it than a
Possibility. It is certain that God has revealed himself, and that the Gospel
was by Revelation from him: but there is nothing of the like Certainty for a
Revelation after the Gospel, or in after times of the Gospel, as there is that
the Gospel it self was of Divine Revelation; so that although I am not positive,
but that there may be some particular Revelation or Inspiration with respect to
some especial Case, yet it may arise, for ought we know, from bare Imagination,
and if not attended with the greatest Caution and Circumspection, may end in
the Whims and Frensies of a Bridget, a Catharina, or a Mother Juliana, and what
not: nay, it may proceed to the disanulling the Gospel it self, and to the
preferring their own private Inspirations (as they will have it) above it.

If we consider the Evidence which was given to the Gospel Revelation, we shall
find there needs on other Evidence to be given to that Revelation for want of
Evidence in this. Our Saviour^s Life was a Life of Miracles, as well as
Innocence, and wherever he w^^^ the Divine Power went along with him, which he
extended ^herever he came, and as occasion served to the Confusion, if not the
Conviction or Conversion of his Adversaries, and all which at last concluded in
his own Resurrection, his Ascension into Heaven, and the Effusion of the Holy
Ghost which began on Pentecost, but like a Torrent ran through the Apostolical
Age, and bore down all manner of Competition, and what then can any Revelation
pretend to beyond it, or where can there be any that can be supposed to produce
the like Evidence for its Veracity.

But again, The Scriptures conclude all with this Revelation, and because we
have none other besides that written Revelation, we cannot suppose any
Revelation beyond it, and much less derogatory to it, or that shall direct us
to any other way by which we are to be saved, then that we have already
received, and is therein recorded.

As to the Case of Personal and Occasional Revelation, which may be conceived
only to serve to a more spiritual Manifestation of the Revelation already made,
I would not altogether deny this, because I know not how far some Persons may,
in some Cases, be enlightened by a Spirit of Prophecy, nor what particular
directions they may receive in an extraordinary way in some special Cases, with
respect to themselves, to others, and to the Church of God: which may be like a
special Providence to some particular Persons, but now as a Man must govern
himself by the general Rules of Divine Providence, and not by particular: and
because he has sometimes met with Deliverances, Supplies and Directions beyond
all his own foresight and reasoning, must not forsake his own Reasonings and
Care, and wholly rely upon the Extraordinary: so it is to be here. It Is not
impossible but a Person may have some occasional Revelation, some Divine
Inspiration at an especial Season, or in some special case; but if he forsakes
the ordinary to depend upon the extraordinary, and expects a Revelation in
every case, because he has had it in some Particulars, he will as much be
subject to Error, and err no less dangerously than if he wholly relied upon
Divine Providence, and forsook all other means whatever; and truly this is a
way much liable to be abused to mislead Persons, and is very suspicious as also
dangerous. It is a Case liable to Imposture and Abuse, forasmuch as those that
are under the Influence of such a conception, are not always, if at all,
capable of making a certain Judgment of it, for it is all transacted within,
and the Imagination may be so much influenced by the Body, and by an Agitation
of the Blood and Spirits from an Enthusiastical and even Devout Temper, by
prepossessions and fore-conceived Principles, and by the Circumstances of Life,
that it may be wholly Natural, as natural as Dreams, or the Deliriums of a
Fever, which proceed from an Ebullition of the Humors and such like ordinary
Causes.

It is very certain that abundance of Persons have been imposed on, and taken
the Effect of Imagination for Inspiration and Divine Illumination: I am far
from condemning all the Instances of this kind of Hypocrisy and a Design to
Deceive, like Maria Vesitationis in Portugal; I will rather think more
charitably, that very often they have thought themselves thus moved and acted
by the Spirit of God, and yet notwithstanding all their pretenses, and the
opinion others have had of them, it has been afterward evident, that all has
been far short of Divine Infusion or Illumination.

What shall we think of Teresa, whose Life is full of her Visions and
Revelations, and indeed if we did but alter the place, and for the Nunnery
conceive her to be in an Hospital, we might take it to be what the Author in a
transport sometimes calls it, a Frenzy. What a Legend of Dreams would the World
be furnished with, if the Visions and Revelations of these kind of People were
bundled up together, as the Miracles of reputed Saints have sometimes been. But
they are truly much to be suspected also of Imposture, and that because we read
so little of this way in Scripture, even in the Apostles times, and nothing to
encourage us in the expectation of it afterward. We read nothing there of the
Vbald. p. 14, 16.
Union of the Soul to the Divine Essence; of its being absorpt and drowned over
head and ears, and ingulphed in the depth of Divinity, so that it became one
and the same with God by a true Deification. We read there sparingly of some
Ecstasies, as one of St. Peter, one or two of St. Paul, but with how much
reserve does the holy Apostle speak, and with how much modesty when he comes to
Visions and Revelations of the Lord, when he heard unspeakable words, which it
is not lawful for a Man to utter, 2 Cor. 12.1, etc. Now what can be greater if
these of Teresa be true, and where might we expect to be more entertained with
the Relation of such Rap^s than in the Gospel; so that when they are there so
unusual, and here so frequent, that even Societies are embodied from them and
formed, it is very much to be suspected, and the rather, seeing that which is
the proper means of judging and of distinguishing Imagination from Revelation,
is laid aside, which is Reason, and when all is resolved into the Persons
single Testimony.

We are required in all Cases to search and try, which does suppose the free
Exercise of our Reason; and where this is rejected, it is a sign there is no
truth in the Thing pretended: but farther, it is very suspicious when Men exalt
their own private Revelations to the same Authority with the Revelations of
holy Writ, and seek to justify the one by the other; when they esteem the way
of Religion as described in Scripture, to be mean in comparison of this that
they are in, and prefer this way of Contemplation and Inspiration, above the
plain Precepts of Christianity; when it is a condescension in them to join in
External Worship. A state indeed of Perfection that is above what the Gospel
has described, and is another Gospel than what we have in Scripture received,
and which there needs an uncontrollable Evidence for: the want of which
increases the suspicion. It Is certain that there is no Evidence for all this,
beyond their own simple Affirmation, and who is there that without good
Evidence can believe that those Rapturous Ladies ( such as Santa Teresa and
Donna Marina d'Escobar) did in Molinos' s Phrase, hear and talk with God hand
in hand, when he reads the Interlocutory Matters that are said to have passed
between them.

The desire of Revelations has so wonderful an Influence over the Souls,
especially of such Women, that there is not an ordinary Dream but they will
Christen with the Name of Vision; and I must needs say, the credulous World has
been much imposed on this way: The Pretense abovesaid of Maria Visitationis is
an Instance beyond all Exception, who imposed upon her Confessor, ( no less a
Man than Lewis Granada) the Inquisition, and even the Pope himself, and yet
notwithstanding she pretended to somewhat more than Internal, for her Converse
with our Savior, etc. was at last detected of notorious Imposture. But most of
the Visionaries we are speaking of, pretended not to so much; and therefore
where there is no External Evidence attempted by them, nor that we have the
Gift of Intuition to see into their inward and Self-evidence, we have no reason
to think otherwise of such Illuminations, Introversions and Interlocutions,
than at best the Effects of a distempered Brain; and so much the rather are we
to be careful of these Matters, and not to be too easy of belief, because it
may be very dangerous in the Consequence of it; for if instead of a Star it
should prove an Ig^is fatuus, whether may not Persons be led under the Delusion
of it, and what will not be concluded to be lawful, nay a duty, which
Revelation shall warrant; and where will this end, if once it be credited, and
that we commit our selves implicitly and blindly to such an uncertain Guide.

Dr. William's third Sermon, An^ 1695.
Now if a Person comes, under pretense of a Revelation, with a Message to
others, and requires them, as they tender their Salvation, to receive it and to
submit to it, without such Certificates as may give Authority to it, it is like
one that shall take on him the Style and Character of an Ambassador, without
any Credentials to give him Authority, and deserves no better Acceptance.

It is by means of Predictions and Miracles that a Prophet must be known to be
a Prophet, an Inspiration to be an Inspiration: and by these Characters may we
be able to judge of both as to the Authority of the Mission, and the Truth of
the Inspiration; where the Evidence was n^c^ssary, there was never wanting one
or both of these: and though John did no Miracle, yet he had the Spirit of
Prophecy, the People acknowledged; John ^^. v. 41.
for, say they, all things John spoke of this Man ( Jesus) were true. There
may, it is likely, be Inspiration where there is neither of these or the like
Evidences, but there is no Obligation on others to believe it, without the
Evidence be sufficient (for such as the Evidence is, such is the Obligation)
now the Evidence is not sufficient which rests solely on Humane Authority, and
has nothing but the bare word or affirmation of the Pretender to prove it: It
is to this purpose that our Savior speaks, If I bear witness of my self my
witness is not true, the Works I do bear witness of me. So that Inspiration is
as to others no Inspiration till it be proved: it may for ought appears to the
contrary, be no other than Delusion or Imposture. Let therefore the Imagination
be never so strong, the Confidence never so great, the Intent never so good,
the Question is, whence is this? what Evidence does the Person bring of his
Mission from God? upon what does it rest? into what is it resolved? what does
he produce more than what may be the fruit of Imagination? it may all be a fit
of Enthusiasm. And if a Person will pretend to immediate Inspiration (were it
an Age for it) much more if he pretends to it after Inspiration h^s ceased, he
must be able to fortify it by such Evidence as can come from none but him from
whom the Inspiration came if it be Divine.

The Case then is to be put upon this Issue, and to be decided by the Measures
here laid down, and we may safely venture the whole Cause of Revelation upon
it, when there is nothing wanting that can reasonably be desired toward the
Justification of its Veracity, and that there is no manner of Pretense for
applying the same Terms of Evidence and Sincerity to Imagination, as to
Inspiration or to Imposture (whether Enthusiastic or Diabolical) as is to
Revelation.

For when was it known that Imagination or Nature (vulgarly so called) did ever
empower Persons to speak all Languages, and to discourse readily at once with
the Parthians, Medes and Elamites, etc. in their several Tongues: when did
Nature or Imagination enable Persons without any skill to cure Diseases
naturally incurable, and such as had no Humane Learning, to talk like
Philosophers of the sublimest Arguments, and with as much freedom as they used
the Speech of the Foreign Nations they instructed.

Farther, What Imagination, Nature or Art could inspirit Moses with such a
Supernatural Power as to turn his Rod into a Serpent, and to devour those of
the Magicians: or by a stroke of it to fetch Water out of a Rock, and to stop
the mighty Current of the Sea?

What Imagination could form such Idea's in the Minds of a Pharaoh and
Nebuchadnezzar, or inspire a Joseph or a Daniel to give such an Interpretation
as justified it self to be true by the corresponding Event?

When did Imagination give Life to a Fly, or do the least act out of it self?
when did that, or Nature, or Imposture, really and truly raise the Dead with
Elisha, call for Fire from Heaven with Elijah, or foretell what shall happen an
hundred or a thousand years after, or so much as what a Person shall think to
morrow? Here we may challenge all the Magicians, all the Men of Art and
Science, all the Enthusiast^ and Impostors in the World, to talk as the Persons
really inspired did talk, to do as they did, and to produce those Testimonies
as they produced in their own Justification, and for the Confirmation of their
Mission from God.

From all which we see, what Evidence we have for the Truth of Revealed
Religion by the various ways of its Manifestation, if we had such Inspirations,
such Visions of things future and remote, etc. what Evidence could we desire
more to attest and bear witness to what we are to believe and receive, and what
Absurdities must we be cast upon, if we should venture to call those Matters of
Fact in question, which though peculiar to those Times, lose not their Force and
Evidence, because they are not in our own, nor have been for several Ages, nor
are to be again in the Christian Church.

It Is true, when a Person is himself the Recipient to whom the Revelation is
imparted, there is no absolute need of a Sign of farther Evidence to ascertain
the Truth of it to him, when if God so please the Revelation of it self may be
made as clear as it can be made by the Sign: but when the Revelation comes at
second hand to a Person, and rests on Humane Testimony, on the Ability and
Sincerity of the Relator or Person supposed to be inspired, there needs some
further Evidence, some Sign or Signs that may show the finger of God, since all
Men are Liars, Psalm 116.11. that is, may be deceived, or may deceive, may
either be so weak as to be imposed on by their own Imagination, or the
Imposture and Practices of Evil Spirits, or so wicked as under the pretense of
Revelation and Inspiration to impose upon others. In such a Case, I say, no
Man's Affirmation or Pretense is ordinarily to be heeded, any farther than he
is able to produce a Testimony as really Divine as he would have his Revelation
to be accounted. For as before said, all Revelation must have a sufficient
Evidence, and if it be a true Revelation, it will be able to produce the same.

A Revelation to another, how evidently and convincingly soever it may be
represented to him, is nothing to me, unless I am fully assured that he has had
such a Revelation: but that I cannot be assured of, unless it be by the like
immediate Revelation, or by sufficient and uncontrollable Testimony. Since the
former would be absurd, and is not to be expected at all times, it is as
reasonable for us to believe, where there are sufficient Motives of
Credibility, as if we our selves were alike actually inspired, as they to whom
the Revelation was immediately conveyed: And if I mistake not, these Motives
are to be resolved 1. Into the Veracity, Sincerity, and Credibility of the
Persons pretending to Inspiration. 2. Into the Matter or Subject of the
Revelation. And 3. into the Testimony produced for it. By the Credibility of
the Person we understand his Probity and Sincerity, his Capacity, Prudence, and
Understanding, which render him worthy of Credit, and are necessary
Qualifications of a Divine Missionary: the being a Prophet to others (as those
are to whom a Revelation is made, and that are inspired by Almighty God) so as
to teach and direct them in the stead as it were of God, whose Mouth and
Representatives they are to the People, is an Office of great Dignity, and
requires somewhat of the Divine Image, as well as Authority, to recommend them
and their Message to others. I grant in the ordinary Cases, as there were
Prophets bred up in the Schools or Nurseries of Learning and Morality, there
might be such Persons as were employed without a strict regard had to these
Qualifications, as Messengers that carried an Errand by the order of their
Superiors. I grant also that God might, and did sometimes upon occasion,
inspire such Persons as had none of these Qualifications to recommend them, as
he did Balaam. But this was no more than when he opened the Mouth of the Ass,
to rebuke the madness of that Prophet, and who was so ever-ruled by the Divine
Power, as against his will, to bless those whom he came to curse, which was so
much the more considerable, as it was the Testimony of an Enemy. But as
Revelation is a Divine Communication, and a Mark of Divine Favor, so it does
suppose in the Nature of it, that the Person so dignified is duly qualified for
it; and which is so requisite, in the Opinion of Mankind, that without it he
would rather be accounted an Impostor than a Messenger from God, and ordinarily
have no more Reverence paid to his Errand than to his Person.

What has been thus said in general, as to the Morality and Virtue of the
inspired Person, will hold for the most part as to his Prudence and
Understanding, which is so necessary a Qualification, that the Divine Election
of Persons for so peculiar a Service, does in that way either find or make them
fit.

Laying all this together, let us see what it amounts to, viz the Capacity,
Ability, and Integrity of the Persons to whom this Revelation is made, the
Unanimity and Consent of Persons remote and distant in Time and Place; the
Usefulness and Reasonableness, the Excellency, Sublimity and Perfection of the
Doctrine they taught, the Testimony given to them by such Operations and
Productions as exceed the Power of created Causes, and are wholly from the
Supreme: where these are concurring, and with one Mouth, as it were, giving in
their Evidence, we may say it is the Voice of God, and that it his Revelation
which carries upon it the conspicuous Stamp of his Authority.

I hope these few Passages out of the Writings of this Learned Man, may be a
means to establish in you a Belief that the Divine Being has given unto us a
Revelation of his Will, and that all other Revelations pretended to by such who
cannot give us the same convincing Evidence, are to be looked on as the Effect
of a Satanical Delusion, a Distempered Head, or a Knavish Combination: It Is
indeed so necessary to believe this^ that unless we do so, we shall be liable
to be carried aside with every Wind of false Doctrine, and our Faith will find
nothing certain to take hold and fix on.

You are well acquainted with a sort of Men, For your farther satisfaction you
may consult a late impartial Treatise of an Ingenious Author, in his Second
Edition of the Snake in the Grass.
I need not name them, who have amused the World as well as themselves, with a
confused System of new Principles of Religion: These, in their own Judgment,
are arrived at so happy a state as to live and sin not, they carry it seems the
Deity always about them, and will neither speak, preach nor pray, without a
Divine Mandate; nay farther, their very Words and Expressions (though why or upon
what account I know not) must be supernaturally forced on them, and they will
deliver nothing but in Raptures, Ecstasies, or by Inspirations. If we tax them
with Absurdities, want of Sense and Incoherency in their Discourse; or if we
tell them that Religion is both a Reasonable and a Divine Service, they
presently exclaim against Humane Learning, the Arts and Sciences, and misapply
that Scripture Text which they think pat to their purpose, Man's wisdom is
foolishness with God. Thus, in the Opinion of these Men, we must shake Hands
with our Reason, resign up our Intellectual Faculties, and become a sort of
Idiots or insensible Statues: and thus all Religion must be resolved into a
Spiritual Delirium or Dotage, a Senseless Stupidity, whilst the Learned Man and
the Divine, the Christian and the Philosopher, must be accounted Terms
incompatible.

Whether the Name Enthusiast, is derived from them, or any other Pretenders to
Revelation, is not material: but certainly, as they are a People, who above all
other Religionists, have abounded in Prophetic Rapts, Predictions, lamentable
Expirations, and Denunciations of Public Woes, Calamities and Judgments; so
have they for the most part (if not all) been miserably benighted and
overshadowed with Darkness: and there have been those amongst them, who when
the Cloud has been removed, and their Imaginations freed from the Obscurity,
have confessed to the Sense of a Deception, and acknowledged the Delusion.

It Is more then ordinarily remarkable it seems of Mr. M -- l that he scarce
ever speaks amongst them, but in a sort of frantic or wild transport, he is
delivering his Prophesies and Prognosticating the certainty of impending
Judgments. And indeed Mr. K -- th sometime ago took notice to me, that among
many hundreds, he had heard him utter, not one had ever come to pass. I speak
not this out of any Personal Prejudice, neither yet with a desire that any Man
should ridicule and contemn them. I have, I must needs say, too certain a
Knowledge of the Honesty, fair Dealing, and Integrity of some in that
Persuasion, to tax their Morals: And as for their Divinity, their fundamental
Hypothesis of the Divine Light, if they knew rightly to explain it, or to
account for the same, either rationally or intelligibly, I am ready to believe
it might prove both serviceable and solid. The rest of their Principles have
been delivered too loosely to pass for any Regular System, and it may be
thought designedly, least they should be found to clash and disagree. Their
late intestine Janglings, their Divisions and Fewds, with their separation into
Parties, give us reason, without the help of Revelation, to portend the
likelihood of their Extinction; and as they started up at first almost
imperceptibly, so may they very probably, within the Compass of another
Century, dwindle into nothing again. However, be that as it will, this is
certain, They are not the People they were at their first Rise; at least, the
greatest part of them: their quitting some of the Marks and Badges of their
Profession, and their gradual Conformity to the Habit and Customs of other
People, which they now seem to think indifferent, is an Argument of this; and
truly, I believe I may not err, if I take three parts of the younger People
among them to be but nominal, or to act only in compliance with the Commands of
their Governors, on which account I am induced to surmise Q -- sm may be but
little longer lived than the Supports of their several Parties and Divisions.

It is not without some Reason, that I impute your present Skepticism to the
unhappiness of Circumstances attending your Education: we do not often find
that when Men shake of their first imbibed Principles, they stick to any other:
the first remove is very commonly to infidelity; and although I cannot think you
are to be discommended for quitting what you find neither consonant to right
Reason nor true Religion, yet in this you are extremely blameable, and I hope
may live to see the danger, that from the madness and folly of some, you should
take the Measure of Divinity in general, and hereupon resolve all Religion into
a pious Fraud.

The People of other Churches, even the Church of England it self, meet
together (you say) habited fitter for the Theater than a place of Devotion;
They have their Prayer Books brought after them, they fall upon their Knees
cry, Lord have mercy on them, they are miserable Sinners: they have done those
things, etc. they proceed and say, They believe in God the Father Almighty, and
cry out Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. and when this is over (nay a great
many of them in the time of repeating their Prayers and Petitions) are viewing
each others Dress, taking notice of the Fashions, and reflecting upon each
others Deportment: the elder sort are thinking of their worldly Business, who
will be their best Chapmen, and how to dispose of their several Commodities:
and as soon as all is over, instead of retiring into their Closets, for the
sake of private Devotion or Contemplation, they enter into Consult where is the
best Wine, what Friends to visit, and to make merry, or where to walk that they
may spend their time, as they call it, in some Recreation or Diversion.

All this I must needs say is too notorious to be evaded, it is indeed as just
as miserable a Complaint, and therefore as I shall not go about to extenuate
the Errors or Impieties of these Persons, so neither does there seem to want
any other Reply than this, That Religion in it self is no more sullied by the
Scandal of pretended Devotee's or Irreligious Proselytes, than the truth of any
other Science by the Impositions and Cheats of an In-intruding Impostor. You
must consider the People you are speaking of have no more Religion than your
self, they go to Church with their Neighbors, whom they think would otherwise
take notice of, and Censure them: but for their own parts their Principles are
to choose, they never embraced any in such a manner as if they were certainly
convinced of their Truth, neither have they any thing to plead for their
sometimes frequenting a Religious Assembly, such as their Parish Church, more
than the Custom of their Country, and the Necessity that there is of Securing
their Reputation. I question not however, but you may find some sincerely
Religious, and truly affected with the Divine Service; Men whose Piety is as
conspicuous in their Lives and Actions, as in their Words and Expressions, such
whose Hearts are fervently affected with the Love of God, and whose whole
delight it is, as well as utmost endeavor to live Godlily, Righteously, and
Soberly in this present World, in order to the Securing of an Everlasting
Happiness in a World to come.

In a word, all that I have farther to say with reference to Revealed Religion,
that complete and settled Standard of Divine Faith, is this, that how diffident
soever you may be at present of its Authority, let not the same by any means
suffer from your impious Reflections: You are no ways able to disprove the
Matters of Fact, they may be true, and you have all the reason in the World to
believe they are so: However, in the end, I may securely predict this, That it
will be a much less trouble to you, your never looking into those Sacred
Volumes, than your searching them with the foolish Patrons of Irreligion, only
to furnish your self with a profane Witticism, or an impious Scoff.

The folly of such Derision (that I may give you the Sentiments of a Reverend
and Devout Bishop of Worcester's Sermon before the King upon Prove. 14.9.
Person) is very conspicuous, in considering to whom the Injury redounds, by
Men's making themselves so pleasant with their Sins. Do they think by their rude
Attempts to dethrone the Majesty of Heaven, or by standing at the greatest
Defiance to make Him willing to come to Terms of Composition with them? Do they
hope to slip beyond the Bounds of his Power, by falling into Nothing when they
dye? or to sue out Prohibitions in the Court of Heaven to hinder the Effects of
Justice there? Do they design to out-wit infinite Wisdom, or to find such Flaws
in God's Government of the World, that he shall be content to let them go
unpunished? All which Imaginations are alike vain and foolish, and only show
how easily Men's Wickedness baffles their Reason, and makes them rather hope and
wish for the most impossible things, than believe they shall ever be punished
for their Impieties.

It is well (says the same Judicious Man) in the Age we live, that we have the
Judgment of former Ages to appeal to, and of those Persons in them whose
Reputation for Wisdom is yet unquestionable, otherwise we might be born down by
that Spiteful Enemy to all Virtue and Goodness, the Impudence of such, who it
is hard to say, whether they show it more in committing Sin, or in defending
it: Men, whose Manners are so bad, that scarce any thing can be imagined worse,
unless it be the Wit with which they use to excuse them: Such who take the
Measure of Man's Perfections downwards, and the nearer they approach to Beasts,
the more they think themselves to act like Men. No wonder that among such as
these the Differences of Good and Evil be laughed at, and no Sin thought so
unpardonable as thinking there is any at all: the utmost these Men will allow
in the Description of Sin, is, That it is a thing that some live by declaiming
against, and others cannot live without the practice of. But is the Chair of
Scorners at last proved the only Chair of Infallibility? Must those be the
Standard of Mankind, who seem to have little lest of Humane Nature, but
laughter and the shape of Men? Do they think that we are all become such Fools
to take Scoffs for Arguments, and Railery for Demonstration? He knows nothing
at all of Goodness that knows not that it is much easier to laugh at than to
practice it; and it were worth the while to make a mock at Sin, if the doing so
would make nothing of it: but the Nature of things does not vary with the
Humors of Men: Sin becomes not at all the less dangerous, because some Men
have so little Wit to think it so; nor Religion the less excellent and
advantageous to the World, because the greatest Enemies of that are so much to
themselves too, that they have learnt to despise it, but although that scorns to
be defended by such Weapons whereby her Enemies assault her (nothing more
unbecoming the Majesty of Religion, than to make it self cheap by making others
laugh) yet if they can but obtain so much of themselves, as to attend with
patience to what is serious, there may be yet a possibility of persuading them
that no Fools are so great as those who laugh themselves into Misery, and none
so certainly do so as those who make a mock at Sin.

vid. Bentlys first Sermon. at Mr. Boyle's Lecture.
It may be not unlikely thought by some the Interest of Mankind, that there
should be no Heaven at all, because the Labor to acquire it, is more worth
than the Purchase, God Almighty, if there be one, having much over-valued the
Blessings of his Presence; so that upon a fair Estimation, it is a greater
Advantage to take ones Swinge in Sensuality, and have a glut of Voluptuousness
in this Life, freely resigning all Pretenses to Future Happiness, which when a
Man is once extinguished by Death, he cannot be supposed either to want or
desire, than to be tied up by Commandments and Rules so thwart and contrary to
Flesh and Blood, and refuse the Satisfaction of Natural Desires. This indeed is
the true Language of Atheism, and the Cause of it too; were not this at the
bottom, no Man in his Wits could contemn and ridicule the Expectation of
Immortality; and yet I may be bold to say, it is a plain Instance of the Foily
of those Men, who whilst they repudiate all Title to the Kingdom of Heaven,
merely for the present pleasure of Body, and their boasted Tranquillity of Mind,
besides the extreme Madness in running such a desperate hazard after Death,
they unwittingly deprive themselves here of that very Pleasure and Tranquillity
they seek for, there being nothing more certain than this, that Religion it
self gives us the greatest Delights and Advantages even in this Life also, though
there should prove in the Event to be no Resurrection to another: Prove. 3.17.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. But the truth
of our future Existence has had the Attestation of the Learned and Judicious in
all Parts of the World. I have elsewhere taken notice of it, and must again
inculcate to you, That Religion is somewhat more than a childish unaccountable
Fear of any pretended invisible Power, and that the Terrors it strikes us with
are vastly different from those Tales about Specters, which do at some times
frighten pusillanimous Minds: those that do arise from our knowledge of having
offended the Divine Being, or from the just fear of his Anger and Indignation,
are such as do not only disturb some small Pretenders and puny Novices, but do
approach even the profoundest Rabbi's, or Masters of Atheism, it being well
known both from Ancient and Modern Experience, that the very, boldest of them,
out of their Debauches and Company, when they chance to be surprised with
Solitude or Sickness, are the most suspicious, timorous, and despondent
Wretches in the World: and the boasted happy Atheist in the indolence of the
Body, and an undisturbed Calm and Serenity of Mind, is altogether as rare a
Creature as the Vir Sapiens was amongst the Stoics, whom they often met with
in Idea and Description, in Harangues and in Books, but freely owned that he
never had or was likely to Exist actually in Nature. Believe me, my good
Friend, here is more in this than Prepossession of Fancy or Disease of
Imagination; and if you object that had we not been told of these things by
designing Men, See the Discourse of Rational and Irrational Souls.
we should never have thought on them our selves; the Answer is ready, who told
these designing Men? if they thought of these things, without being told, why
may not others do so too? It is manifest enough to every Man, that his Soul,
whilst in the Body, is capable to retire it self from Corporeal Images, and to
be busy with Idea's of another Nature, which no Corporeal Impression could
possibly make; and hence also it is as clear, that our Souls may operate and be
capable of Pleasure and Pain when separated from Body. For if the Soul were no
more than a Crasis of the Body, it would be capable of no other Distemper than
what arises from the Compression or Dilatation of Matter, or from the
Obstruction and Turgescency of Humors. Since therefore we find it subject to
Maladies, which spring merely from Moral Causes, and which are no more curable
by the Prescripts of Physicians, than the Stone or Gout are to be removed by a
Lecture in Philosophy, we have sufficient Cause to believe it of an Incorporeal
Nature. Farther, The Essences of Things are best known by their Operations, and
the best guess we can make of the Nature and Condition of Beings, is from the
Quality of their Actions, while therefore by contemplating our selves, we find
that we do elicite Actions, which do exceed the Power of Matter, and the most
subtle Motion of Corporeal Particles, we have all imaginable ground to think
that we are possessed of a Principle Immaterial as well as Intellectual.

Vide Interest of Reason in Religion.
He who considers that there is not one perfect Organ in the Humane Body, but
the Parallel of it is to be met with in the noblest sort of brute Animals, and
yet that there are diverse Operations performed by Men, that no Beast whatever
is capable of doing the like, must need apprehend that the Rational Soul is not
a Corporeal Faculty, nor a Contexture of Material Parts. To prove this, we have
already instanced in the Acts of Intellection; viz. 1. The Acts of simple
Apprehension. 2. Acts of Judgment. 3. Acts of Ratiocination. 4. Acts of
Reflection. 5. Acts of Correcting the Errors and Mistakes of the Imagination.
And lastly, Acts of Volition, or those whereby we choose and refuse by a
Self-determinating Power, according as things are estimated, remaining exempt
from all Coaction and Necessitation by the Influence of any Principle foreign
to it. All these are impossible to Matter, because that acts always according
to the swing of Irresistible Motion; nor can it be courted or solicited to Rest
when under the forcible Impulse of a stronger Movent. So that whatever
insensibility you may fancy of a Soul divested of Corporeal Organs, you will
experience, that as the Body is unconcerned in any thing but Sensation, there
will remain a Power of Exerting those Superior Acts and Faculties which have
no relation thereunto, and consequently a Capacity to suffer Pain or Pleasure,
the Rewards and Punishments of a well or ill spent Life, for it is not Sense
but Reflection that wounds the Conscience: Sense, it is true, may divert the
Pain, but can never make it; and when Death puts an end to sensible Diversions,
the never-dying Worm may lash without control. In fine, if bad Men were sure
to undergo no other Pains or Horrors, and if the good were sure to receive no
more Joys or Pleasures till the Resurrection, than proceed out of the Heaven or
Hell they carry with them, and from the certain and constant Expectations of
another, that might be sufficient, if well considered, to deter Men from Vice,
and to encourage them to Righteousness: but the Scriptures intimate more, and
plainly inform us, that the Souls of bad Men are immediately upon Death
translated to a place of Torment, and the Souls of the Good to a place of Joy
and Happiness; whether those Places are what we generally understand by Heaven
and Hell, or whether or no the Completion of our Happiness or Misery shall
precede the ultimate Judgment, will not certainly be determined till we make
the Experiment.

Thus Sir, having given you my own, together with the more weighty Opinions of
other Men, as to the Business of Religion, I hope the Light set up in your
Understanding will put you upon Embracing what upon a serious attention to the
same you find unquestionable. I am far from insinuating the Necessity of an
implicit Faith, or persuading you to shut your Eyes, and leave the rest to
your Guide: God Almighty has made you a reasonable Creature, and if you make a
right use of that Divine Prerogative, you need not fear a secure Passage into
the Harbor of solid Happiness. What pains soever some may take absolutely to
exclude Reason from having any thing to do in Divinity, or however lightly they
may esteem it, this will be found certain, that we have no surer Pilot when we
first set out, to keep us from the Rocks of Atheism on the one side, and from
Superstition, Polytheism, and Idolatry on the other: or indeed any other
Director to secure us from making Shipwreck of our Faith, than the pure Acts of
our unprejudiced Understandings, which I call right Reason.

A Superficial Knowledge, may raise some unhappy Doubts, and a light
smattering, especially in some kinds of Philosophy, may draw us into the danger
of Infidelity, with respect to our Immortality: but all this we may be freed
from by the Exercise of a true Judgment, and a solid Enquiry in Physics, or
after the Nature and true Causes of Things, will with no other difficulty more
than serious attention and application help us to dispel those Errors of our
Intellects.

It is not enough what some Men think, that a Man is able to account for some
of the Appearances in Nature, by the Aristotelian Doctrine of Qualities and
Forms, or the Cartesian of Geometrick Principles, and then in a foolish
Exultation to cry out Inveni, or boast that there is nothing so abstruse, but
will admit of a Mechanic Explanation. To give an Instance, It Is not sufficient
that out of a Lecture upon the Optics, we explicate the manner of Vision, by
saying that See Sir Samuel Morland's Urim of Conscience
the Figure and Color of a visible Object make the Base of an imaginary Cone,
which is composed of a multitude of visual Rays, and instantly conveyed through
a lucid Medium to the Superficies of the Beholders Eye, where a Section of the
Apex of that Cone is refracted by the several Waters and Tunics, and the Figure
of the said Object, being inverted by the Crystalline Humor, is in the same
posture lodged in the Retina, from whence it is conveyed into the common
Sensory. Again, It suffices not that in hearing we judge that different
Percussions do beget infinite Spheric Figures of Aerial Motions, which every
where spread themselves till they meet with some harder Body that makes
resistance, which suppose to be the Ear, in the Cavity of which the foresaid
Figures of Aerial Motions, suffer several reverberations, and then make a
percussion upon the Tympanum or Drum (a nervous and pellucid Membrance of
exquisite Sense) and from thence are conveyed into the Brain. However
consentaneous these Conjectures may be to the Truth, they are all, I say, too
short of Satisfactory or Complete Accounts: there are yet insuperable
Difficulties behind, and we must expect perpetual Disputes about the Matter and
Modification, both of the visible and audible Species: But admitting these also
were fairly decided, that Light, Colors and Images are the same Substance,
that the Rays which cause the visible Species, are either certain Particles or
Effluvia's darted from a lucid Body, repercussed in their going forth, and
reflected variously here and there, according to Gassendus, or that these
Particles beaming forth from the same lucid Body, move other Particles of a
Nitro-sulphureous Quality implanted in the Air, and as it were by inkindling
them render them luminous, and these at length others, and that so a diffusion
on every side of Light or Images is propagated by a certain Undulation, which
is the more probable Opinion, if we may credit Dr. Willis. Farther, Admitting
in the Case of Hearing, that the audible Species or Sonorisick Particles are a
kind of Saline little Bodies, after the manner described, or some other way
stirred up into act for the production of Sound: in a word, admitting the rest
of the Senses, the Touch, the Smell and Taste, and all other Phenomenon
relating to the Humane Body, might after some such manmer be explored by the
Corpuscular Philosophy; yet all this will not direct us to a knowledge of the
Substance and Condition of our own Souls, the Speculations of this Nature may
indeed inform us that the Being which exerts such admirable Powers, and judges
so exquisitely of each of these Sensations, must it self be independent both of
Matter and Mechanism. How then is it possible for any Man, without a wilful
blindness or debauch of his Understanding, when he has made this Enquiry, and
satisfied himself in the wonderful and divine Contrivance of Structure in the
several Organs destinated for so many Functions: how is it, I say, that this
should incline a Man to Atheism, unless, contrary to the Dictates of his own
Conscience, he were resolved that way: or how can we conceive a reasonable
Creature so strangely degenerate from the rest of Mankind, as to imagine where
there can be nothing more conspicuous than the Workmanship of a most powerful
and most intelligent Being, that the same at first proceeded either from no
Cause at all, or one no better, viz. Chance or Fortune. So that to deal freely,
I can do no less than believe, with a Modern Philosopher, That whoever does
profess Philosophy, and thinks not rightly of God, may be judged not only to
have shaken hands with Religion, but with his Reason also, and that he has at
once put off Philosophy as well as Christianity. The sum of this Argument lies
here, That no Man can indeed scarce Reason at all, or to be sure cannot Reason
rightly and be Irreligious: On the other hand, to be truly and indeed Religious
is to be truly Reasonable: So that to put the Cause upon this Issue, let us
examine what it is that Right Reason teaches us, whether it be to do Good or
Evil: Let us consider whether it point out unto us a direct and sure way to
future Happiness, or engage us in the Paths that lead to Destruction. For if in
effect it be Reason that imprints upon our Minds any Notion of Irreligion, or
that in any manner inclines us to Vice, we ought undoubtedly to reject it
without the least Hesitation: but if on the contrary it appear, that true
Reason be the only Foundation both of true Piety and real Virtue, and that any
Pretense, either to the one or to the other, not built on Rational Principles,
may in truth be no other than the Effect of Superstition or Hypocrisy, th^n
certainly it is our Duty to use our Reason as well in Matters of Religion as in
any thing else. It is this which must direct us in our Search of Holy
Scriptures; it is this must guide us in our Enquiry after the Founder of the
Christian Religion; and when by our Reason we are persuaded of the Authority of
the Sacred Writings, and that the Penmen thereof were Supernaturally Inspired,
which as is intimated before, we have abundant Reason to believe, we must then
let our Faith take place, and not only assent unto those things which we can
account for, but even of those also, which though not contrary to, are above our
Reason, and must be acknowledged to surmount our Apprehension.

The Belief of a God, of his Providence, and of future Rewards and Punishments,
is that Faith which is the true and only Foundation of all Religion, but the
Foundation of that Faith lies in the Perception we have of the Truth of those
Things, by that general Light or Capacity of discerning which is imparted to
all Mankind.

All the Certainty, says the pious Father Malebranch, which we can have in
Matters of Faith, depends upon that Knowledge which we have by reason of the
Existence of a God, and thus we see one inestimable Advantage derived to us by
the right use of our Reason, and a powerful Argument in favor of this Opinion,
That it is by Reason only we are made capable to lay the first Foundation of
all Religion, which is the certain Knowledge of the Existence of the Divine
Being.

If you expect any Definition or Explication of this word Reason, I may answer
with a very Ingenious In his Treatise of Humane Reason.
Man, That by Reason, is to be understood that steady, uniform Light that
shines in the Minds of all Men; that Divine Touchstone or Test by which all Men
are enabled (so far I mean as they are able) to discern the Congruity and
Incongruity of Propositions, and thereupon to pronounce them true or false.

There are indeed different degrees of Clearness in the Intellectual Perception
of different Men, occasioned by the different Degrees of Attention in
themselves, and the different Representation of Things from without; but the
Light by which all things are discerned, is universally one and the same.

The Uniformity of this Light is the ground of all Intellectual Communication
between Man and Man: for if different Men saw always the same things in
different Lights, it would be impossible for one Man, by any Representation
whatsoever, to raise the same Conceptions in another Man's Mind that he has in
his own; and therefore it is that whatever extraordinary Illumination some Men
may enjoy, it can only be of authority and useful to themselves; or at most, it
can be only so far useful and of authority to others, as those that enjoy it
are able to give extraordinary proof of it.

All Matters of Religion, even as all other Affairs of Humane Life, are to be
handled by Men (in reference to one another) in methods conformable to the
Universal and Uniform Light of all Mankind.

By Religion I understand the Belief of the Existence of a God, and the sense
and practice of those Duties that result from the Knowledge we have of Him, of
our Selves, and of the Relation we stand in to Him, and to our fellow
Creatures. The Existence of a God is demonstrable from the Necessity of
admitting some first Cause of all Things; whatsoever that Cause be, I call it
God: and the Idea that we have of this powerful ^^cing, arises from the
Contemplation of those innumerable Perfections that we discern in the Things
that are: for he that gave those Perfections unto these Things, must needs have
an inexhaustable Fountain of Perfection in Himself. By the Being then of God, I
mean the first Principle of all Things, He that made all Things what they are,
and endowed them with all their different Powers and Virtues, from whence I
conclude him to be a Being absolutely perfect. My own Existence is a
Self-evident Principle: No Reflection can give unto a Philosopher any greater
Assurance of his own Existence, than the intimate Persuasion that every Plowman
has of his without Study or Meditation. Now the Idea that Men have of
themselves is twofold, Material and Immaterial: The Material part of Man is his
Body, which is evidently subject to the general Laws of Matter, and liable to
all the Mutations that are incident to other Material Beings. The Immaterial
part is his Mind, which discovers it self in his Capacity of Thinking and
Reasoning: for Thought exceeds the power of Matter, that therefore which
thinks, viz. the Mind or Soul of Man, is not material, and by consequence not
subject to the Laws of Matter, nor liable to the Mutations that are incident to
Matter, but capable of a Subsistence, notwithstanding any Alteration or
Dissolution that shall happen to the parts of his Body.

This Immateriality and Immortality of the Soul, has been understood and
believed by the generality of Heathen Philosophers in consequence of their own
Reflections and Ratiocinations, long before the Evidence that has been since
given of it unto Mankind by the Revelation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: And
therefore the Belief that the ancient Philosophers had of the Soul's
Immortality, is an undeniable proof that it is a Notion discoverable by the
Light of Nature, because they who had no other Light could not otherways have
discovered it.

The Relation that Men stand in toward one another, is chiefly observable in
the mutual Necessity that all Men have of one another Assistance and Succor;
it being hardly possible for any Man to subsist at all, but absolutely
impossible to subsist comfortably without borrowing Help from others.

These are the Circumstances in which Mankind is born into the World, and we
are placed in these Circumstances by God Almighty, the Universal Cause and
Principle of all Things: so that whatsoever we are led unto by the Necessity of
these Circumstances, is in effect a Duty imposed on us by the Eternal and
Unalterable Law of God: toward whom we stand first related as to a Benefactor,
from whom we have received our Being, together with our present Enjoyments, and
our Capacity of any farther Enjoyment whatsoever. Next as to a Lawgiver or
Governor, by whom we are obliged to the observance of certain Rules or
Ordinances unto which he has subjected us.

If we consider singly the Idea that we have of our own Being, the Rule that
Results from thence for our Conduct, is, That we must not degenerate from the
Dignity of our Nature, but must therefore bridle and govern all the Appetites
and Passions that arise from our Corporeal Constitutions, according to the
genuine Dictates of those nobler Faculties of Ratiocination and Judgment
wherewith our Maker has endowed our Minds. If we consider the Relation that we
stand in toward one another, the Law of God obliges us indespensably to Truth,
Equity, Charity, Benevolence, and to every thing which tends to the Settlement
of Societies, or to the general Welfare of Mankind; for every particular Man's
greatest Interest being involved in the Interest of the whole, the Observance
of such Things, as tend to the general Good, is every particular Man's Duty,
and is not to be transgrest for the sake of any lesser or private Advantage.

If we consider the Relation that we stand in toward God, his Law requires our
Acknowledgment, Gratitude, Love, Dependence, Submission, or in one word, our
humblest Adoration of his Infinite Perfections. The Observance of these Rules
is a Duty Incumbent upon Mankind by the said Law of God; the breach of any of
them is a breach of God's Law, an Offense against the Lawmakers, or a Sin. Laws
are of no vigor unless enforced by Rewards and Punishments, which are
therefore to be proportioned to the Nature and Degree of the Observance and
Transgression of the Laws. The Observance and Transgression of God's Laws by
M^n (whose Bodily Actions depend upon the inward Motions of his Mind) consist
not in any Machinal Acts of the Body, but in the voluntary Motions and
Intentions of the Mind; and therefore the Rewards or Punishments of such
Observance and Transgression are chiefly to be conferred or inflicted upon the
Mind or Soul of Man, and that after the full Course of his Actions, either good
or bad, is accomplished, which is to say, in the future state of the Soul after
its Separation from the Body.

In the Belief and Sense of these general Truths, and in the Practice of the
Duties that result from them, according to their full Extent and Tendency,
consists all true Religion: Whatsoever else is introduced into any Religion,
either National or Practical, I say, whatever does not necessarily flow from
some of these Branches, or tend to enforce the Observance of them, is no
essential part of true Religion, but rather the product of Design and Folly.

Every Man then is answerable unto God, the Supreme Lawgiver, for his own
particular Conduct in every Branch of these Duties, as they relate either to
God, to his Neighbor, or to himself.

This I take to be the pure Language of Impartial Reason, unassisted by
Revelation; and they seem indeed to be the most Natural Inferences which can be
drawn from truly Rational Propositions: whatever false Deductions or
Conclusions some Men's false Judgments have invented for the support of their
wretched Cause, the Fallacy is soon detected, and a stricter Inquisition will
soon lay open the grand Absurdities of their mischievous Opinions. But truly
it is plain enough, though some Men may be reputed a sort of Reasoning Atheists,
yet the much greater part of them are Infidels by Imitation, and so far from
being able to oppose the Truth of the Divine Being, the Certainty of Revealed
Religion, or their own Immortality, that they scarce ever gave themselves time
to consider seriously the meaning of the Words. These have no quarrel with
Religion on the Account of its Truths, not being firmly enough established; but
their Pique proceeds from hence, that they fear it will lay them under a
Necessity of putting a Check to their Exorbitant Desires, and hinder them in
the Pursuit of their Vicious Inclinations.

To Conclude, If after all that can be said, however Rational or true, you will
notwithstanding go about to persuade your self that all is but a mere Dream or
Imposture, that there is no such Excellent Being as is supposed to have Created
and to Preserve us, See Bently's first Sermon. at Mr. Boyle's Lecture.
but that all about us is dark, senseless Matter, driven on by the blind Impulse
of Fatality, that Men at first sprung up out of the Slime of the Earth of their
own accord, and that all their Thoughts, and the whole of what they call Soul,
are only various Action and Repercussion of small Particles of Matter kept a
while moving by some Mechanism or Clock-work, which finally ceases and perishes
by Death. If contrary to the Evidence in your own Understanding, you can listen
with Complacency to these Horrid Suggestions, if you can willingly and with Joy
let go your Hopes of another Life, and entertain the Thoughts of Perdition with
Triumph and Exultation: If you can glory in debasing and villanising the rest
of Mandind to the Condition of Brute Beasts, and permit your Folly to baffle
all Arguments, to be proof against the clearest or most perspicuous
Demonstration: what would you have us think better or more favorably than
this, that you resolve to carry your Atheism with you to the Grave, and that
the Infernal Horror and Despair must be alone sufficient to Rectify your
Mistake, or to Convince you of your Error.

I have nothing more in this, but to intimate my Request to you, that you would
consider what has been said, with that Attention which becomes the Subject; and
if you can object nothing against the Fundamental Parts of the Discourse, let
not the Arguments, here borrowed, by any means suffer from any disorderly
Management committed by

London, Febr. 20. 1691. Yours, etc.

The Appendix. Concerning the Corruption of Humane Nature, and the Necessity of
Divine Grace, etc. To Mr. --
THere remains, my Friend, as a necessary Suppliment to what has been so lately
delivered, that we make a short Enquiry into the Nature of the Divine Grace; I
mean, that we consider whether or no there is an absolute Necessity of any
Extraordinary or Supernatural Accession of Aid or Assistance to the Security
and Confirmation of our Faith and Practice, or if with Pelagius, we are to
conceive our selves able, by the natural Powers of our own Souls, or the free
Exertion of our Rational Faculties (exclusive of this extraordinary
Cooperation) to obtain the same, and that Grace (according to this Heretical
Opinion) consists only in the free Pardon of our Sins through the Mediator, and
the Doctrine and Persuasions only to a Holy Life, for the time to come, with
God's ordinary Concurrence.

If the former of these Opinions be true, that there is somewhat necessary
which is independent on the Powers of our own Souls, we may be able to satisfy
our selves, in that it is possible to give credit to the Truths of Religion,
and yet at the same time to neglect their Practice; but if the latter be the
most consonant to the Truth, it will be then, as I imagine, scarce conceivable
that any Man, who is satisfied in the Verity of Religion, should at the same
time be negligent or remiss in the performance of what his Faith requires, or
deflect out of the Paths which he knows will conduct him to his greatest
Happiness. At this rate, we must think every Man who believes does practice
accordingly, and that whatever Verbal Confessions we may meet with of their
Creeds, yet if they act not steddily in conformity to the same, we are to
suppose there is a certain Diffidence intermixed with their Faith, a sort of
Disbelief, or at the least, a distrust of the Certainty of Religious Truths,
which they think may be no more than empty Notions.

But this Opinion seems so directly opposite both to right Reason and the
Experience of Mankind, that to admit it we must Exclude the whole Creation from
any just Claim to future Happiness, and take for granted that there never was
such a Thing as a Religious Man, or a true Believer in the World. On the
contrary, as we have no reason to question, but that there have been vast
numbers, both of Men and Women, who have been as convincingly satisfied of the
Truth of the Supreme Being, and their Soul's Incorruptibility, as of any thing
whatever: so may we safely assert, that there never was any one of these, who
has not at certain times been an actual Transgresor, or a Trespasser against
his Faith. And farther, that in whatever State of Purity the first Man was
created, yet since the Lapse or Degeneracy of Humane Nature from its Primitive
Perfection, there is no Man able, without the Concurrence of this (...), or
Divinium aliquid we are treating of, to live in a real Contempt of the present
World, or to disregard its manifold Temptations.

It is besides my Intention to make a scrutinous Enquiry, How the first Man
came to fall from Original Righteousness, or how this Degeneracy comes to be
derived from him to his Posterity. It seems hard indeed to persuade our selves
that the Rational Soul is immediately contaminated with this Sin, but is so
necessarily, so soon as we become capable of sinning: so that according to a
right Notion of the Matter, the Damage we have sustained proceeds from our
first Parents unhappy Forfeiture of Immortality; since which it is impossible,
without Divine Assistance, for Mankind, thus propagated in the constant Methods
of Nature, to secure themselves from Falling, and from rendering themselves
obnoxious to a Transgression of the Laws of God.

I know the Atheist does here wonderfully pride himself, in having found out an
Objection impossible to be resolved by our finite Understandings: For, says
he, if the Grace of God be sufficient for all Men, and that the Cooperation of
Man's Will to sufficient Grace, is to be conceived the Cause of his Election,
why did not God so constit^te Mankind, as that all should Cooperate to this
sufficient Grace, and consequently be Elected to Everlasting Bliss? To this I
say, when they have met with no other Reply, than that such was God's Eternal
Will, they presently attack the Divine Being, and in their own Conceits
immediately displace him from his Throne and Government.

It Is here likewise that the Deist struts and exalts the lucky hit of his
Fancy, See the Oracles of Reason, p. 89.
thinking himself more knowing than the whole World besides, in that he has now
found out the Juggle, as he calls it, of Christianity. It Is first, says he,
unnecessary that there should be a Mediator, the Mercy of God being sufficient
for his Justice. 2dly, God must appoint this Mediator, and so was reconciled to
the World before. And 3dly, a Mediator derogates from God's Infinite Mercy
equally, as an Image does from his Spirituality. And thus the mighty Monster
lays his Plot against the Redemption of Mankind, looks big upon the
Contrivance, and doubts not but with these three strokes he does the
Christian's Business. His next Onset is upon our Immortality, or Separate
Existence of the Soul, which he gradually lessens by insinuating that Brutes
are ejusdem Rationis Participantes, or endowed with the same Reason as Man,
though not altogether in the same degree. Indeed it is great pity that those who
are debasing Mankind at this ridiculous rate, should be looked upon otherwise
than the more sensible Beasts, or be defined otherwise than as a kind of two
legged Animals without Feathers. Their last Assault is against Heaven it self,
or the Divine Being, whom they first seek to discredit by the multitude of
anomalous Accidents which they say could never come to pass if an Intelligent
Being were the Director; their Conclusion (though perhaps not so plain) is this,
that we need believe nothing but what we our selves are able to account for,
which in other words is to believe our own Understandings to be infinite, and
that is to believe we are so many Gods our selves.

Whoever looks upon our Modern Deism any otherwise than disguised Atheism, will
find himself deceived: for my own part I never yet heard of any one of them
that could forbear, at one time or other, giving us to understand that he was
the modester sort of Infidel; and whatever advantage it may be to their
Principles, this is certain, that there is scarce a Profane, Irreligious Person
or Libertine about the Town, who pretends not to be a very devout Deist.

As to their wild Ravings against the Christian Religion, we have no occasion
to reply other ways than this; That had Christianity been all transacted behind
the Curtain, or in the Clouds; had its Founder been as invisible as the King of
the Pharies; or were the History of Christ no better attested than those of the
Mythologists, who talk of once upon a time, and the Land of Utopia, we should
then, I say, have no small grounds for our Hesitation: but since we find it
otherwise, and that all was acted openly at Noonday, before the Face of the
Multitude; since not only the Names of Christ and his Apostles, but their Lives
and stupendous Actions, together with a Narrative of their Sufferings and
Deaths, are delivered to us by as undoubted Testimony as it is possible for any
other Matters of Fact to be, and stand upon perpetual Record: their Adversaries
will be looked upon as a brainsick People, and no Man in his Wits will think
this Religion soiled, till it is unquestionably proved, that there never were
such Persons on the Earth as our Savior and his Disciples; or that they never
performed those works of which it is reported they were the Authors; till they
can do this, it signifies nothing at all that they cannot reconcile the want of
a Mediator, or the Mystery of Man's Redemption by the Sufferings of Christ, to
their own crack-brain'd Fancies, or to their own Notions of the Divine
Attributes. It Is generally observed, that by an immoderate Curiosity in
searching after the Divine Arcana, instead of inlightening others, Men do but
stagger and confound themselves; which if they righ^ly considered the certain
Limits of their own Capacities, they might with less difficulty be dehorted
from this dangerous Extravagance, and calmly acquiesce in the revealed Will of
God. But to return to the present Corruption of our Natures, and the Necessity
of Divine Assistance to concur with our own Natural Power, we have an
intelligible account of the former in one of the Articles of the Church of
England, where it is said that Sin, viz. Original, is the Fault and Corruption
of the Nature of every Man that naturally is engendered of the Offspring of
Adam; whereby Man is far removed from his first Righteousness, and is of his
own Nature inclined to evil: so that the Flesh lusts always contrary to the
Spirit, and in every Person born into this world, deserves the Divine
Indignation; and this Natural Infection does remain even in them that are
Regenerate, whereby the Lust of the Flesh, called in Greek (...), which some
expound the Wisdom, some the Affection, some Sensuality, others the desire of
the Flesh, is not subject to the Law of God.

The Learned Orator Dr. In his Sermon. on Phil. 3.18.
Allestry speaks to this purpose upon this Argument: Our Savior (says he)
suffered on the Tree, that we might be renewed into that Constitution, which
the Tree of Knowledge did disorder. Before Man eat of that, his lower Soul was
in perfect Subordination to his Mind, and every Motion of his Appetite did
attend the Dictates of his Reason, and obey them with that resignation or ready
willingness, with which our outward Faculties do execute the Will's Commands:
then any thing, however grateful to the Senses, was no otherwise desired than
a^ it served to the regular and proper ends and uses of his making: there was a
rational harmony in the tendencies of all his parts, and that directed and
modulated by the Rules and Hand of God that made them; in fine th^^, Grace was
Nature, and Virtue Constitution.

Now to reduce us to this state, as near as possible, is the Business of
Religion; but this it can in no degree effect, See the Discourse of Rational
and Irrational Souls, by M.S.
but as it does again establish the Subordination of the Sensual to the
reasonable part within us: that is, till by denying Satisfaction to the
Appetite (which is now irregular and disorderly in its desires) we have taught
it how to want them, and to be content without them, and by that means have
subdued its Inclinations.

According to this great Man, the Corruption of our Nature does not lie in the
Mind, but only in the lower Soul; and Regeneration is no more than the reducing
that lower Soul to obedience to its superior, the Mind: but because this plain
Point has been made a mighty Mystery by some People, I shall yet farther
explain it. When Man by his Fall had incurred the Penalty of Death, and became
a Mortal Creature, he thereby ushered in Diseases and Infirmities, the
Forerunners of Death and Dissolution, and therefore propagated unequal
Mixtures and Constitutions, which naturally, according to the prevailing part
of the Mixture, raises powerful and pressing Lusts and Passions, which not only
make violent and repeated storms upon Reason, but they also interrupt her
Operations in other Duties, by the frequent touches of the Animal Spirits, upon
that Image in the Brain of the Beloved Action, and intrudes it among our
Thoughts whether we will or no: and for this cause (though in other things we are
reasoning Men) when the Tender is touched, we can scarce understand a plain
Conclusion from plain Premises; till the gratifying of the prevailing Lusts has
wasted many of our sensible Spirits, and then Reason freed from Violence puts
on Shame and Remorse for her Defeat: but no sooner is Nature recruited than
Reason is pressed to forget her Repentance. And this is the best of our
degenerate Condition: for in most Men, either through the want, or the
abundance, or irregular Motions of the Animal Spirits, the reasoning Faculty is
generally obstructed, and they reason weakly in every thing: nay, sometimes
this power is quite blockt up, and some Men become distracted, others mere
Changlings. But besides that, in the best of us the Reasoning Power is often
obstructed, and has forcible Inclinations to deal with: the work of Reason in
general, is by the first Apostasy abundantly increased: She must maintain
Patience and Submission under Diseases, Pains, Infirmities, Poverty, Loss of
Parents, Husbands, Children and Friends: She must maintain Charity and Humility
in the Rich and Wise, command Visits to the Sick, Assistance to the Prisoner,
Fatherless and Widows: but in the State of Innocence there were no Objects for
the Exercise of these and many more Virtues, nor no Provocations to the
contrary Vices: all these are the Natural Consequences of Dust thou art, and to
Dust thou shall return; and of that Curse which was the Consequence of Man's
Transgression. It is here that we see the Reason why the first Covenant was
peremptory, The day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye, because Man was
blessed with an ability to keep his Covenant with God: but through the
greatness of Mercy in the Second, we are promised the assistance of the Holy
Spirit, and when we fall (as the best of us must with our utmost care) God is
pleased to accept of our Repentance, knowing it impossible for Man, under his
present Circumstances, and the manner of his Multiplication, to keep himself
free from Sin. To be short, in the State of Innocence Constitutions were
regular, and therefore Reason was strong and uninterrupted in her Operations,
and her Work was short and easy; but by the Apostasy they became irregular,
the strength of Reason was impaired, her Operations interrupted, and variety of
hard Works, which were not in the primitive State, are now become our
Reasonable Service.

I must confess my self better pleased with this account, than many others I
have met with, and chiefly for its placing the Corruption of our Nature in the
sensitive or inferior Soul: for notwithstanding Carts and his Followers have
disallowed the Division, and will by no means comply that there should be any
more than one and the same Soul, and that those Intestine Conflicts between the
Flesh and Spirit, which we do all at sometimes experience, do arise only from a
determination of the Spirits by the Will one way, and from another
determination of them by the Corporeal Appetite, yet the Explanation elsewhere
given, as it is more consistent with holy Writ, so it is likewise with the
Belief of the greater number of Learned Men, who have solidly established this
Doctrine of a Duality of Souls in every individual Man. But leaving this, we
must all grant him to be a Creature endowed with Reason, and supposing him to
be such, it will be now worth the Enquiry how it comes to pass that he should
be so very incident to Failings, and to act even against the clearest and most
demonstrative Reason. There have been several Attempts made to explain this
Matter, by several Men: some of which will have the Cause to proceed from
certain Errors or Mistakes in Judgment, for, say they, since it is impossible
that Man, as he is endowed with Reason, should appetere Malum, qua Malum,
whatever he makes choice of, though in it self never so great an Evil, must be
offered to his Appetite under the Disguise of some certain good of which he
believes himself to stand in need: and thus, through the want of due
Consideration, or Errors of our Understanding, the Bonum apparens takes place
of the Bonum reale; and thus likewise it happens that the Bonum vicinum puts in
before the Bonum remotum.

The Understanding, Mr. Lock on the other side is of opinion, that it is
neither an appearing Good, nor yet the greatest positive Good, but always some
pressing and preva^^^ng Uneasiness that Influences our Action^. It seems (says
Lock's Essay of Humane Understanding.
he) so stablisht and settled a Maxim by the general Consent of Mankind, that
Good, or the greater Good determines our Wills: that I do not at all wonder,
that when I first published my Thoughts upon this Subject, I took it for
granted: and I imagine, that by a great many I shall be thought more excusable
for having then done so, than that now I have ventured to recede from so
received an Opinion, but yet upon a stricter Enquiry I am forced to conclude,
that Good, even the greatest Good, though apprehended and acknowledged to be so,
does not determine the Will, until our desire proportionally raised to it,
makes us uneasy in the want of it.

Convince a Man never so much, that Plenty has its Advantages above Poverty;
make him see and own that the handsome Conveniences of Life are better than
nasty Penury; yet as long as he is content with the latter, and finds no
uneasiness in it, he moves not, his Will is never determined to any Action that
shall bring him out of it. Let a Man be never so well persuaded of the
Advantages of Virtue, that it is as necessary to him who has any great aims in
this World, or Hopes in the next, as Food to Life; yet, till he hungers and
thirsts after Righteousness, till he feels an uneasiness in the want of it, his
Will is not determined to any Action in pursuit of this confessed greater Good,
but any other uneasiness he feels in himself, shall take place, and carry his
Will to other Actions. Let the Drunkard see that his Health decays, his Estate
wastes, Discredit and Diseases, and the want of all things, even of his beloved
Drink, attends him in the Course he follows; yet the Returns of Uneasiness to
miss his Companions, the habitual thirst after his Cups at the usual time,
drives him to the Tavern, though he has in his view the loss of Health and
Plenty, and perhaps of the Joys of another Life: the least of which is no
inconsiderable Good, but such as he confesses is far greater than the tickling
his Palate with a Glass of Wine, or the idle Chat of a soaking Club. It Is not
for want of viewing the greater Good, for he sees and acknowledges it, and in
the Intervals of his drinking Hours, will take Resolutions to pursue the
greater Good: but when the Uneasiness to miss his accustomed Delight returns,
the greater acknowledged Good loses its hold, and the present Uneasiness
determines the Will to the accustomed Action, which thereby gets stronger
footing to prevail again the next occasion: though he at the same time make
secret Promises to himself, that he will do so no more: this is the last time
he will act against the attainment of these greater Goods: And thus be it from
time to time in the state of that unhappy Complainer, Video Meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor; which Sentence, allowed true, and made good by constant
Experience, may this, and possibly no other way, be made easily intelligible.

If we enquire now into the Reason, of what Experience makes so evident in
fact, and examine why it is Uneasiness alone operates on the Will, and
determines it in its Choice, we shall find that we being capable but of one
determination of the Will to one action at once, the present uneasiness that we
are under, does naturally determine the Will in order to that Happiness we all
aim at in all our actions; forasmuch as whilst we are under any Uneasiness, we
cannot apprehend our selves happy, or in the way to it. Pain and Uneasiness
being by every one concluded and felt to be inconsistent with Happiness,
spoiling the relish even of those good things we have: a little Pain serving to
mar all the Pleasure we rejoiced in, and therefore that which of course
determines the Choice of our Will to the next Action, will always be the
removing of Pain as long as we have any left, as the first and necessary step
toward Happiness. Another Reason why it is uneasiness alone determines the
Will, may be th^^, because that alone is present, and it is against the nature
of things, that what is absent should operate where it is not. I know it may be
said that absent Good may, by Contemplation, be brought home to the Mind, and
made present; the Idea indeed may be in the Mind, and viewed as present there,
but nothing will be in the Mind as a present good, able to counterballance the
removal of any Uneasiness we are under, till it raises our Desire, and the
Uneasiness of that has the prevalency in determining the Will. Till then, the
Idea in the Mind, of whatever Good is there only like other Idea's, the Object
of bare unactive Speculation, but operates not on the Will, nor sets us on
Work, the Reason whereof I shall show presently.

How many are to be found that have had lively Representations set before their
Minds, of the unspeakable Joys of Heaven; which they acknowledge both possible
and probable too, who yet would be content to take up with their Happiness
here, and so the prevailing Uneasiness of their Desires, let loose after the
Enjoyments of this Life, take their turns in determining their Wills, and all
that while they take not one step, are not one jot moved toward the good
things of another Life, considered as never so great. Were the Will determined
by the view of Good, as it appears in Contemplation greater or less to the
Understanding, which is the state of all absent Good, and that which in the
received Opinion the Will is supposed to move to, and to be moved by: I do not
see how it could ever get loose from the infinite Eternal Joys of Heaven, once
proposed and considered as possible; for all absent Good, by which alone barely
proposed and coming in view, the Will is thought to be determined, and so to
set us on Action, being only possible, but not infallibly certain: it is
unavoidable that the infinitely greater possible Good should regularly and
constantly determine the Will in all the successive Actions it directs; and
then we should keep constantly and steddily in our course toward Heaven,
without everstanding still, or directing our Actions to any other end: the
Eternal Condition of a future State infinitely outweighing the Expectation of
Riches or Honors, or any other Worldly Pleasures we can propose to our selves,
though we should grant these the more probable to be attained; for nothing future
as yet in possession, and so the Expectation even of these may deceive us: if
it were so that the greater Good in view determines the Will, so great a Good
once proposed cannot but seize the Will, and hold it fast to the Pursuit of
this infinitely greatest Good, without ever letting it go again; for the Will
having a power over and directing the Thoughts, as well as other Actions, will
hold the Contemplation of the Mind fixed to that Good. This would be the state
of the Mind and regular tendency of the Will in all its determinations, were it
determined by that which is considered and in view the greater Good: but that
it is not so, is visible in Experience, the infinitely greatest confessed Good
being often neglected to satisfy the successive uneasiness of our Desires,
pursuing trifles. But though the greatest allowed, even everlasting unspeakable
Good, which has sometimes moved and affected the Mind, does not steadfastly hold
the Will; yet we see any very great and prevailing Uneasiness, having once laid
hold on the Will, lets it not go, by which we may be convinced what it is
determines the Will: thus any vehement Pain of the Body, the ungovernable
Passion of a Man violently in Love, or the impatient Desire of Revenge keeps
the Will steady and intent; and the Will thus determined, never lets the
Understanding lay by the Object, but all the Thoughts of the Mind and Powers of
the Body are uninterruptedly employed that way, by the determination of the
Will influenced by that topping Uneasiness, as long as it lasts; whereby it
seems to me evident that the Will or Power of Setting us upon one Action in
preference to all other, is determined in u^ by Uneasiness, and whether this be
not so, I desire every one to observe in himself.

Thus far, that great Master of Humane Understanding, and truly if we behold
Man as merely in a state of Nature, on every side surrounded with sensible
Objects, he seems to have well characteriz^d our miserable Condition. It is
something extraneous to our own Power and Faculties, that must help us to
suppress those inordinate Desires which occasion this Uneasiness; it is that
which must heighten in us a desire of a more durable Happiness, and Content,
and render us dissatisfied till we have conquered our unruly Appetites, and
brought them into subjection to the Will of Him who made us. It is neither a
bare knowledge of the ill Tendency of our Designs or Actions, it is neither want
of Consideration nor Deliberation neither, but the over-looking the Necessity
of a Supernatural Concurrence, a disregard to the Divine Grace, and a total
Dependence upon the Powers of our own Souls, that principally occasions our
repeated Failings, even against our clearest Knowledge and Intentions of doing
otherwise. A due Reflection and deliberate Attention to what we are about to
act, will, I grant, be very serviceable to suspend the Execution of our Designs
for some little time, and to keep our Minds, as it were, in Aequilibrio: but if
we are remiss in seeking for Additional Strength beyond our own, or if we
depend upon our own Sufficiency, it is a very great Chance but our Sensations
will over-set us, and the Impetuosity of our Passions prevail upon us. We may
set our selves upon a Contemplation of those solid Truths, which present
themselves to our most serious and abstracted Speculations, but our sensible
Idea's are so continually crowding in upon us, and fill up so great a part of
our Minds, by the Sensations they excite, which are always present to us, that
it is but seldom that we finish our Meditations without some sensible
Interruption: or if we do, it is not long before some pressing and importunate
Desire of Sense intercepts the Light of our Understanding, and we are brought
into a slavish Vassalage, by the gratifying its Desires; so that however light
we make of it, or how much soever we contemn it, there is nothing can secure us
in the Prosecution of our greatest Good or Happiness, but a just regard to, and
a continued Consultation with the Divine (...). But for the better
establishment of this necessary Truth, I shall insert some of the Sentiments of
the Devout Malebranch, who in a Discourse of the great Advantages our
Sensations have over the pure Ideas of the Mind, expresses himself as follows.

It seems Evident that our Knowledge consists only in a clear view of the
Relations that things have to one another: Maleb. de Verit. inquirend.
therefore when it happens, as in difficult questions, that the Mind must see
at one view a great number of Relations, which two or more things have amongst
themselves, it is evident also, that if it has not considered these things with
much attention, and only knows them confusedly, it will be impossible for it to
perceive distinctly their Relations, and consequently to form a solid Judgment
of them. One of the chief Causes then of a want of Application of Mind to
abstracted Truths, ^s that we see them at a distance, and things which are
nearer are continually represented to our Minds. A great Attention of Mind
approaches, if I may so say, to the Idea's of Objects, with which it is
affected: but it often happens, that when we are attentive upon Metaphysical
Speculations, we are diverted from them, because some Sensation comes upon the
Soul, which is nearer to it than those Idea's: the least Pain or Pleasure is
sufficient to effect this: the reason of it is Pain and Pleasure, and generally
all Sensations, are within the Soul it self, they modifie and affect it much
nearer than the simple Idea's of Objects of pure Intellection, which, though
present to the Mind, do not modifie it. Thus the Soul being on the one hand
very narrow, and on the other not being able to hinder Pain, Pleasure, and
other Sensations, its capacity is filled with them, and it cannot at the same
time be sensible of any thing, and think freely of all other things of which it
cannot be sensible. The buzzing of a Fly, or some other little noise (supposing
it to be communicated even to the chief part of the Brain, so that the Soul
perceives it) is capable, notwithstanding all our Efforts to the contrary, of
hindering us from considering abstracted and elevated Truths; because all
abstracted Idea's do not modifie the Soul, though all Sensations do. It is this
which causes a Stupidity and Dullness of Mind, in respect of the great Truths of
Christian Morality: Hence it is that Men only know them after a speculative and
unfruitful manner, without the Grace of Jesus Christ.

The whole World, I may say, knows that there is a God, that he must be adored
or worshipped, but who is it that serves and worships him without Grace? which
makes us taste a sweetness and pleasure in all our Duties. There are very few
who are not sensible of the Emptiness and Instability of the Goods of this
World, and who even are not touched with an abstracted and always with a very
certain and evident Conviction that they deserve not our Application and
Concern; but where are those that practically despise these Goods, and who are
not anxious and careful to obtain them? It Is those only who perceive some
bitterness and disgust in their Enjoyment, or else by the Grace of God are made
sensible of a Spiritual Good, by an inward Delight which God has joined to
them, who overcome the impressions of their Senses, and the Efforts of
Concupiscence. The bare Contemplation of the Mind does not therefore make us
ever resist these Efforts as we ought to do, unless an internal Motion of the
Heart does also second it. It is this Light of the Mind only which is, as some
say, a sufficient Grace, enabling us to condemn our selves, informing us of our
own Weakness, and that we ought to have recourse by Prayer to Him, who is our
Power. This inward Sentiment of Heart is a lively Grace, which operates; it is
this which affects and fills us, which persuades the Hearts of Men, and without
which there are none of them can think heartily.

All the most constant Truths of Morality lie hid in the secret Recesses and
Windings of the Mind, and so long as they stay there, are barren and without
any Power: since the Soul does not taste them, but the Pleasures of the Senses
are nearer the Soul, and it being impossible that it should not be sensible,
and love its Pleasure with a natural Love, (for one may hate Pleasure with a
hatred of Choice) its impossible to be freed from the World, and shake off the
Charms of its Senses by its own Power, because a Love of Choice cannot long
refrain from conforming to a Natural Love.

I deny not that the Righteous, whose heart has been livelily turned toward
God by prepossessed Delights, cannot without this particular Grace, do some
deserving Actions, and resist the Motions of Concupiscence. There are some that
are generous and constant in the Law of God, by the Power of their Faith, by an
assiduous privation of sensible things, and by a Contempt and Disgust of all
temptations. There are some who act for the most part without tasting
preventing and unthought of Pleasure, the only Joy which they find in acting
piously, is the Pleasure alone they are sensible of; and this Pleasure is
sufficient to stay them, in that Estate, and to confirm the disposition of
their Heart.

Those who begin their Conversion have commonly need of a p^^possessed and an
indiliberate Pleasure, to free them from their sensible Goods to which they are
united by other preventing and indeliberate Pleasures. Sadness and Remorse of
Conscience is not enough, and they do not yet taste any Joy: But the Just can
live by Faith, and in Want: and it is even in this Condition that they deserve
more, because Men being reasonable, God will be loved by them with a Love of
Choice, rather than with a Love of Instinct, or an indeliberate Love, like that
by which they love sensible things, without knowing them to be good otherwise
than by the Pleasure which they receive from them. However, the greatest part
of Men have little Faith, and being continually led to taste Pleasure, they
cannot long preserve their Elective Love for God against a Natural Love for
sensible Goods, if their delight in the Divine Grace does not uphold them
against the Efforts of Pleasure; for it is this delight that both begets,
preserves and increases Charity as sensible Pleasures do Desire.

It is plain from what has been said, That Men being never without some
Passion, or agreeable or disagreeable Sensations, much of the Capacity and
Extension of their Minds is taken up with them, and when they are willing to
employ the rest of their Capacity to examine some Truth, they are often
diverted by some new Sensation, or by a Disgust which they find in this
Exercise, and by an inconstancy of the Will, which agitates and runs the Mind
from one Object to another, so that unless they have accustomed themselves to
overcome these Oppositions from their Youth, as I have elsewhere explained,
they will at last be incapable of penetrating into any thing that is a little
difficult, or which requires a little Application.

The Operation of Divine Grace, upon the Souls of those who are qualified for
its Reception, is so invisible, and so insensibly communicated, that the
Irreligious and Profane have hence taken an occasion to ridicule and contemn
it, and as far as lies in their Power to explode the very Notion out of the
World. These will allow of no other Grace than the force of certain Habits, by
which Men suffer themselves to be governed, and which are for the most part the
Result of their Education. We must own indeed that the Efficacy of this Grace,
above the Prevalency of Habits, however deeply radicated or woven into the
Constitution, or the Difference between one and the other, is certainly known
by none but the Regenerate Man: Those who are never so intimately acquainted
with the Nature and Powers of the Mind, know how the Vestigia of Sensible
Objects come to be impressed and drawn out upon the Brain, or after what manner,
not only Imagination, but the pure Acts of the Understanding are performed:
Those, I say, who know all this by the clearest Idea's, together with the whole
Process of the common Mode of Natural Understanding, can at best but guess, and
that very faintly, at this Divine Influence, which must cooperate even with
such Persons, whose Habits of Goodness are as deeply rooted as possible, if
they receive a solid Pleasure and Satisfaction in its Practice.

Mere Habits of Moral Goodness, may be in many respects, very serviceable, and
an occasion of securing, us from an limitation of the Practices of Wicked Men;
from being at all times overpowered by the Storms and Tempests raised in our
own Breasts: They may keep us from being extremely injured by the Precepts of
such, by whose evil Communication our Manners would be corrupted, and our Minds
debaucht; They may serve to render us somewhat the more impregnable, and better
fortified against the treacherous Assaults of those, who endeavor to frame and
model us into the same temper with themselves. In a word, they may place us in
a State of some little Security, against these and the like Adversaries ready
to b^set us, but they will never be able of themselves to give us any sensible
fruition of the Divine Goodness, or to crown our Desites with an Eternal
Felicity.

Now if true Piety be an empty and a useless Sound, if neither that nor the
Divine Grace have any other. Being in the World than what proceeds from a
contracted or long continued Habit: if Conversion of the Heart to God,
Contrition for past Offenses, if Renovation or Regeneration have no better
Ground for their Support and Truth, than merely natural Habit, how come^ it to
pass that some Men; who have been thoroughly hardened in Iniquity, by the force
of an obdurate habit of Impiety, should be at some times so sensibly touch
with a sudden Horror, as presently to awaken out of their Dreams of Carnal
Security, and by a refulgent Ray of the Divine Light, to have their Souls so
strangely illuminated, as that they have often found themselves, even contrary
to their own natural Inclinations, put upon impeaching their formerly beloved
Lusts and darling Satisfactions, and also upon an open Confession of their
desperate Madness, in having so long pursued them. The Instances of this Nature
are very numerous, some of them I have already mentioned, and more might be
here inserted if I thought it necessary, not only of those whose Understandings
being weak or shallow, we might believe imposed on; but even of the most accute
and profound Desperado's in all sorts of Villainy, Men who have undauntedly bid
open Defiance to Heaven, and admired how the silly World should be frighted
with that Childish Whim (as they have termed it) of their Immortality: But
leaving these, I shall take notice, that as on the one hand there are some who
will allow of no Grace at all, so on the other we find those, who reckon every
several Virtue to be a distinct Grace; thus there must be a Grace of
Temperance, a Grace of Chastity, a Grace of Patience, a Grace of Charity; and
so in like manner, there is nothing more common than to hear them talking of
Restraining Grace, Preventing Grace, Saving Grace, Renewing Grace, Persevering
Grace, Regenerating Grace; as if these were so many several Graces, and not one
and the same Grace of God. Thus others of them will have the Divine Light* the
Spirit of God, the Grace of God, and the Grace of Jesus Christ, to differ
essentially; which improper ways of speaking, have, for want of Explanation,
been the occasion of lessening and obscuring the Fundamental Notion, as well as
of Contempt to the profane Jesters at all things S^c^ed.

I remember sometime since, before I made my first Visit to the Reverend Dr. H
-- k, I sent him a long Epistle containing my own Sentiments of Divine Matters;
and desired him to inform me wherein he dissented. There were some particular
Queries therein relating to this Subject last mentioned, which, as I find them
in the Copy of my Letter, I shall here Transcribe.

Query 1. Whether there be any thing essential to Salvation, but a holy or good
Life, or a Conscience kept without Offense toward God and Man. Granting this,
2dly, Whether it is not possible for this happy Man to be found under any
Christian Communion. 3dly, Whether this State of true Felicity and content is
to be attained by any surer Method than that of a due attendance upon the
Divine Monitor which is planted in our Souls, I mean the Divine resplendent
Light of the Archetipal World, as explicated by Father Malebranch, and after
him by Mr. Norris: for however inconsiderate Men may cavil at the Notion as a
Principle of Q -- sm, I am satisfied we do all receive a certain secret
irresistible Reproach from this faithful Monitor, when we have thought of, or
committed any unworthy Action: and an inexpressible Satisfaction from our doing
Good. I desired, with submission, to be farther informed whether or no these
words, the Grace of God, the Spirit of God, or Jesus Christ, have any other
true import than that of this Divine Manifestation to the Soul: or if to say
(commonly speaking) such a Person is endowed with the Grace of God, does not
bear a strict Analogy with his being more than ordinarily attentive to this Lux
Divina: it seems hard indeed to conceive any other different Degrees of Grace,
than there are different Degrees of Reflection upon, or attention to the silent
Admonitions of this Invisible Being: and surely it can be nothing but the want
of this Reflection and Attention to which our present Infidelity owes it Rise.
I know Mr. Norris will have this Light in some degrees thereof, to be not only
the same with what we call the Grace of God, but that it is also in a more
inferior acceptance, the common Mode of the Humane Understanding: I desire to
know in what you dissent herefrom, as likewise your Explication of the word
Conscience; it seems to me but little short of an Absurdity, that there should
be any other Sense presiding in the Soul over all her Actions, than what is
communicated from the Supreme Being. Moreover, I would gladly be informed,
whether any Man has the power, as of himself, heartily to believe that which at
sometimes he confesses with his Mouth. The Rehearsal of a Creed is no
difficult matter, but a solid Conviction, that what we do rehearse, is
apparently clear to us as Mathematical Demonstration, is very rarely to be met
with. It is surely impossible for any Man, who limits his Faith within the
narrow bounds of his Reason, to submit an entire assent to those Propositions,
which though perhaps necessary to be credited, he himself cannot account for: I
have often thought this the Infirmity of the Supplicant in Holy Writ, when he
cried out, Lord, I believe, Lord help my unbelief: for it is otherways very
difficult to conceive how a vicious Life can consist with a full Conviction of
the Divine Existence, and our own Separate Beings. 6thly, What you think of
Enquiries into Nature, whether they prove not to some the Causes of Modern
Deism, and to others of pure Skepticism. I have been often apt to imagine that
there are no Natural Phenomenon, which may not admit a Solution from those two
grand Principles of Matter and Motion, or by Axioms deduced from the
Corpuscular Philosophy: and I doubt not but it is our resting in an ability to
discuss the same by this kind of Disquisition, has been the occasion that the
prime or supreme Cause of all, has been veiled from our Eyes. Curiosity is so
natural to the Soul of Man, and the seeming Satisfaction that does at sometimes
attend a Philosophic Enquiry, is so great as to render the same to some sort
of People a dangerous Temptation; it is not that I think the Enquiry of it self
such, but the resting in the simple knowledge that such or such Productions
must be the Result of such and such Causes, without reflecting upon the first
and chiefest which puts these upon concurring, must certainly be so: and truly,
it is very seldom that the generality of Men make any farther Appeal, unless it
be to Fate, Fortune, Chance, Destiny, or some such like unaccountable Chimaera
which they substitute in the room of an all-powerful, infinite and intelligent
Being. Lastly, I desire you would send me your Thoughts of the especial
Providence of God, and your Opinion of Mr. B -- * late Draught of the Q -- rs
Principles.

In some few Days after the receipt of my Letter, the good Doctor was pleased
to return his Answer in these words: SIR,
Dr. H -- k's first Let^^r.
I Do charitably believe, etc. (but waving the Introduction he proceeds)

A pious Life and holy Conversation, are without peradventure the principal
things aimed at in the Gospel of Jesus Christ: but since we are there told that
there are such things as dangerous, and damnable Heresies, the Fundamental
Doctrines which all Christian Churches have believed, it is our duty sincerely
and conscienciously to receive; and whoever does so, will find them very
excellent Motives to the practice of Religion.

I deny not the possibility of a Man's being dev^ut and holy by himself, i.e.
without attending upon the Public Offices of Religious Worship; yet since such
Assemblies are not only commanded, but of great use and even necessity in the
Christian Church, it behooves us to join with some one or other of them: and
among these, I see not how any Man can reasonably or justly quit a National
Church, on any other account than that of its obliging him to a breach of the
Divine Commands, or injoyning him to any thing which is manifestly sinful.

Grace, and Divine-Light, and the Spirit of God, etc. are the same in effect.
It is the Holy Spirit which both gives us Grace, and inlightens our Minds by a
Divine Manifestation to our Souls. Every true Christian is in some ^egree a
partaker hereof: for without it we can neither believe, nor obey, nor as we
ought rely upon the Promises of our God. It is this which we receive upon our
earnest and fervent Prayer, and it is th^^ which does excite both our Attention
and pious Resolution: which as the same produces in us lesser or greater
Effects, or different degrees of Love, Obedience, Self-denial, etc. so these
are called the Degrees of the Divine Grace, as our endeavors are either weaker
or stronger, uneven or steady, inconstant or more constant: and as our
Self-denial rises to a higher or a lower pitch. Now to secure us from the
danger of a mad Enthusiasm, from the disorder of Imagination, the deception of
Fancy, or the delusion of Evil Spirits, in the business of private Inspiration
and pretended Revelations, we are most certainly to bear in mind that the Holy
Spirit and the revealed Will of God, do exactly at all times correspond: so
that whatever Light we pretend to, which contradicts, or is not justifiable by
the written Word, the same is most certainly either Design or Delusion, and
always false and counterfeit.

For my own part, I am not against the Notions either of Father Malebranch or
Mr. Norris, provided their Hypotheses do not dishonor God, by supposing Him in
any manner the Author of our Sins: however, there were very good Christians in
the World, before either of them spun Philosophy to so fine a Thread.

To believe in God, and that he inspects the most secret of our Actions: to be
truly sensible of the Love of the blessed Jesus, and to expect a Life
hereafter: to believe what the Gospel delivers to us, so as to be acted by
those Principles: to become truly penitent, meek and humble, patient and
charitable, and ready unto every good word and work: in a word, to be sincere
and constant and faithful unto death, this is to be a Religious Man and a true
Christian, an Heir to Heaven, and a much happier Man than all the Masters of
Philosophy can make you.

In order to this Attainment, we are to quit anticipated Prejudices, instilled
either by Education or our own false Reasonings: and we may much shorten the
trouble by seriously resolving to our selves this single Query, viz. Whether
the Matters related in our Savior's Gospel are certainly true: if they be,
there is nothing in this World must hinder us from a serious and conscientious
Practice, and from living up to those holy Rules and Precepts as far as we are
able. For the Promises and Threatenings, if true, are things of that
consequence, that all is to be laid aside for to gain the promised Blessings,
and to avoid the threatened Misery.

I doubt not but a Person of, etc. must have had a liberal Education; and
although a superficial or slight knowledge in Physics, may dispose to
Skepticism, yet you have doubtless by your Profession, a very great advantage;
for however it may be abused, a profound Judgment and substantial Knowledge,
must undoubtedly lead us to very great Devotion: and the more exquisitely
curious the Anatomist is, the greater Reason will he have, if he abuse not his
Understanding, to adore and admire the Infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness of
his great Creator, and consequently to worship, to love, and to obey him.

If you believe Revealed Religion, which was never so questioned or refuted as
to deserve the Answer of any soberly learned Man, you must believe the Truth of
God's particular Providence, although you cannot reconcile every particular
Phenomenon, either to your own Reason, or the Corpuscular Philosophy. The holy
Scriptures are a System of Divine Philosophy, and I should think that the
Assertions of the Almighty ought to be received by Rational Men, before the
seeming clearness of any mere Humane Hypothesis. Alas! how little is it that we
know; and granting the Supreme Being to have made our World in the Nature of a
Clock, is this an Argument that its first Fabrication, or the Motions bestowed
upon its several Parts, can result from any thing short of an Almighty and
Divine Power, but our Philosophy is unable to inform us, of all the Wheels, the
Pius, and several Motions of this stupendous Frame: it is true, we set it move
according to Mechanic Laws, but there may be many thousand Motions in it, of
which we are ignorant. Let us bless our God for the Revelation which he has
given us, and let us (as most certainly it behooves us) rely upon his special
Providence, whoever does so, will in the event find Comfort and Satisfaction:
nor do I see how a good Man can have any real Happiness or Consolation without
it.

As for Mr. B -- s Divinity, I must own there are many things in it, both
Rational and Solid; but when he comes to spiritualize the Divine Ordinances and
Institutions of Christ and his Apostles, he not only sets himself up in
opposition to the Churches of Christ, to the Sense and Practice of the
Primitive Christians (as I am able to prove) but exposes a want of knowledge in
Scripture Interpretation. The Novelty of the Sect, and the dangerous tendency
of their pretended Inspiration, is argument enough to ^^e of their
Inconsistency with themselves and true Religion: and surely we ought to be
extremely cautious how we side with such whimsical upstart Opinions, till we
can reconcile the Possibility for Divine Goodness and Mercy, to suffer
Christendom to lie in Ignorance for Sixteen hundred years, and that the
Churches immediately planted by the Apostles, should make Mistakes of that vile
Consequence (even when their Founders were present to set them to rights if
they had done so) as we must believe they did, if Q -- sm be true.

A well-grounded knowledge in the Primitive Christianity, which may be truly
fetched out of Ecclesiastic History and the Fathers of the Church, will give
you this Satisfaction, that the holy Ordinances from the first promulgation of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, such I mean as Water Baptism, and the Eucharist,
have been practiced even to this day, by all good Christians by the use of the
outward Elements in their Administration. I deny not but there have been both
great Abuses, Misapprehensions and Mistakes, in the performance of them, or in
the manner of their Reception, and I think I may say there are (...) more
egregiously absurd, than some of those derived from the Chair of supposed
Infallibility: but this will by no means extenuate our Crimes of neglecting
their use, or making light of putting them at all in practice. I desire you at
your leisure to consider well Mr. B -- s Comment upon (...), on which he lays a
very great stress: and if you compare it with some of those Places in Holy
Writ, which clearly justify this manner of Baptismal initiation into Christ's
Church, you will find it so gross a Metaphor, that neither Grammar, Rhetoric,
nor the Rules of Logic, neither (which I prefer to them all) the Reason of an
understanding Man will ever be able to countenance.

We may set into what Absurdities, even Learned Men are betrayed, when they too
much rely upon their own Judgments, when they set up for new Discoveries, and
impose their own Phant^sies for Divine Revelations.

If you please to send me, what you think the sufficient Proofs which this
Learned Man has excogitated for the support of his new Religion, I will, if God
enable me, give you my impartial Thoughts: for I must seriously profess to you,
I see nothing in his Works which ought to sway any true Christian, to leave any
Protestant Church for the sake of Q -- sm. I have formerly been in Mr. B -- s
Company, but could never discover any thing like fair Argumentation: I must own
him to have been a Man of very considerable parts; yet his Scripture Quotations
were for the most part manifestly wrested, and his general Discourse a pure
Invective, or downright Railery against the Church of England, at which, I
must confess, I was very much surprised, having framed to my self other Notions
of the Man before. I left him with this undoubted satisfaction in my self, that
the Spirit of Self-conceit, of Pride and Bitterness, must needs be very re^^te
from the true Spirit of Christianity.

I thank you for your Discourse, concerning the Natural Power of Spasms or the
Disorders of the Nervous System: but as to what you say about Daemoniacs,
Fascination, and the Operation of Evil Spirits, I must refer my Opinion to a
time of greater leisure, or till you please to visit me; in the mean time I
pray God more and more to inlighten your Understanding, etc.

I am your real Friend, A. H.




Some little time after this, I received a Second Letter from that sincerely
Religious and most excellent Divine, by way of Answer to one that I had sent
him, which as I find it amongst my Papers, begins thus: SIR,
Dr. H -- k's second Letter.
I Rejoice with you, that it has pleased our good God to confirm in you such a
Belief of his Existence, and your own Creation after the Divine Image, as may
secure to you a Remembrance of the Duty incumbent on you: and put you both upon
a constant and fervent Prayer for the supply of Divine Grace, together with a
steady and devout Submission to, and Dependence upon his especial Providence.

I do look upon your last Letter to be the Picture of your Mind, and bating the
Ceremony, I find no other fault than this, that how lamentably true soever your
Remarks may be upon the present Age, for the most part; yet I am free to
acquaint you with my Thoughts, that there are a much greater number of good
People amongst us than you imagine. I may say (blessed be our God for it) I
have the personal knowledge of many whom I can call truly pious and sincere
Christians: Some of them such, who as they by no means value themselves upon
their Humane Acquirements, are yet able to silence the Calumnies of the Profane
even by their own Weapons of Humane Reason. I speak not this to show my own
good liking, of such for the most part vain and unprofitable Argumentations;
but yet I think it no disserviceable Office to Religion, neither yet to the
Cause of our great Creator, that some Men have left both the Atheist, and his
Friend the Deist, without Excuse: and that they may see their Condemnation
heightened by their obstinate disbelief of the Christian Religion, contrary to
the natural unprejudiced Light of Reason, as well as the Extraordinary of
Divine Faith.

Your Character of Mr. B -- l I think no whit too large, nor do I dislike your
Thought of his being designed by Providence, as a demonstrative and clear
Evidence to satisfy the doubting World, that the larger portion of right
Reason or solid Knowledge a Man is endowed with, the clearer prospect he enjoys
of the Truth and Certainty of Divine Revelation: and that it is not only
unlikely, but impossible to philosophise as becomes reasonable Men, without
thinking venerably of Almighty God, and his Son Christ Jesus.

The true Christian Vertuoso is indeed not often met with, and whether the
Character of a practically Religious Man, and at the same time a very great
Philosopher, suits any Man so well as it did the deceased B -- l, may very well
be made a Question.

For my own part, I the less value the Attempts or Endeavors of Men
philosophising about Religion, being persuaded that there are not many
sincerely pious Converts made thereby. Religion wants not the Rhetorical
Flourish of fine Language; Aerie Notions and School Distinctions render her but
confused, and are really Blemishes to her Purity and Simplicity. Her Paths are
plain and easy; in her Natural Dress she is all over amiable, and wants not
the imbellishment of Philosophic Luster.

There are Arguments enough already from the Storehouse of Humane Reason, to
silence the Complaints of Atheism; it is not Reason that will satisfy the
unreasonable Infidel: and I am persuaded, were there no Mortification or
Self-denial in the Case, no Restraint to be laid upon the brutish Appetite, the
Truths we plead for would be clear enough to the Unbeliever. The depth of their
Philosophy lies here, they will not believe in God, because he has not made
them irrational or brute Creatures, which since they came not such out of the
hands of their Maker, they resolve to make themselves so, and then foolishly
please themselves with the Childish Expectation of escaping Divine Judgment,
because they have so long suffered themselves to be acted by what they call the
irresistible impulse of their sensitive Appetites, and wilfully indulged
Passions.

What every good Man glories in (viz.) that he is endowed with Reason and a
Capacity to shun the Evil, and to choose the Good, is the greatest Misery of
these Men: who finding themselves able to dishonor their Creator, to turn
their backs upon Religion, and to do despite unto the Spirit of Grace; since
there is a possibility for them left to blaspheme their God, to trample upon
all things Sacred, and that they are not hereupon immediately destroyed by the
Divine Anger and Indignation; they grow hardened in their Vices, their
continued Habits are at length woven into their Constitutions, and they act
indeed but little differently from Irrational Agents.

Right Reason, or Philosophy, will do but little good with such, the
Reformation, if at all, is owing to the hand of God: it is beyond the skill of
Man to inlighten our Understandings, in such a manner as to give us a taste of
the Divine Goodness. We may frame to our selves some speculative Notions, we
may confess with our Mouths, as finding our selves unable to resist or to hold
out any longer; but it is the Grace of Jesus Christ that must complete our
Conviction, and cooperate with our Souls in a perseverance to the end.

This is a Truth so clear to me, that I am firmly persuaded you will find no
sincerely pious or true practical Christian of a differing Opinion: the worldly
wise Man may despise and contemn us; the Libertine may scoff at us, and impute
all to our want of Knowledge, to Fancy or Prepossession: let them mock on,
and mark the end: it is sufficient for us, and will recompense to us these
Indignities, if we are happy in the Grace of our Lord Jesus.

I commit you to his protection, and remain

Your faithful Friend to serve you, A. H.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Can by no means think well of those you have taken notice of, neither do I
think it becomes any Man to dogmatize concerning the Creation, or to ridicule
the Mosaic History: if we cannot content our selves with what is there
delivered, it is true we may please our selves with new Theories of our own
erecting, but must not expect to find out any such as Mankind will comply with,
or perhaps such as will please our selves much better than that of the
Historian in Sacred Writ, which we find fault with, because, in some things,
disagreeable to Modern Discoveries. In these things every Man may think as he
pleases, provided he think not to the dishonor of Almighty God: but let no Man
publish to the World for truth, the uncertain, even very uncertain Conjectures
of his own Mind.






I had not been long acquainted with this Reverend Divine, before his fatal
Distemper deprived me, with many others, of the advantage of his Conversation:
and it is the least respect I can pay his Memory, in public to acknowledge my
own belief, that he was a Man of undissembled Piety, strictly holy and devout
in his Life and Converse, laborious and painful in his Ministry, of very easy
access, and ready to succor all Men to the utmost of his Capacity: He was a
Man universally respected by Persons of different Persuasions, and I have
reason to surmise that he died as generally lamented. He always expressed himself
with a more than common earnestness, and had something in his Air and Mein, so
soberly grave and modest, yet withal so pleasant, that I never met with in any
other Person. He had nothing of Affectation, of a precise or reserved Temper,
and so little regarded a Courtly Demeanor or Ceremonial Deportment, that I
have heard it objected as the greatest of his Faults, that he was ungenteel,
and too negligent in his manner of Address: but least this should be taken for
his full Character, which makes so small and even so inconsiderable a part
thereof, I shall for the present leave it, whilst I pursue my Argument of the
Nature and Necessity of the Divine Assistance, to the Completion of Man's
Eternal Happiness; something more particularly relating to which Theme, I find
so pertinently handled by the Author of Reasons Interest in Religion, that I
care not to pass it by without taking notice and considering upon the same.

As nothing (says this Author) but charming Lusts, The Interest of Reason in
Religion.
false Delusions, carnal Interests, foolish Prejudices, indulging the Appetites
of the Animal Life, and attending to the titillations of the Flesh, can hinder
Men from the performance of what God, in subserviency to his communicating of
Grace (at least in his ordinary dispensing of it) does require: so the being in
the Exercise of those Means, and in the Discharge of those Duties which God
prescribes and enjoins, does not only take us from, and prevent those Sins,
which would render our Conversion difficult, if not impossible, but they are
further useful as Means appointed and blessed of God unto such an end.

Though our Obedience has neither any Physical Efficiency upon our Regeneration,
nor is Grace bestowed in the Consideration of any previous Merit that is in our
Performances, yet it is neither superfluous nor vain, much less does it lie in
any repugnancy to our Conversion, being only perfected by an effectual
subjective Work of the Spirit of God. This Doctrine is not only opposed by
Pelagius and Socinus, but of late by Mr. Hobbs, whom we may very well allow to
combat the Grace of God, having beforehand listed himself in opposition to
the Divine Being.

Now having lost the Divine Image and our Integrity by the Fall, we not only
contend that there is the Efficacy of an External Agent, necessary for the
recovering it, and that he who imprinted the Image of God upon Humane Nature in
the first Creation of Man, must again restore it in his Regeneration: but we
affirm withal, that till the Sanctifying Spirit effectually, infallibly, and by
an unresisted Operation, transforms us into the Divine Nature, and communicates
to us a Vital Seed, we remain polluted, unholy, and incapable of doing any
thing with all that duness of Circumstances, as may commend us or our
Performances to God's Acceptance: Not but that antecedently to the Holy Ghost's
renewing us, by a Communication of Grace to us, we may both dogmatically
believe the Doctrines of the Scripture, and be found in the discharge of the
Material Parts, not only of Natural Duties, but of the Acts of Instituted
Religion; but to say that we ought thereupon to be denominated Holy, is to
remonstrate to the Scriptures in a thousand places, and to overthrow the very
Tenor and design of the Gospel. While we remain thus unholy, we are so far from
being actually united unto Christ, or capable Subjects of Justification or
Forgiveness, that till we are actually made Partakers of the Washing of
Regeneration, and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, we cannot possibly have any
Union with Him, or a Right to Pardon of Sin, or any thing that ensues or
depends thereupon by him.

There is nothing has, at least ought to have the true denomination of
Holiness, but what proceeds from the Spirit of Christ in us, and Principles of
Grace by Infusion communicated to us, which are the Foundation, Matter, and
Bond of our Union with Him, and under whatever Gloss or Varnish, we or our
Works appear to the World, yet without such a Relation to Christ we are none of
his, nor are our Duties, as to the Principles and Circumstances of them,
acceptable to God: The Obligation upon Men to Obedience in what state soever we
suppose them, the consistency of God's right to command them, with our
contracted inability to the yielding of due Obedience: the Capacity that all
Men remain in, notwithstanding any congenite Impotency for the performing many
External Duties good in themselves, and in the Matter of them, with the
Subservience of these Performances to Conversion, as they are Means appointed
of God in order thereunto: all these I in some measure understand, and can
reconcile with the Economy of the Gospel: But that our Lives can be holy, till
our Hearts be so through the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, or that our Works can
be adequately good antecedently to our Reception of Supernatural Grace, I do in
no wise understand, nor can I conceive the same can be made intelligible
without imposing Paelagianism upon us.

But farther, The Gospel acknowledges no Acts of true Holiness performed by
any, where there is not, antecedently at least, in order of Nature, a Principle
of true Holiness in the Persons performing them; no Acts, Operations or Duties
of ours, are in the Esteem of the Gospel, holy, but what proceed from, and are
done in the Virtue, Power and Efficacy of Grace, previously derived from and
communicated to us by Jesus Christ: there is prae-required to all Acts of
Gospel Obedience, a new real Spiritual Principle, by which our Nature is
renewed, and our Souls rendered habitually and subjectively holy. Grace is not
the Effect and Product of any previous good Action of ours (whatever
Subserviency through the appointment and dispose of God, they may lie in as to
his bestowing of it) but all Acts and Operations truly good are the Fruits of
Divine Grace; to talk of sincere Obedience precluding our antecedaneous
Adeption of a new Principle, and the Communication of a Divine Vital Seed to
us, is to impose Paelagianism upon us, and that in a more fulsome way, and in
ruder terms than many of his Followers used to declare themselves.

I deny not the things revealed and commanded in the Gospel, being both good in
themselves, and suited to the Reason and Interest of Mankind; and also enforced
by the most attractive Motives which we can either desire or imagine; but that
Men in the alone strength of their Natural Faculties, may perform many External
Duties, and in that manner also, that we who judge only according to
appearance, are thereupon to account them holy, yea, that nothing but
Supineness, lustful Prejudice, consuetude in Sin, and a being immersed into the
Animal Life, can hinder them from so doing; but I deny that any Act or Duty
has the proper Form or Nature of Holiness, or is so denominated in the
Scriptures, but both what proceeds from an antecedent Habit or Principle of
Holiness in the Persons by whom they are performed, and an immediate Influence
from Christ, in the virtue of our Union with him, as our quickening Head, vital
Root and living Spring in the actual performance of them; so that though no
Physical Efficiency is to be ascribed to the Gospel, yet besides a Moral
Efficacy, which through its own frame and complexion it has to reform Mankind
(beyond what any Declaration of God and our selves that ever the World was made
acquainted with had) there is a Physical efficacious Operation of the Spirit of
God accompanies it, on the score of God Almighty's having in infinite Wisdom
ordained it as a means for the communicating of Grace; but still it is not the
Doctrine of the Gospel that we are united to: it is true that it is both by the
Doctrine of the Gospel that we are brought to be united to Christ; and it is
also true that whosoever are united to Him, have the Doctrine of the Gospel,
(...), as an ingraffed and incorporated Word, and are molded (...), into the
form of its Doctrine: but yet it is not the terminus of the Relation of Union
which intervenes betwixt Christ and them, nor (whatsoever may be the Opinion of
some) is it that which they are united to.

The way and manner how the Spirit assists us in the Spiritual Understanding of
Things, is either through its immediate indwelling (if I may so speak) or
through the communication of new Principles, a (...), an ablation of every
thing extraneous; a dissipation of those fuliginous Vapors that both
obnubilate the Mind, and do imbuere objectum color suo: by the Purification of
the Heart the Understanding is clarified: By the Spirit of Life in the new
Birth the Subject is elevated and adapted to the Object; the Divine Grace
renders the Mind idoneous for and consimilar to the Truth. And farther, there
is a suggesting of Media for elucidating the Truth, there is also frequently an
irradiation of the Word it self, an attiring and clothing it with a Garment of
Light, and upon the whole, the Soul both feels and is transformed into what it
knows, its apprehensions are no longer dull and languid, but vigorous and
affective.

This Mystical Union of the Soul of the true Believer with Jesus Christ,
however difficult it may appear, and hard to be reconciled to the Natural
Understanding, ought not to be debated or distrusted by us, upon the account of
our Ignorance in the manner of it. We do assent to the Continuity and Adhesion
of one part of Matter to another, notwithstanding the Difficulties that
encounter us about its Mode; and though there be not yet any Philosophic
Hypothesis, that can resolve us how it comes to pass that one part more
indiscerptibly cleaves to another, than if they were fastened together by
Adamantine Chains: and therefore there is no Reason why the
incomprehensibleness of the Manner of our Union with Christ, should any ways
obstruct or weaken our belief of it, having all the assurance that Divine
Revelation can give us concerning our being united to Him: as we assent to an
evident Object of Sense, or to that which is plainly demonstrated by Reason,
though there occur many things in the manner of their Existence, which are
unconceivable, so the Quod sit and Reality of our Union with Christ, being
attested by him who cannot lie, it becomes us to embrace it with all steddiness
of Belief, though we cannot conceive the Quo modo or manner how it is; we have
reason to think, that through our Maker's leaving us posed and nonplust about
the most ordinary and certain Natural Phae^omena, he intended to train us up to
a mancipation of our Understandings, to Articles of Faith, when we were once
assured that He had declared them, though the Difficulties relating to them were
to us unaccountable.

Nor is the manner of the coherence of the Parts of Matter the only Difficulty
in Nature relating to Union, that perplexes and baffles our Reason; but the
Mode of the Mystical Incorporation of the Rational Soul with the Humane Body,
does every way as much entangle and leave us desperate as the former. That Man
is a kind of Amphibious Creature allied in his constituent Parts, both to the
Intellectual and Material Worlds, and that the several Species of Beings in the
Macrocosm, are combined in Him as in a System, Reason as well as Scripture
instructs us. That we have a Body, we are fully assured by its Density,
Extension, Impenetrability, and all the Adjuncts and Affections of Matter; and
that we have an Immaterial Spirit, we are demonstratively convinced by its
re-acting on it self, its consciousness of its own Being, and Operations: not
to mention other Mediums whereof we have spoken elsewhere, and that those two
are united together to make up the Composition of Man, is as plain from the
influence that the Body has upon the Soul in many of its Perceptions, and
which the Soul has upon the Body in the Motions of the Spirits and Blood, with
all that ensues and depends thereupon. Nor could the Affections and Adjuncts of
the Material Nature, nor the Attributes and Properties of the Immaterial, be
indiff^rently predicated of Man, were not the Soul and Body united together in
the Unity of Man's Person. But now how this can be, is a knot too hard for
Humane Reason to untye. How a pure Spirit should be cemented to an earthly
Clod, or an immaterial Substance coalesce with Bulk, is a Riddle that no
Hypothesis of Philosophy can resolve us about. 1. The Aristotelick substantial
Uniter will not do; for besides its repugnancy to Reason, that there should be
any Substantial Ingredient in the Constitution of Man, save his Soul and Body,
the un^^ion of it self with the Soul, supposing it to be Material, or with the
Body, admitting it to be Incorporeal, will remain unintelligible, and to affirm
it to be of a middle Nature, partaking of the Affections and Adjuncts of both,
is that which our rea^onable Faculties will never allow us to subscribe to; the
Idea's which we have of Body and Spirit having no Alliance the one with the
other, and to style it a Substantial Mode, is to wrap up Repugnancies in its
very Notion; for though all Modes be the Modification of Substances, yet they are
predicamental Accidents, and how essential soever this or that Modification may
be to a Body of such a Species, yet it is wholly extrinsecal and accidental to
Matter it self. In brief, the voluminous Discourses of the Aristotelian's, both
about Union in general, and the Union of the Rational Soul to the Organical
Humane Body in particular, resolve themselves either into idle tattle and
insignificant words, or obtrude upon us Contradictions and Nonsense. 2. To
preclude all Union betwixt the Soul and Body on Supposition that they are
distinct constituent parts of Man, is plainly to despair of solving the
Difficulty for not to dispute whether the Soul and Body may, in Philosophic
rigor, be called Parts; or whether Man, in reference to them, may be styled a
Compositum: it is enough that the one is not the other, but that they are
different Principles; and that neither of them, considered seperately, is the
Man. Though the Soul and Body be perfect Substances in themselves, and though the
Soul can operate in its disjunct State, and in its Separation, will be no less
a Person than Soul and Body now together are, yet there are many Operations
belonging to the Soul in this Conjunct State, of which it is incapable in the
Separate; and there are many things predicable of the Soul and Body together,
which cannot be affirmed of them ^sunder. How close and intimate soever the
Union betwixt the Soul and Body be, and how great soever in their mutual
Dependancies in most of their Operations upon one another; yet not only the
Intellectual Spirit, and the duly organized Matter, remain even in their
Consociation classically different, (their Essences, Affections and Operations
admitting a diversity as well as a distinction) but there are some Operations
belong to each of them, upon which the other has no influence. For as the Mind
is Author of many Cogitations and Conceptions, to which the Body gave no
occasion; so the Body is the Spring and Fountain of several Functions, over
which the Soul has no Dominion, nor any direct influence, they remain as much
distinct, nothwithstanding the Union which intercedes between them as they
would have done, should we suppose them to have had an Existence previous to
their Confederations, or as they shall be after the dissolution of the L^^gue
between them.

From all which it may be Scientifically concluded, That they are distinct and
different Principles in Man's Constitut^on, but whether thereupon he ought to
be called a Compositum, or they to be styled Parts, will be resolved into a
mere Longomachy or Chat about Words; though to speak my own Mind, I see no Cause
why Man may not properly enough obtain the Appellation of Compositum, and the
Soul and Body be allowed for Constituent Parts.

Nor thirdly, does the Cartesian Hypothesis, though the most ingenious and best
contrived of any hitherto thought upon, fully satisfy an inquisitive Mind in
the Matter before us: their Hypothesis is briefly this, That God in his
infinite Wisdom chose to create three distinct and different kinds of Beings:
1. Some purely Material, which through difference of the Figure, Size, Number,
Texture, and Modification of their Parts, come to multiply into many different
Species. 2. Some purely Immaterial, among whom, whether there be any Specifical
Difference, is Pro and Con disputed. 3. Man, a Compositum of both, having an
Immaterial Intellectual Soul joined to an Organical Body: Now, say they, God
having in his Sovereign Pleasure thought good to form Man such a Creature, he
has not only by an uncontrollable Law confined the Soul to an intimate
Presence with, and constant Residence in the Body, while it remains a fit
Receptacle, or till he give it a discharge, but withal has made them dependent
upon one another in many of their Operations; and in this mutual dependence of
one upon the other, with respect to many of their Operations, they state the
Union betwixt the Soul and Body to consist: for through the Impressions that
are made upon the Organs of Sense, there result in the Soul certain
Perceptions; and on the other hand, through the Cogitations that arise in the
Soul, there ensue certain Emotions in the Animal Spirits, and thus, say they,
by the Action of each upon the other, and their Passion from one another, they
are formally united. But all this, instead of loosing the Knot, serves only to
tie it faster: For 1. this Mutual Dependancy, as to Operation of one upon the
other, cannot be apprehended, but in Posteriority of Nature to Union, and
consequently the formal Reason of Union cannot consist in it. 2. There are
Cases wherein neither the Impressions of outward Objects upon the Sensory
Nerves, beget or excite any Perceptions in the Soul (which whether it proceed
from obstinacy of Mind, or intense Contemplation, alike answers my drift) and
also Cases wherein Cogitations of the Mind, make not any sensible Impressions
upon the Body (as in Ecstasies) and yet the Union of the Soul and Body remains
undissolved, which argues that it imports more than either an intimous
Presence, or a Dependence between them in point of Operation. 3. It Is
altogether unintelligible, how either a Body can act upon a Spirit, or a Spirit
upon a Body. I grant it may be demonstrated that they do so, but the manner of
doing it, or indeed how it can be done, is not intelligible. That a Tremour
begot in the Nerves by the jogging of Particles of Matter upon the Sensory
Organs, should excite Cogitations in the Soul, or that the Soul by a mere
Thought should both beget a Motion in the Animal Spirits, and determine through
what Meatus's they are to steer their Course, is a Phenomenon in the Theory of
which we are perfectly non-plust. How that which penetrates a Body without
giving a jogg to, or receiving a shove from it, should either impress a Motion
upon, or receive an impression from it, is unconceivable: so that to state the
Union of the Soul and Body in a reciprocal Action upon, and Passion by and from
one another, is to fix it in that which supposes the Sagacity of our Faculties
to conceive how it can be.

Now if common Unions, of whose Reality and Existence we are so well assured,
be nevertheless, with respect to their Nature, not only so unknown, but
unconceivable: we may lawfully presume, if their lie nothing else against the
immediate Union of Believers with Christ, save that it cannot be comprehended,
that this is no Argument why we should immediately renounce the Belief of it.
If we can but once justify that there is such an Union betwixt the blessed
Jesus and sincere Christians, the incomprehensibleness of the manner of it
ought not to discourage our Faith, if we can take up with the Evidence of Sense
and Reason, as to the reality of other Unions, whose Modes are as little
understood, I see no cause why the Veracity of God, provided we can produce the
Authority of Divine Testimony, should not satisfy us as to the Reality of the
Union; though the manner how it is were a question we could not answer; and
indeed, if Men will not be huff't and talked out of the persuasion of those
things, of whose Existence their Senses and Reason ascertain them, though they
cannot answer all the Difficulties they are accosted with in their Enquiries
about them, much less ought Christians to be hectored out of the Belief of the
Doctrines of Faith, because of the Entanglements which attend the Conception of
them; it is the Nature of Faith to embrace things upon the alone Testimony of
God, though it understand nothing of the Mode and Manner how they are: the
highest Assurance of the Reality of any thing is God's affirming it, and what
he asserts, we are with all reverence to assent unto its Truth, though we can
frame no adaequate Idea of it, nor fathom it in our own Conceptions: Our
Savior himself has adjourned the perfect knowledge of this Mystery till the
glorified state, in these words, Joh. 14.20.
At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you.

Thus far you have had the Thoughts of the beforementioned Author, which I
shall leave you to consider seriously at your leisure; the Subject is indeed
noble, how despicably soever it may be treated by the Libertine, whose Belief
is staggered, because he himself is not possessed of what he has slighted and
contemned, and for that he finds himself at liberty to live as he lists.

I must own indeed that it is scarce possible, for one Man to infuse such
Idea's into another, as may be able to persuade that other, that he himself is
a Partaker of such a Spiritual Refreshment and Divine Consolation, as nothing
less than the Divine Gaace can communicate to his Soul; and on this account I
have the less admired that both Paelagius, Socinus, and their Adherents, have
gained so great footing in the World, and that the Doctrine of the Divine Grace
should be redicul'd by them, and esteemed little otherwise than as a senseless
Notion: the Opinions of these Men run so smooth to the sense of the Natural
Understanding, that so long as Men are careless and unwilling to look farther,
they are constrained to make their Reason the positive and adaequate Rule, both
of their Morality and Divinity. But for my own part, I should not so much
dispute with them this Mysterious Cooperation or Divine Concurrence, provided
they could but show me any true Practical Christian, one who is so in Deeds, as
well as Words, who has espoused their Opinions: I may be free to say, I know
nothing like one, nor do I think it possible to meet with a sincerely devout
Convert, or Regenerate Person, who is not ready to acknowledge that of himself
he was able to do nothing as he ought, and that the Renovation or happy Change
of his Mind was purely owing to the Adeption of a new Principle, or to a Union
with the Divine Spirit of Jesus Christ.

It Is true, amongst the Followers of Pelagius and Socinut, there are those who
understanding the Verity of their Opinions, would be measured by their
Practices, have been more than ordinarily exemplary in their Conversation with
the World, and their Self-denial of some Temporal Enjoyments: Men who have kept
themselves to a constant attendance upon Religious Worship, and set those about
them an extraordinary Pattern, for the practice of private Duties, and all
these we may readily grant the possibility of their attaining, by the mere
strength of their Natural Faculties, or the Powers of their own Souls,
independent of the Divine Grace: these, however necessary, were never looked on
by considerate Men for more than the Introduction or Outside of true Religion;
but although there are amongst them Persons so very circumspect in their
Deportment or Behavior, yet the greatest part of them are such as wholly
devote themselves to disputation in mixed Companies, where they continually gain
Proselytes among loose People, such, who as they never could reconcile
themselves to the practice of Religion, are very glad to find the same resolved
into Matter of Speculation, by which means every Man may have an opportunity to
raise a suitable Theory to his own Inclination^. Now I must confess, that which
has principally induced me to dissent from the Principles of these Men, is a
consciousness I have had that it is not only possible, but certain, that Men
may have an Historical Faith, and that they may believe or assent to the Truth
of the Revelation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and yet at the same time to
show themselves as if wholly unconcerned in their Lives and Practices, whether
the things delivered in that Gospel be true or not, which I think is hardly
reconcilable even to our own Reason, nor can be otherwise ascribed than to the
want of that Supernatural and Divine Aid I plead for.

The Interest of Reason in Religion.
Upon the other Extreme, as these we were just now speaking of (many of them at
least) will not allow any such Doctrine as that of the Divine Grace, so there
have been those who have affirmed, that a Person may by Philosophy and
Contemplation, attain such a Degree of Union with the Divine Being, as to know
and understand things by a Contactus or Conjunction of Substance with the
Deity: The Passages (says my Author) which occur in Plotinus, Porphirius,
Jamblicus and Proclus (all great and famous Platonists) of such a tendency, are
numerous and need not to be here transcribed. This Imagination was espoused by
the Arabian Philosophers, and had it been entertained by the Contemplative
Heathen only, we might have taken the less notice of it; but it was imbibed,
and that very timely by Origin himself, and from him the Ferment or Leaven
thereof was derived to the ancient Monks, from all, or some of these, it spread
amongst the Romish Monasticks, such of them as are called Mystic Theologues;
nothing more frequent with that sort of Men than a Tattle of an intime Union
with God, whereby the Soul becomes Deify'd; and from them the Weigelians and
Familists borrowed their Magnificent Language of being Godded with God, and
Christed with Christ.

The adventurous Determinations of the Schoolmen, concerning the beatifical
Vision, smell rank of the same blasphemous nonsensical Figment; for by their
contending that the Divince Essence is immediately united as an intelligible
Species to the Intellect of the blessed, and that this Species, and the
glorified Understanding do not remain distinct things, but become identify'd,
they do in effect affirm the Soul to be transubstantiated into God, and to be
really deify'd: and seeing it is a Matter of easy Demonstration, that the
Knowledge which we shall enjoy of God in Heaven, differs only in degree from
that which we possess here (otherwise it is both altogether unintelligible and
incapable of Rational Explication) it will follow by a short Harangue of
Discourse, either that Believers have no Knowledge of God at all in this Life,
or else that their Soul's become Deify'd and Essentially united to God by
knowing him. I shall not name here the admired Nonsense and high-flown Cantings
of some Modern Enthusiasts, which carry a broad-fac'd Aspect this way, it is
easy for us to instruct our selves, from what Springs these, with the like
Visionaries, have drawn the putrid Conceits which they propine to the World.
It Is enough for us that we believe the Person of Christ, and the Persons of
Believers to remain distinct after all the Union that intercedes between them:
Let us be thankful for the Influences of his Grace, and for the In-dwellings of
his Holy Spirit; but let us detest those swelling Words of Pride and Ignorance,
of being Christed and Deify'd; for whatsoever be the nature and kind of the
Union between Christ and Christians, that the same should by Hypostatical,
cannot without Blasphemy be imagined.

And thus, my Friend, I hope I have with no unpardonable Prolixity, gone over
these very weighty Subjects; I pray God we may all of us have right Notions of
them fixed on our Hearts: and that they may be attended with the Fruits of a
sincere Repentance and Amendment of our Lives. I shall endeavor to conclude
all with the most suitable Advice I can, and in order to the same, would wish
and desire you to think often and seriously upon the certainty of your Death
(for whatever you may think of an Immortality hereafter, it is manifest you can
obtain none here) consider what Thoughts will be most likely to intrude upon
you, what Business you will principally be employed about (should you have time
allotted you for such a purpose) the Conflicts and Consternation you must
encounter, the Confusion of your last Minutes, the Agony of your Soul in the
moment of its flight: For let me tell you, however you may please your self in
this time of Health and Vigor, that an approach of a privation of your present
Life will not surprise you, that you shall be able to Philosophise sedately and
unconcernedly concerning the Condition of your Soul, and that whatever fearful
Apprehensions may assault you, your beloved Music will charm them into
Silence, and the well-struck Instrument shall lull you into an Abyss of
Darkness and Oblivion; notwithstanding these aerie Notions and unlucky
Phancies, believe me, your Thoughts of other Matters will prevail and
interpose, your perplexed Soul will be too restless and uneasy, uneasy to be
stupify'd by the Power of such sensible Delights and Satisfactions: And in a
word, in opposition to this pretended Strength (unless you are arrived to a
brutish Insensibility) your fore-past Life will come in view, and you your self
must differ from the rest of Mankind, if you wish not that you could but dye
the death of the Righteous, and that your latter end were like unto his.

Febr. 28. 169^. I am your Friend and Servant, etc.

THE END.
Advertisement.
THE Person upon whose Account these Letters were first written, not having
thought fit to return any material Answer, the Author has been prevaild with to
print them by themselves; but lest it be thought designedly to give them the
fairer show of Demonstration, or by the want of any weighty Objection, to
procure to them the greater Esteem in the World, he does promise, That if any
one does object against, or can confute the main Points herein debated, if the
same be done with that Sobriety and Seriousness which becomes the Subject of
such Enquiries, and sent to the Publisher of these Printed Letters, the same
shall be faithfully published, with a Reply annexed. And to render such an
Undertaking the less laborious, if the Arguments of the first Letter,
particularly those of Mr. Bently and Mr. Lock, are found to be fairly
overthrown, or any new Hypothesis advanced which will intelligibly solve the
Cosmical Mechanism, and make it clear to us that Perception, Volition, and
Ratiocination, can derive their Source from any thing short of that First,
Supreme, Intelligent, or Alwise Being we call God: if this, I say, be once
performed, the rest, such as our Belief of Providence, our Immortality, and the
Divine Grace, shall be readily given up. Till this be done, he will not think
himself concerned to answer every petulant Cavil which may be raised against
these Sacred Truths, by Men devoted to Skepticism and Irreligion: for if after
all they have said, they find themselves constrained to grant there must be one
First, Supreme, and Powerful Being, who made the World, the same Consideration,
if carried a little farther, will show them the Necessity of the same Power to
continue and preserve its several Parts from a ruinous Destruction, which is,
though in other words, to allow a Providence. And farther, since it is apparent
that this Almighty Being has bestowed upon Man a Principle of Freedom, or a
Capacity to Will and Reason, which is vastly different from, and Superior to
his Fellow Creatures, it would be very strange, allowing the common Attributes
of the Divine Being, if he should be unaccountable to his Maker for the Abuse
of these Endowments. In a word, whatever Pains may be taken to extinguish this
Natural Light of the Understanding, yet since it is found so very hard, I had
almost said impossible, for any considerate Man to be diffident in the first
Article, viz. the Belief of a God, it will be at best the most dangerous
Presumption, or downright Madness to discredit either his Providence or our own
Immortality.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
Page 8. l. 35. r. was not from Eternity.
P. 15. l. 9. r. allow.
P. 16. l. 31. r. owe.
P. 19. l. 12. r. unaccountably.
P. 24. l. 17. r. Phoenomenon.
l. 19. r. an innumerable.
20. r. Corpuscles and Sixes.
P. 25. l. 2. r. greater.
P. 27. l. 20. r. this.
P. 28. l. 17. r. world.
P. 39. last ^^ne r. Mouths.
P. 44. l. 35. r. Conjuncture^.
P. 45. l. 16. r. Interpositions.
P. 46. l. 39. r. help.
P. 47. l. 11. r. wittily.
P. 66. l. 4. r. ut for ad.
P. 88. l. 1. r. Description.
P. 96. l. 17. r. it instead of in.
P. 98. l. 10. r. hebitatione.
P. 127. l. 9. r. imitable for Infinite.
P. 130. l. 23. r. Scriptures.
P. 146. last line r. Enthusiastic.
P. 152. l. 17. r. Enjoyment.
P. 159. l. 23. r. been.
P. 164. l. 10. r. visitationis.

