THE MIDDLE WAY BETWIXT Necessity and Freedom. THE SECOND PART. BEING AN
Apologetical Vindication of the Former.

By JOHN TURNER, late Fellow of Christs-College in Cambridge.

(...).

LONDON, Printed for Samnel Sympson Bookseller in Cambridge, and are to be sold
by him, and Fincham Gardener at the White Horse in Ludgate Street, London. 1684.

Rev^^^^do admodum Patri ET ILLUSTRI VIRO, ERYCIO COMPTONIDAE,
Splendidissimorum Northamptoniae Comitum Filio, Fratri, Patruo, Nepoti; Non
minus propria Virtute, Sapientia ac Doctrina, quam Titulis and Imaginibus
Majorum claro; Augustae, quae est in Trinobantibus Praesuli Amplissimo,
Oratorii Imp^^^alis Decano; KAROLINAEQUE MAJESTATIS in Concilio sanctiori
intimae admissionis Consiliario; JOHANNES TURNER, Hanc suam, tramitis, qui
nuper medius dicebatur, Apologeticam defensionem, Idem scriptor jusdem operis
continuat or and assertor, eidem faventissimo Patrono ac Mecoenati humiliter
offert, and cum perpetua gratiarum action vovet consecratque.

TO THE READER.
IT may seem, for ought I know, preposterous to some, to call that which I now
publish an Apologetical Vindication, for why should I vindicate that which is
not accused? or make an Apology for that which no man censures? But when I
consider how strong the current of the best Writers upon the subject I have
undertaken, has run against that notion which I have endeavored to establish,
I could not think it modest to dissent from so many and so Learned men, without
giving a more particular account of my self, and without endeavoring to
explain, illustrate, and confirm what I had written by a more distinct review
of the whole matter, and by an addition of new Arguments and Circumstances to
strengthen mine opinion, which I hope I have done with that clearness of
expression and that force of reason, that will convince the most obstinate, and
abundantly satisfy the most doubting mind.

For my part, I declare I have no other concern in it, then that I would have
the truth to appear, the truth, which I have always, and which I shall always
prefer before any private interest or consideration whatsoever, as I am
indispensably obliged to do by my duty as a man, and as a Christian, and by my
profession as a Divine, by which I am under a still more particular and
pressing obligation, to promote, encourage, and propagate all those notions,
whose belief has a tendency to the happiness of the world, and to
discountenance and discourage as much as in me lies all that have a tendency to
destroy its peace and welfare; for I am either very much mistaken in my
sentiments of things, or there is nothing practically or politically true,
which it is not very much for the interest of the world that it should be
known. Indeed if Divinity were nothing but an Art, a mere Trick and a Juggle to
impose upon the People, and to enrich its Professors, then it would be true in
another sense, than that in which it is usually taken, artis est celare artem,
and an oath of secrecy ought to be taken of every man that enters into Orders,
that he should not betray the Arcana of his Function, which it would be
impossible for any man to do, without bringing ruin and disgrace upon it: but
since we intend nothing but the good of the world in the first place, and do
not aim at any private advantage any further then is consistent with that, why
should we not be frank and open in what we do? It is for them to cant and talk
mysteries, that cannot preach useful sense, or speak intelligible English, them
that uphold a Party by flights of Enthusiasme, and certain uncouth absurdities
of expression, and decry carnal reason for no other cause, but only that either
they do not understand it, or else that they are sensible it is no friend of
theirs: but Nature and true Religion are always of a mind, and this is the
great fault of the Calvinistical doctrines, that they contradict experience*
and bid a perpetual defiance to humane faculties, and to common sense, which if
the Scripture it self should always do, it would be no Argument that Calvin was
in the right, but only that they themselves were very much out of the story,
and were not really the word of God, as they pretend to be.

I mention the Calvinistical doctrines, because there is a connection betwixt
the divine obduration and the humane; and I call it the humane, because the
Calvinistical necessity is a necessity of man's making, and they have both of
them the same effect; that is, they do things they know not why, and they act
after such or such a manner, because they cannot help it; only they differ in
the cause, that is to say, one of these necessities is acted from without, and
the other from within, one is a real necessity of providence, and the other
pretends to be a necessity of nature.

It was therefore very suitable and congruous in a discourse of the former, to
take so fair an occasion to consider the latter likewise; and the rather
because those very Texts of Scripture which do so plainly evidence and
demonstrate the one, are produced by those that assert the reprobation for the
defense and maintenance of the other, with how much disingenuity, and how
little skill I think I have sufficiently manifested to the world, and have so
fairly explained the beloved ninth of the Romans about which so much noise has
been made, and so much has been written to so little purpose by the contending
Parties.

Nay, I have turned their own Cannon upon themselves, I have engaged this very
Chapter in the quarrel against them; and Jacob and Esau, the younger and the
Elder, Ishmael and Isaac the seed of the Bondwoman and the promised seed,
however disagreeing and angry with each other, have upon this occasion joined
all their Forces, and laid a formal Siege to Geneva, neither is it at all to be
doubted, but they will carry the place, whether you consider the strength and
courage of the Assailants o^ ^he one side, or on the other the weak and
defenseless condition of the Town, its want of Provision to hold out, or
Ammunition to defend it self, and annoy the confederated leaguer of nature and
revelation by which it is so closely begrit.

That which I now publish was intended, as you will see by the beginning, and
by several passages up and down in it, only by way of preface to that other
discourse which is already abroad, but it grew so long before I was well aware,
that it was much bigger than the Discourse it self, to which it was intended to
be prefixed; it was therefore beter that it should be published by it self, and
consequently after the other; for it would have been absurd to refer to a
Discourse which was not yet in being; besides that it will be much better it
should come out as it does, for this reason, that the other having been already
perused and digested, you will be the better able as you read along to
understand this, and to make a judgment of both: and therefore that you may the
better compare both of them together, I have added a common Index of the chief
Heads of both at the latter end. So that all you have to do, is only by
Preface, in the beginning to understand Postscript, and by the word following
in several places, to understand as much as if I had said foregoing, which it
is no great matter for one friend to do for another, and then all is well and
as it should be: or if you do not like this way of interpretation, though it be
as good as many that come from very able Expositors and profound Divines, then
take your own way. And though you laugh at the Title, which you may do and
welcome, if you please, yet be so just to the Argument notwithstanding, as to
give it that respect which it deserves.

I cannot pretend to add much in this place, to what I have already written,
but because being lately injured by the malice of an ill man, whom I know not,
and therefore forgive him unsight and unseen, I did in the heat of my
resentment, draw up a just and true Character and representation of my self,
which* upon second thoughts, I have suppressed, as I have many other things, to
the great detriment and destruction of Pen, Ink, and Paper, which might be
employed for better uses; in which tumultuary scrible, I did among other
things, declare my opinion as to the points in difference betwixt those whom
they call in Holland the Remonstrants and Contraremonstrants, so far as those
points are determinable upon the Principles of nature, the inserting of which
in this place may do some service to the cause I have undertaken; therefore I
have thought fit to insert it in the words that follow, and to beg of you no
greater favor than what in justice I may challenge at your hands, that you
would read it with the same ingenuity, candor and good meaning with which it
was written by me.

[For the points in Dispute betwixt the Arminian and Calvinistical Doctors, I
make no manner of scruple to affirm, that the former of these are certainly in
the right, and that the latter of them by turning men into Beasts, and by
making it impossible for a man by his natural strength to make the least
attempt at any thing that is good, or to harbor the least degree of a virtuous
inclination, but on the contrary, to be carried forth by an irresistible
propensity of will to all manner of wickedness, and to the highest degrees of
sin, as well as to the most detestable instances of it; (as Mr. Calvin and his
Followers in so many words are pleased to do) have done a very great and a very
unpardonable affront to humane nature, and that it would never be endured, if
any one man should bespatter his Neighbor at that rate, at which they have
taken the confidence upon them to reproach and vilify the whole race of
Mankind. I reckon that they are every whit as bad Philosophers as they are
Divines, and that since men do naturally carry different constitutions and
temperaments about them; by which it appears plainly that some men are by
nature and by the particular happiness of their constitution, more virtuously
disposed than others: which dispositions may either be heightened or corrupted,
or perfectly destroyed by difference of Company, different ways of Study,
different courses of Life, and different methods of Education.

Again, since as some constitutions are in the general more virtuously disposed
than others, so there is none so good as not to be carried forth with a greater
or lesser inclination to sin; and since it appears in every man's observation,
that one temperament is naturally inclined to one sort or species of evil, and
another to another, which inclinations may likewise be heightened, or in a
great measure conquered and subdued, by the same means by which the
dispositions to virtue and good manners are either cultivated, or lessened or
destroyed; I say, since these things are so in the open view and appearance of
all mankind, since they are so plain, so manifest, so undenyably certain from
the daily experience both of our selves and others, what can be more foolish
then to say that all men are irresistibly, that is, equally inclined by nature
to all manner of vice? or to affirm that nothing but an irresistible Grace can
hinder the best of men from being worse than the most fierce, untameable and
savage Beasts themselves, as Mr. Calvin expressly does, and it is no more then
what does unavoidably follow from his doctrine of irresistible pravity and
corruption. But yet I am very far from bidding defyance to the spirit of Grace,
very far from sinking into the Pelagian, or so much, as into the Massilian or
Semi-pelagian error; I do believe and am taught by the word of God, and by my
own experience of my self and others, that without the Grace of God it is
impossible to do that which is truly pleasing and acceptable in his sight: I
believe there will always be, through the confessed pravity of the best
natures, such a mixture of corruption, by the interposition or intervention of
carnal or prohibited desires, by which our zeal for Goodness will be always
either cooled, diverted or destroyed, that even our best Actions will not be
accepted of God, without the assistance of his Grace to give them a beauty,
consummation and perfection which they could not have received from our selves:
I believe that as virtuous actions or dispositions cannot be perfect, so much
less can virtuous habits be attained without the supernatural and perpetual,
though not irresistible assistance of the same spirit, which is as necessary to
create in us sometimes good dispositions and much more good habits, but always
to assure and perfect them; as the Death of Christ was to atone for our bad
ones, or his intercession to apply the merits of that death and passion to the
several imperfect degrees of our repentance or amendment of life.

I do believe, and am verily in my conscience persuaded, that God who in the
Creation of the world, and in the admirable contrivance of it, for its own
preservation, and for the well-being and happiness of its inhabitants, has
discovered so much goodness; he that in the structure of the bodies of all
Animals, and in the provision which he has made for the respective subsistence
of them all, according to their several natures and constitutions, has plainly
showed himself to be a very merciful and Gracious Being; he that has ordered
and created all things in number, weight and measure, he that out of nothing
has reared this comely Fabric of the World, so full of usefulness as well as
beauty, both of which do almost equally declare him to be not an angry,
merciless, and revengeful, but a serene, composed, benevolent and Gracious
mind: I say, I do believe and am verily persuaded, that such a Being as this,
would not, or rather could not with consistence to himself, condemn almost all
mankind, all the successions, ages, and generations of Men, Women and Children,
(as Conquerours do when they put Towns to the Sword) to infinite insufferable
and eternal Torments, with out any fault of their own, but only for one single
disobedience and transgression of their first Parents, which it was not
possible for them, being yet unborn, to prevent: and yet this is no more than
what Mr. Calvin and his adherents do expressly assert.

I believe that the Supralapsarian and Sublapsarian Doctrine, one of which
makes God to have decreed the fall of Adam, and in him the fall of all Mankind;
the other only to have foreknown it, and to have condemned the infinitely
greatest number of men upon that supposition, to be equally impious and
detestable, because the divine foreknowledge cannot be deceived; and therefore
to condemn men upon a condition that will certainly take effect, is the same
thing as to condemn them without any condition at all.

I believe that that Doctrine which makes all humane actions and intentions to
be absolutely necessary, unavoidable and fatal, by ascribing them all either to
an irresistible corruption or an irresistible Grace, does manifestly destroy
the nature of morality and consequently of religion too; for every man must be
denominated either good or bad, not from the action of another but his own, not
from that action to which he is irresistibly determined, but from that which he
may either do or omit, which he may promote or slacken, or perfectly destroy by
a certain Principle of freedom from within. I believe that this Doctrine is
every whit as great, nay, a much greater excuse and dispensation for sin, then
any Papal Indulgence or dispensation can be; I believe it is not only
destructive of virtue and good manners in single men considered by themselves,
but that considering them as members of a society it destroys all mutual faith
and confidence in one another, it pulls up all manner of obligation by the
roots, and by an unresistible force and power it dissolves or rather tears in
sunder, breaks into shivers and crumbles into dust the firmest and most assured
Religion of an oath; and therefore I cannot wonder that any man shall take an
Oath to qualify him for an Office or Employment, which otherwise he pretends,
but he is very much deceived, he would by no means have taken, nor to see him
break it when he has done, for no man can keep his Oath any longer than he
can, and according to this Hypothesis, he could neither help the taking of this
Oath, nor the giving of this reason why he took it, nor the being deceived in
the reason which he gives, nor the breaking it after he had given such a reason.

I believe that the turning all Mankind into Puppets and Machines as this
Doctrine manifestly does, is the vilest reproach and ignominy that can be cast
upon it, and then to say we promise, and threaten, and entreat, and exhort,
that we punish and reward one another, that we are first made to commit sins,
and then to bewail or confess them, to say that we do what we could not avoid,
and are sorry for what we cannot help, or that we cannot help that very sorrow
it self, no more then we could the actions that occasion it, nor the
reformation which is consequent upon it, nor the repeated enormities which
frequently ensue when that sorrow is forgotten, as by degrees it usually is, is
to turn mankind into things very despicable and contemptible to themselves, and
to convert all humane actions into ridicule, where we our selves being Parties
all the way, have nothing to do but to pity every man his own abused self, and
yet cannot forbear laughing at one another.

For what more comical or pleasant can possibly be conceived, then for this man
to look as if he were in a brown study, laying of causes and effects together,
and being as free as the air, or as freedom it self can make him; as the
Calvinists themselves do naturally think when they are contemplating upon any
design, to see another look angry, and meditating revenge, and contriving a
thousand cruel stratagems within himself to bring the desperate intrigue to
pass; and to behold a third smiling at some inward conceit, and following, as
he believes, a pleasant imagination, with a voluntary pursuit, as it is natural
for every man in this case to do, and yet all this while they are all three
mightily deceived, for all this is but one and the same numerical individual
fate, putting on new shapes and appearances in several Persons, and displaying
it self only for this reason, because it cannot help it, like the spasmes and
distortions of one in a Convulsive or Epileptical Fit, with a strange variety
of Postures and Grimaces.

But yet as pleasant as it is to consider so diverting a spectacle in others;
yet when we behold it in our selves, the mirth will be quite dashed, and the
Comedy ended with an ungrateful Epilogue, reflecting upon us, and spoken either
by us, looking inwardly upon our selves, or one of those who was the object of
our mirth before, and who looks upon us with every whit as much contempt and
laughter as we do upon him.

I believe that this Doctrine is therefore as well as for other reasons that
have been already suggested, manifestly prejudicial to the public good,
because the reflecting* upon the absolute fatality of all humane actions and
events, and that things will be as they must be, let us will and endeavor what
we please, whose very wills and endeavors are acted and influenced by a
necessity not to be resisted, is naturally productive of a melancholy
listlessness, carelessness and sloth, and gives a perpetual damp and cheque to
all great designs or useful undertakings; and if men do endeavor
notwithstanding, to do things worthy of praise or of reward, it is only then
when either they do not believe this Doctrine, which is the case of all men in
the common actions of life, in which till they come to dispute about the
business, they generally suppose themselves and one another to be free, and do
by themselves and by one another, as if they were really of this opinion; or
else it is then, when although they do believe, and are perhaps very zealous to
maintain it, yet they do not attend to the consequences of it.

Neither is it sufficient in this case to say, what I know very well is usually
pleaded, that all the consequences of opinions, or all the possible corollaries
resulting from the acknowledgment of such or such a proposition, are not to be
charged upon all that assert that opinion, or look upon such a proposition, as
a matter of undoubted truth; for though it be true indeed that in an opinion
which I have newly taken up, and have not sufficiently enquired into, all the
absurd consequences that follow from it are not presently to be charged upon
me, as if I maintained the one as well as the other; yet when those
consequences have been manifestly shown to be the inseparable companions of
such or such an opinion, this is a demonstratio per absurdum, that the opinion
it self is eroneous and falser; and if these consequences have been charged
upon me a thousand times over, which is the case in the present debate, without
my ever so much as pretending to show that there is no such real consequence as
is pretended; then it is too late for me to plead ignorance any longer, but I
must of necessity either own the consequences, or discard my opinion together
with them.

But though the absolute necessity of all humane actions be an opinion so
absurd and ridiculous in it self, and drawing such horrid consequences after
it, yet I do not say that in all our actions tendencies or inclinations, we
enjoy a perfect and entire freedom neither; for the contrary of this is
manifest by experience, for we are more free to some instances of virtue then
we are to others, and the several inclinations together with the several
degrees and measures of them, that are to be met with in several constitutions
to this or that unreasonable action or enjoyment, in one constitution to one
sort of instances, and in another to another, are to be looked upon by their
perpetual solicitation of our better part, and hindering it from the true and
undisturbed exercise of it self, to be a degree of necessity superinduced upon
it.

For we are to be considered as Persons of a Compound or Heterogeneous nature,
we consist of a soul and body, that is, of an active, self-moving or free, and
of a passive or necessary Principle, the latter of which is a perpetual clogg
and hindrance to the former.

By being united in a very close, entire, and intimate manner with it, it is
the seed of all concupiscence, all-prejudice, inadvertency, ignorance,
precipitancy, passion and folly, and according to the several constitutions of
this passive Principle, that is, according to the several modifications,
configurations, motions, consistencies and temperaments of the material part,
united to the immaterial and immortal nature; so there arise different
tendencies and various dispositions in the whole personality or Compositum
taken together to this or that vice, infirmity, or frailty, this or that evil
habit or unallowable practice; in one man to Lust, in another to Pride or
Ambition, in another to Dissimulation or Falsehood, in another to Covetousness
or sordid and penurious living, ^n another to fool-hardiness or unreasonable
courage, in another to super stition or unreasonable fear.

And that these things are owing to the material nature, appears from this,
that these (...) are propagated Ex Traduce as the Schools are used to speak,
that is, they descend by way of Generation from Father to Son, and that a proud
man, that is one that in his constitution is excessively so, cannot appear
humble or affable though he would never so fain, and when he endeavors it, it
does so ill become him, that in his pretenses to humility, he discovers his
Pride. A man that is given to craft and overreaching, though he do so far
subdue the malignity of his nature, as to hinder himself from doing any actual
wrong, yet he manages even just things and honest designs with a sort of
intrigue peculiar to his temper, and does his best actions with so much
artifice and slight of hand, as if he were about to cousen or deceive. An angry
man though by reason and Philosophy, by long exercise and practice upon
himself, he may in a great measure tame and mollify his temper, yet upon any
sudden motion the beast will return again, and he is not able to withstand a
surprise, though he be prepared to receive an expected provocation: and on the
contrary, a man of a more cool and temperate disposition, though such be
usually the best Philosophers and the most useful men, and though he may have
computed the true value of things, how little desirable it is to live, and how
little to be feared for a Good man to dye, though he be prepared and armed in
his mind against foreseen dangers, and probably impending evils, when they
appear at a distance from him, yet a sudden and unexpected assault, which would
rouse up courage and anger in another, creates nothing but paleness and a damp
terror in him, against which it is as naturally impossible for him to make any
resistance, as it is to stand under the pressures of some mighty weight, which
is exceedingly too heavy for his strength to bear; and so it is with one that
is naturally addicted to a glozing, parasitical and insinuating way of speech,
or to an obsequious complaisance and flattery in his Mine; this man though he
have the virtue not to make that use of these qualities for which they are
fitted and accommodated by nature, yet he can no more tell how to speak or act
after the same plain and unaffected manner that other men do, then a Fish can
live out of Water, or a Diver live perpetually in it, but his very kindnesses
look as if he had a design upon you, and with his smiles he gives you warning
to have a care of your Pockets.

Again, you shall have some of Grave and comely aspect, whose Postures are full
of gravity, and their Mine of wisdom, and yet if you view their inside, though
but with a careless and a transient eye, you shall find them as empty as an old
Pollard, which time has rendered hollow, so that it has nothing within
notwithstanding that by reason of its age and thickness, the tallness of it is
Trunk, and the spreading of its Root, by reason of its outward majesty and
venerable appearance, it command a respect from the younger Trees of the
Forest: And yet this man, though he be not void of so much ordinary discretion
as to manage himself tolerably well, that is, without any great inconvenience
to himself, or to the public, whether you consider him as a private and single
man, or as a member of the body politic, though he can be temperate and
friendly, and just, yet all the Study, and all the Education in the world, will
never make him really wise; neither is it possible for him though he would
never so fain not to appear as if he were so.

There are others that are naturally inclined to be full of apish and unlucky
tricks, that affect little featresses and humors in their conversation, and
with this affectation of littleness, and seeming folly, there are some that
have real wit and wisdom, and others nothing else but Mummery and Grimace.
There are some whose temper inclines them to believe they understand
Government, and to censure matters of State; and others that out of a natural
affectation of appearing wise, will set up, as it happens, either for great
Casuists or downright Atheists: some are for peace and quietness upon any
terms, and others can endure nothing but to live in a flame: there are some
that affect to shrugg under the weight of Kingdoms, with which they have
nothing to do; and some that by nature are disposed to mind their own business,
and leave the public concerns to the Providence of God, and to the management
of those to whom of right they belong, while others careless both of the
public and themselves, spend all their time in little observations, and
censures that do no harm, of dresses and garbs, and the modish ways of living,
and take a much greater pleasure in censuring a man's Tailor, than the man
himself.

And as the imperfections of the humane nature are all of them constitutional
and owing to the union of the Soul with Matter, and to the different
modification of that Matter to which it is so closely and intimately united, so
also those things which are accounted perfections are in a great measure owing
to the same cause; for as there are some that are by nature sordid and
parsimonious, so it is equally plain and evident by experience, that there are
others whose temper does always very strongly incline them to be generous and
obliging, who are very ready to lay hold of all the occasions and opportunities
of doing good, and take a particular pleasure in the sense of having done it;
as there are some that are by constitution subject to be fierce, unmerciful and
cruel; so there are others that are as excessive, and perhaps, in some
instances, as much to blame, in an immoderate pity and compassion; and there
are others whose Genius is Philosophical, and strictly just without either pity
on the one hand or cruelty on the other.

Innocent mirth, easiness of access, affability in conversation, an unaffected
softness and sweetness of behavior, are things that are deservedly accounted
felicities and perfections, because they tend to the strengthening the Band and
Cement of Friendship among men, and they do unavoidably force a warm affection
and esteem from us wherever they are found; as on the contrary, austerity
joined with justice and with wisdom does always procure authority and
veneration, and will as unavoidably extort respect, though mingled at the same
time with some kind of fear and apprehension of the Persons to whom that
reverence and respect is paid, and both of these where they are not rooted and
riveted in nature, they cannot be counterfeited or dissembled by art, though
they may be improved by it, and all that we do or can understand by the Soul,
being only this, that it is a cogitant, self-active, immaterial Being, all that
we understand by Matter or Body, being that it is a thing or nature,
impenetrable, extended, and passive; it follows plainly from these two notions
compared together, that the latter can have no sense or feeling of any thing,
but what is communicated to it by the former, and the former being an uniform
or similar thing, and having exactly the same nature and notion in all the
several personalities wherein it is found, it is plain that this natural
difference or disagreement or disproportion that is found in the wisdom, the
wit, the humor, or inclination of one man from another, is neither wholly
owing to the matter, nor to the cogitant or immaterial part, but it results
from the union of them both together, and from the different modes of that
mysterious union in one personality and another. Which things are so true, that
the great seize upon which men are used to value and esteem themselves,
and upon the comparison to despise or contemn any other: the great perfections
and accomplishments, that make such a noise in the world, which fill the
Standers by with admiration, and the Possessours with pride, are in their first
sourse and Fountain constitutional things.

This man is looked upon as an admirable Poet, another is reputed excellent for
an Orator, a third for a Mathematician, a fourth is famous for a Pleader at the
Bar, a fifth a Casuistical Lawyer or Divine, fitter for Chamber Council or for
giving a sound judgment in a case proposed, then for the Pulpit or the Bar, a
sixth has a prodigious faculty at painting, he can make a Picture live, and a
dead Figure move, not only it self, but those that behold it likewise; and a
seventh, can draw Stones and Trees after him by the charms of Music, and wake
the drousy ashes of the dead, with notes almost as powerful as those with which
the Angel Trumpeter of the day of Judgment shall sound a Resurrection to the
sleeping world.

All these things, I say, are originally rooted in a several Idiosyncracy, or
particular constitution of the blood and spirits, and other more subtle and
imperceptible organismes of the body; and other account than this there can be
none given why one shall carry away a Tune almost at the very first hearing,
another shall never hit it with a thousand years Practice, why one shall have
very good skill in Music, a good voice, or an exquisite hand, who knows very
well when things are done as they should be, but is not able to imitate or
equal them by any composition of his own; why he that is good at one sort of
composition, shall have little or no ability or faculty in another; why he that
can compose so exquisietly well to more delight or admiration in another, shall
yet have neither hand nor voice to reap the true pleasure of his composition
himself; why in Poetry all men that understand what good Poetry is, or have
read all that have written both ancient and modern, yet cannot be good Poets
themselves; why he that is excellent at Satyr, yet perhaps shall be able to do
little or nothing in the Heroique way; or he that shall write an excellent
Pindarique, would do but very lamely at an Epick Poem; or why there are others
who are sick of Moschus his disease, and cannot write well of any thing but
Love; why in Painting one shall be excellent at Landscape, another at Story,
another at the Life; why one shall design very well, and do great things of his
own, but cannot endure the tediousness of Copying, or the pains of Imitation;
another shall imitate or copy to admiration, but can do very little out of his
own fancy or design; why he that is Mathematically given, can take no Pleasure,
but rather looks upon them as a sort of glorious trifles, in the flights or
softnesses of a lofty Poem, or an excellent Oration; and why on the contrary a
Poet or an Orator shall look upon the Mathematics or the crabbed niceties of
Scholastic Learning, as things that are dry and unpleasant, things that do by
no means deserve his pains, and such as it is impossible for him ever to lend
his patience, or bestow his attendance upon them; why he that is wholly given
to the Study of Languages, as some such there are, and are good for nothing
else, thinks him only fit to be called or thought a great Scholar, who upon
occasion could have been Interpreter to all the Builders at Babel, while
another is so wholly of another mind, that he thinks of this man with nothing
but contempt, and has no relish of any thing but real and useful knowledge;
and a thousand more such differences might be produced, the reasons of which
are placed in the particular Genius of the persons to whom they belong, that
is, in their particular constitutions, in which the seeds or causes of all
these either excellencies or defects are contained.

And according to the different proportions of care, industry and study, the
different happinesses or infelicities of Fortune or Education, so may these
defects be amended, or increased, these aptitudes improved or utterly
destroyed; for men are not only as to these matters very different from one
another, but by Company, or Diet, or different Education they may be altered
from themselves; a man is scarce the same thing when he is full and when he is
fasting, when he is fresh in the morning and weary after the toil and labor of
the day, he has not the same apprehension, and does not make the same judgment
of things when he is in drink and when he is sober.

When he is sick and oppressed with a too heavy load of Melancholy and
oppressive matter, when his blood does not circulate freely, or his stomach
does not perform its office, or the due and usual separations are not made by
sweat, or siege, or urine, he cannot discern things so clearly as at other
times, he suspects persons without reason, and fears those things of which he
is in no danger, and he needs only to purge, or bleed, or enter into a Diet as
a Physician shall prescribe, to bring him to a sound sense and a right
understanding both of himself and of the things about him: and so to conclude
this matter, this is the account that is to be given, why he that was a brisk
and an active man in his youth, shall perhaps be a stupid Fellow and a dotard
in his old age; others very dull and phlegmatic in their youth, do as they
grow in years, improve in briskness and in gayety too, why one that had a good
understanding, shall lose it by an accidental fall upon his head, and he that
was dull and slow of apprehension, being soundly purged by a sickness of the
Small Pox shall grow more nimble and sagacious then before.

Wherefore this is the great duty incumbent upon men, they are very carefully
to watch, as over all their evil inclinations and unreasonable desires, so
particularly over that which they find to be most reigning and constitutional
in them, because in this there is the greatest danger, from this there is a
strong and a perpetual solicitation, upon this all opportunities and
temptations from without have a manifest advantage, to this they find the most
easy and favorable access, and against this it is, whatever it be, that the
Devil himself, who uses his utmost diligence in watering the tares and cockle
of our minds, that he may choke the wheat, and stifle the good seed, employes
his most assiduous stratagems and devices, and with the most assured hopes of
success.

It concerns us therefore highly in opposition to so many and so great Enemies
from within and from without, to stand perpetually upon our guard, and as we
are to lay aside every weight, and to subdue, as much as in us lies, every
thought and affection to an obedience to reason and religion, so because there
is always the greatest danger, and we are always the most strongly solicited
and assaulted on that side, we are therefore to have a more particular regard
to the sin that does so easily beset us, that is, to that particular sin or
folly whatsoever it be, which is most constitutional and complexional in us.

Secondly, as there are constitutional infirmities or vices, so there are also
of the same kind certain natural perfections or useful inclinations, which it
ought to be every man's business for his own particular carefully to observe,
and having observed to cultivate and improve, because in the improvement of
this talent, which is so natural to him, he will find himself most happy, he
will be able to make the most considerable progress, and will be most
serviceable to himself and to Mankind.

And though he be certainly the most happy man and the most highly favored of
God and nature, whose constitutional talent shall consist in that, which is of
greatest use and advantage to the World, as if a man have a natural gravity and
wisdom in his looks, joined to a natural sobriety, and a strong power of
persuasion, which if employed in exhorting the world to virtue and calling it
to repentance, and in spurring men on to a vigorous pursuit after things that
are useful, praiseworthy, and of good example, will briug great authority and
reputation to himself, and be of the most signal benefit and advantage to
others. Yet there are other Talents likewise, which though they are not
altogether of such absolute necessity or such universal use, yet ought they
wherever they are found to be with no less care and industry improved then the
other, as if a man's parts lie for the improvement of Husbandry, Trade,
Navigation, Mechanic arts, or any thing whereby life may be rendered more
happy, society more ornamental, Cities more wealthy, correspondence more
diffusive, and the world, by every man's having wherewithal to subsist, more
safe; these are dispositions wherever they are found, which are to be looked
upon as the stock of nature, with which we are to set up as Citizens of the
World, and for the improvement of which we must be accountable to God, from
whom every good and perfect gift proceeds.]

To which Considerations, for I went no farther upon that occasion; it is to be
added in the third place, that the reflecting upon this, that our very virtues
and excellencies themselves are, in so great a measure, constitutional things,
ought to be a natural remedy against all manner of insolence and pride; for
though it be a great shame to abuse and adulterate an happy constitution, and
the greatest commendation that can be to improve it, yet to be proud or
insolent because our Bodies are better made either for the practice of virtue
or for the attainment of wisdom then our neighbors, is to be proud of that
which we could not avoid, and which it was not in our power to order otherwise
then it is, and by consequence is a very foolish, and very non-sensical pride.

And then fourthly and lastly, the reflecting upon the constitutional frailties
and imperfections, to which the nature of man is differently exposed, which it
is so hard and perhaps utterly impossible perfectly to conquer, and which are a
degree of necessity superinduced upon us from without, by the unmanageable
temperament of our bodily part, ought to affect us all with a sense of charity
and pity for each other, and to stir us up to a mutual forbearance of the
several infirmities to which our natures are subject; that is to say, we must
so far bear with one another, as is consistent with the peace of the world, and
every man ought to endeavor so far as Religion and virtue will permit, to
render his humor and his manners as agreeable as he can to those with whom he
converses, for the greater comfort of Humane life, for the preservation of
friendship and charity in the world, and for the mutual benefit and advantage
of Mankind.

And now I see nothing that remains, which has not been sufficiently
considered upon this Argument of Liberty and Necessity, either in this
introduction, or in the book it self, unless it be one of these three things,
which I shall pass over very briefly.

The first is the case of the divine Prescience which is pretended to be
inconsistent with humane freedom. To which it is sufficient to answer, that
extend the foreknowledge of God as wide as you please, yet knowledge is but
knowledge all this while, and can have no external Physical causality, for this
were to confound the notions of knowledge and of power together; so that the
only reason why there can be no such thing as a free agent, is not because this
freedom is inconsistent with the divine Prescience, which can have no Physical
influence upon it, and there is no other influence in the nature of things; but
because the notion of a free agent considered by it self, is an impossible
notion, that is, it is impossible there should be any such thing as an
immaterial being; for I have proved at large in one Part of this Discourse,
that an immaterial and a free agent are the same: and this being a point upon
which all Religion depends, I leave the Calvinists to consider of it.

Secondly, Mr. Hobs his Arguments against Freedom are objected, and those
Arguments, as I remember, for I have not his Book by me, are these two which
follow; the first is contained in this syllogism. Every Cause is a sufficient
cause. Every sufficient cause is a necessary cause. Therefore every cause is a
necessary cause. Which is no more then to say in fewer words, Every cause is a
cause. Which being an Identical Proposition must needs be true, for nothing is
a cause till it have produced an effect, and then indeed it is necessary that
the effect should have been, because that which is past can never be to come;
but yet it does not follow but that there might be a causality or causability,
residing in a subject or substance though it do not yet exert it self by any
express or actual operation; and Mr. Hobs in this sense might have been said to
be a cause of the Leviathan and the book de Cive many years before he wrote the
Books themselves.

His second argument is taken from the nature of a disjunctive proposition
concerning an action which is supposed to be future and contingent; as thus.
Either Socrates shall dispute to morrow, or he shall not dispute to morrow; and
it is certain that this Proposition is unquestionably true, because it consists
of contradicting parts, which contain the whole circuit of things within
themselves; for everything in the world besides disputing is not disputing, and
if Socrates should dye or should be annihilated to morrow, yet to be
annihilated or to dye is not to dispute, so that the whole Proposition is
unavoidably true, but it does not follow that either of its parts are so
determinately at this time, and that was Mr. Hobs his mistake, as I will prove
by altering the Proposition a very little. Either Socrates shall dispute freely
to morrow, or he shall not dispute freely. Now the nature of a Disjunctive
Proposition is this, that all the parts taken asunder, cannot be true at the
same time; because they are supposed to be incompetible and inconsistent with
one another, otherwise there is no disjunction: further, it is certain that
there can but one part of a Disjunctive Proposition, which concerns the present
be true at the same time, and in a Proposition de futuro there can be but one
part eventually true; but this depends upon the nature of the thing, and upon
the issue of the expected event, not upon the nature of the Proposition, to
which it is necessary that it should consist of several parts, and therefore
the truth of it as such, must depend upon the just and full enumeration of all
those parts of which it ought to consist, so that whatever becomes of the
nature of the thing, the Disjunctive Proposition hinders not but Socrates may
be free, since freedom is supposed in one of its members, but yet if it be
necessary that he shall dispute freely to morrow, as Mr. Hobs must own, if he
will be consistent to himself, then he will be free and necessary at the same
time, which is absurd.

The third and last thing which may be, and is usually objected, concerns those
places of Scripture, wherein the days of a man are said to be numbered, and the
time of every respective personalities continuance upon the earth predetermined
and preordained, which if it be true, then it will follow unavoidably that the
actions of a man's life are necessary and fatal, for there may be a thousand
several actions that may conspire to bring a man into a Chronical distemper,
which shall be the cause of his death; if he be predetermined to dye at such a
time of the Plague, it must likewise be so ordered, that he shall necessarily
reside there where it is, or repair thither that he may catch it: and if his
fate be to be knocked on the head by the fall of any Stone or Timber from an
House, it is necessary that he be abroad and passing by that place where the
Stone or Timber may be sure to meet him in its fall, and the like. But I do
absolutely deny that the days of a man are any where in Scripture affirmed to
be thus limited or predetermined; but that which is called the appointed time,
is the utmost distance of time from the day of a man's birth to which the
stamina vitae will extend, or to which the respective constitutions will last,
if they be well used; and what that time is, God certainly who is the Author of
nature, and has all causes and effects perpetually present to him and always
in his sight, cannot choose but understand very well: but yet it does not
follow, but a man may anticipate this time by intemperance, or by want of
skill, or want of care; nay, I suppose we may affirm it for a certain truth,
that no man ever did yet live so long, as he might possibly have done, had he
understood his own constitution, and the respective usefulness or annoyance of
all other things to it, together with the true proportions in which they are to
be taken and avoided, and had he lived a life answerable to so exact a
knowledge; and yet after all, humane life would be but of short continuance,
and after all we should have reason to pray with the Prophet David, that God
would teach us to know our end and the number of our days, that we might apply
our hearts unto wisdom; that is, that he would teach us to reflect upon the
shortness of our lives and the frailty of our natures, that we might improve
that little time we have here to the best advantage. And this I think is a
sufficient answer to Beverovicius his Question, An terminus vitae sit mobilis,
without all that laborious canvassing of the business, which is to be found in
the Epistles of those Learned men, who at his request undertook a resolution of
that Problem, especially Voetius and Salmasius.

I have nothing further to add, unless it be, that I would desire the
Calvinists to consider seriously with themselves, whether they who declaim so
loudly against the Church of Rome, which I believe as well as they to be an
Idolatrous Church, are not guilty of Idolatry themselves; for they worship an
Angry, Revengeful, and Implacable Being, instead of a Merciful and Gracious
Nature, a Rash and Cruel Deity, instead of a Wise and Just, which if I
understand any thing, is to direct their worship to a false Object; for
certainly the attributes of God are not really distinct from God himself, and
therefore to worship false Attributes must be of necessity to worship a false
God. However I am very tender of chargeing them with Idolatry, especially since
they pretend to hate and detest it so much; only I desire them to consider of
it, and I cannot forbear declaring thus much, that I think it is to no purpose
to worship the God of the Calvinists who cannot be moved from his Decrees by
any Prayers or entreaties, and who if he be the Author of any good to us in
this life, or of any happiness to any of us in that which is to come, yet it is
not out of any Principle of goodness in his nature, but purely out of an
Arbitrary determination of his mind, and, in plain English, an unaccountable
humor.

I have referred toward the latter end of these Papers to an Appendix, which I
designed concerning the Extension of the Divine Substance, but I have
considered that question very largely in some other Papers, wherein I have
attempted an explanation of the Doctrine of the Trinity, which I intend, when I
have reviewed, to publish.

Farewell
AN Apologetical Preface, IN VINDICATION Of the Discourse Entitled, The middle
way betwixt Necessity and Freedom.
I Am so well persuaded of the truth of what I have written, and of the honesty
of my design in writing it, that I shall need to make no other Apology for its
Publication, than that I conceive, it might be useful to the world; and I hope,
the event will prove that I was not mistaken.

The consideration of those Texts of Scripture, wherein God is said to have
hardened, or blinded, or deceived men, is the subject of the following
Discourse, as it has been already to very little purpose of many larger
Volumes; while some are so nice that they will not allow in any of these
Phenomenon any more than a divine Permission, by leaving men wholly to the
conduct and guidance of their own unruly Passions, and corrupt Affections, and
to the blasting influences of degenerate and wicked Spirits. And others are so
hardy as to ascribe all to the arbitrary will of God, founded upon no reason,
but a boundless Sovereignty and dominion over all things.

The first of these is so dilute and cold a way of interpreting those places,
where so much of activity and positive Concurrence seems plainly to be ascribed
to God; that if such activity can possibly be reconciled to the common notions
which we are used to entertain of the divine nature and attributes, and to the
standing measures of truth, goodness and justice: It ought by no means to be
admitted, because such a way of Interpretation when there is no need, does
instead of doing good, do a great deal of mischief in the world, by insinuating
the Scripture to be more obscure than it is, and by that means giving too much
encouragement to the wild Interpretations of Enthusiastic or designing men.
Whereas the Scripture being the universal law of Life, the standing rule of
faith and practice amongst men, that it may be the more effectual to those good
purposes for which it was designed; it ought to be rendered as plain and
intelligible as may be, neither ought we ever to recur to a figurative sense;
so as for example, when such or such an action, or such or such an effect is
ascribed to God, in Scripture, to say that he only permits that action to be
done, or that effect to come to pass, unless where the literal and first
meaning will not do.

But yet notwithstanding this way of interpretation, how weak and insufficient
soever it be in its self, which I think, I have abundantly discovered in the
following papers: Yet being made use of upon pious reasons to salve the credit
of the divine Justice and goodness, and to make the revealed will of God more
unisone and agreeable to the natural reason of men, it is our duty not to
decline it without a becoming Reverence; and to treat the Authors or abettors
of it with all imaginable respect and Honor.

But as for that other way which resolves all into the arbitrary pleasure of
God, who is according to these men a very arbitrary Being, and damns his
Creatures in the other world with as little reason as he hardens them in this,
it is an opinion so horrid, and so impious, so derogatory to the honor of God,
so expressly levelled against the happiness of men, attended on all hands with
such dismal consequences of inevitable Ruin and Despair, that if it could not
be avoided but this must needs be granted to be the natural sense and only true
meaning of the Scripture, in those places which either one way or other do
concern this point. I should think it my duty to renounce and abominate that
Book wherein such prodigious Doctrines were contained, not only so destructive
to the interest, but so contrary to the common and received notions of mankind,
of which it is impossible for us to rid our selves, and which are themselves on
all hands granted to be an unquestionable sort of Revelation.

Now if an expedient can be found out, by which both of the aforementioned
inconveniences shall be avoided, which may consist with a more natural and
easy way of expounding Scripture, which will do no violence to the attributes
of God, or the common sentiments of mankind; which shall make Religion to be at
once an intelligible and highly reasonable thing, and shall at once vindicate
it from the scoffs of Atheists, who are its professed Enemies, and from the
reproaches of the Calvinists who are its pretended Friends: I hope to discover
so wholesome and safe a passage between two dangerous extremes, by both of
which the Authority of the Scripture suffers; by the one from the obscurity, or
rather downright Inconsistency of its expressions to the nature of the things
intended to be signified by them; and by the other from the horrid and
detestable impiety of its Doctrines, I say, to discover such an expedient as
this, for the Cure of two such dangerous and destructive ills, will, I hope, be
thought a service done to true Religion, and a further confirmation of the
excellence of that Book upon whose Authority and Credit it relies: and this is
that which I have endeavored to do in the ensuing Papers, and the expedient
which I propose is this.

That God though he be so far from governing his Creatures by arbitrary
measures, that his Justice is every where allayed and tempered with an infinite
Goodness, Pity, and Compassion; yet that when men have for a long time
obstinately persisted in desperate and profligately wicked Courses, being
altogether insensible of the divine patience and forbearance with them, or
which is worse, ungrateful under the sense of it, and by a stubborn continuance
in the same Courses, bidding an open defyance to his Power, having resisted all
the convictions of their own Consciences, the admonitions and advices of their
Friends, the gracious impressions of God's Holy Spirit, being deaf to the voice
of Reason, secure in the midst of the most dismal fears and dangers, wilfully
refractory and disobedient against their truest interest, nothing bettered or
amended by all the troubles or inconveniences which former ill practices have
brought upon them: that in such case it is just with God to harden them by a
particular and positive act of his will into a final impenitence, to fix and
rivet such degenerate habits into an utter impossibility of amendment, to make
their Sin one part of the punishment which is consequent upon it, and to
reserve them on this side the Grave, in a supernatural frenzy to be the public
examples of his Justice and warning pieces to the world, that in such cases as
these there is no manner of harm, nor any the least inconsistency with any of
his attributes. Psalm. 69. v. 27. If he add iniquity to their iniquity, on
purpose that they may not enter into his Righteousness. Prove. 16* v. 4. Or if
he that made all things for himself, shall also make the wicked for the day of
Evil, that is, make men persist obstinately in those courses which are to
appearance wicked, though indeed they be fatal, for the day of Evil, that is,
in order to their punishment, as well in this life as in the next.

And truly if we reflect, which in so bad an Age as this, it is not difficult
to do, how obstinately some men are bent upon the most desperately wicked
Courses, to the destruction of their health, to the ruin of their Interest, in
spite of the persuasions and admonitions of their most faithful friends; a man
can hardly think otherwise, but that for some one or more very heinous and
provoking Sins, after a long course of impenitence which is in effect every
minute a re-commission of the same Sins, they are possessed and actuated by a
divine infatuation.

How well I have proved my assertion, and how suitable that Hypothesis which I
have laid down is, for the salving the Phenomenon which I pretend to explain by
it, must be left to the Judgment of every impartial reader. But because it is
objected among other things, in the instance of Pharaoh, which I may call the
Master-instance, since it is not only the first, but the most frequently and
the most expressly inculcated, of any in the whole Bible, that he is said to
have hardened his own heart, and to have sinned yet more, and the like
expressions, which may seem at first sight very inconsistent with a fatal
obduration; therefore to remove this difficulty, and render the sense of
Scripture as easy and as intelligible as I can, I have endeavored to show
that these two things are by no means incompetible with one another, with what
success must be left to others to determine.

I will now add, that I find Josephus in the second of his Antiquities, exactly
concurring with me in this opinion: For he plainly makes him to have acted
freely in what he did, having reasons and motives of his own to persuade him to
it, which was his Sin, and yet to have been all the while possessed by so strange
a stupidity and sottish Madness, as could not be otherwise than the effect of a
divine Judgment, and a fatality not to be resisted.

The grounds of reason assigned by Josephus, by which the King of Egypt was
induced not to suffer the people of Israel to depart, are two.

First, That which Moses uses in his own excuse, to free himself from the
delivery of a message, which he thought would be to no purpose, who though he
there makes a very solemn profession of his devout acknowledgment and adoration
of the divine power. Yet he concludes, (...)* I doubt notwithstanding, says
he, how I being a private man, of no Authority or interest among them, shall be
able to persuade my Countrymen to leave that fertile Province of which they are
now possessed, and follow me thorough so many dangers into the Land of Canaan.
And then immediately sub* joins, (...); If I should be so happy, continued he,
to persuade mine own Countrymen, yet how shall the Egyptians, and how shall
Pharaoh be wrought upon to suffer them to depart, by whose perpetual drudgery,
and daily toils, they gain so much wealth and advantage to themselves? This
therefore was the first rational Inducement why he would not suffer them to
depart, because their stay was of so much use to enrich him and his people.

The second account to be given of this obstinacy, so far as it was a voluntary
thing is, that sorcery and enchantments were so usual in those times and places
among the Egyptians and Chaldeans: that when Moses first gave him a specimen of
that miraculous power with which he was endued, as a Testimony of his divine
Mission, by changing Aaron's rod into a Serpent, he looked upon this as no
other than a magical delusion; and therefore instead of letting the people go
as he desired, (...) that is, He grew desperately displeased and angry, calling
him a base and wicked fellow, who having fled himself into the Land of Midian,
to avoid the Egyptian Bondage, was now returned from thence by sorcery and
witchcraft to persuade the rest to follow his example, and force the Egyptians
to suffer it by his Enchantments. (...). ( L. fortasse.) (...) i e. Which words
he had no sooner spoken, but he added immediately, that you may not value your
self too much upon your skill in Magic, or think that you are the only person
in the world who can make a counterfeit apperance of divine power, you are to
understand, Moses, if you do not know it already, that there is nothing more
common among the Egyptians than this, and that all our Priests can do the same,
at which immediately the Magicians threw down their Rods, which were converted
presently into Serpents like that of Aaron, and gave new strength to the
obstinacy of Pharaoh's heart.

These were the two rational motives upon which Pharaoh proceeded.

The First was properly a reason of State, and interest why he should not
suffer the Israelites to depart.

The Second was an argument with him and his people, not to give that credit to
the miracles of Moses which otherwise they might have done.

But this is not all the account Josephus gives, he does manifestly suppose
likewise the Concurrence of a necessary, together with the voluntary and
spontaneous principle, without which it would have been impossible, but so many
and so great Plagues must needs have melted the Egyptian King into a compliance
with the demands of Moses, and into a final Resolution, not any more to be
recalled, of suffering the Israelites quietly to go their way.

For when the rod of Aaron had swallowed those of the Magicians, which was a
sufficient testimony of a Power superior to theirs, yet he makes the King of
Egypt insensible of any such thing. (...), and then (...), etc. He was filled
with rage, but not with fear, or admiration at what had happened.

And when Moses not at all discouraged by his former course Entertainment and
contemptuous usage, accosted him a fresh upon the same errant, adding menaces
of the utmost Plagues and Calamities to befall him and his people, in case he
still continued obstinate and refractory against the divine will and Message.
Yet Josephus makes him to take so little notice of it, as if he had not heard
what Moses had said: (...).

Again, whereas I have compared this hardness of Pharaoh's heart to a
Lethargick or Apoplectick fit, which is awakened sometimes into some degree of
sensation by the application of Caustic and painful Remedies; but frequently
upon the abatement of that Pain, relapses into its former security and
forgetful Slumber, as Pharaoh was frequently of the mind to yield to the
pressing importunity of Moses, when it was backed with the dreadful
solicitation of the most dismal Plagues, but yet upon the least relaxation or
intermission of those Plagues, was just the same insensible and stupid Creature
that ever he was before. I am in this likewise very strongly supported by the
Authority of the same Josephus, of the Rivers being turned into blood, and of
the removal of that Calamity he says thus. (...) that is, The King being
startled at this unexpected event, and being perfectly at his wits end, not
knowing at this rate what would become of the Egyptians who must all perish, if
the Waters continued to be poisoned, gave leave to the Hebrews immediately to
depart, but no sooner was the hand of God removed, but he returned to his
former mind, and would by no means permit them to be gone.

So likewise when the Plague of Frogs was by the Mercy of God at the Prayer of
Moses removed, he makes him to have been so stupid, that he was no more moved
than if no such Judgment had ever been inflicted, his words are these, (...)
that is, But Pharaoh was no sooner freed from this Judgment, but he forgot the
cause and would not dimiss the people.

Again, when the Plague of Lice, that loathsome and abominable Calamity, had
filled all Egypt with Terror and deformity together; he makes him then, like a
man between sleeping and waking, to give his half consent that they should
depart. (...) (...) ( L. Opinor (...) i. e. At this horrible Calamity, the.
King of Egypt being affrightned, and fearing at once the Destruction of his
people, and recounting with himself the shameful and ignominious manner by
which they were about to perish, was now half persuaded to lay aside his
perverseness, and hearken to sober Counsels. But the Concurrence of these two
Causes is most plainly intimated by him at the close of that Chapter, out of
which the above mentioned Citations are taken in the following words. (...)
that is, The aforesaid mischiefs must needs have been sufficient to bring him
to a sense of what was equally his interest and his Duty, if he had not lost
the use of Reason, together with the sense of Goodness; but he not so much out
of Ignorance, as out of perfect Malice, being sensible of the cause on which
all these Judgments depended, would yet notwithstanding set himself in
opposition to God Almighty, was a wilful betrayer of himself and his people to
Destruction, and did what he knew to be for the worse at that very time when he
did it.

Neither is Josephus less favorable to my sentiments, in the case of Rehoboam,
than in that of Pharaoh; but rather more, for he does not only attribute the
infatuation of Rehoboam himself, to a positive Act of the divine will; but he
makes his advisers to have been exactly in the same predicament with himself,
being all of them alike infatuated and deceived, so, that as he could not take,
so neither could they give any other Counsel than they did: his words are
these, speaking first of Rehoboam's rejecting the Counsel of the old men;
Antiq. L. 8. c. 3.
and then of his applying himself to the younger Fry, for their opinion in the
case proposed. (...) (...) ( L. fortasse, (...)) (...) that is, But he (
Rehohoam) neglected the Counsel of the old men, how good soever in its self,
and how suitable soever to the present Circumstance of time wherein it was
given, God himself, as I conceive, making him to condemn and disallow that
which was most for his advantage: Wherefore assembling his young men and
Camerades that had been bred up together with him; he acquainted them with the
advice of the old men, desiring likewise their opinion of the matter, but they
partly from the heat and inconsiderate rashness of Youth, and partly because
God would not suffer them to discern any thing better, advised him to give for
answer, that it was in vain to expect a redress of grievances from him, for
that he was so far from it, that they should find his little finger heavier
than his Father's loins.

Nay, Curcelleus and Episcopius themselves, who are my great opposers in this
point, yet when they are sifted to the bottom, they confess the very same;
though at first they are mealy mouthed, and will not acknowledge so much. So
Curcelleus. L. 6. c. 9. p. 382. Semper enim iis satis lucis relinquit ad omnem
justam excusationem adimendum, qualis vel illa sola est quae ex operibus Dei
apparet, ex quibus potentia ejus aeterna, and divinitas perspicitur. Romans 1.
20. Nisi forte mentem iis eripiat and obbrutescant, ut olim contigit
Nebuchadnezari. Sed poenae ejusmodi sunt admodum rarae and extraordinariae; and
quando Deus aliquem ad ejusmodi statum redegit, id quod postea committit non
imputatur illi in peocatum, non magis quam brutis ratione destitutis, nec
supplicium ejus aggravat, sed supplicium ipsum est, quod absurdum foret tale
esse ut aliud post se traheret: that is, God always affords men light enough to
leave them inexcuseable, that light which shines from the works of the
Creation, from whence his eternal power and Godhead is discerned. Romans 1. 20.
Being sufficient to this purpose, unless by a particular Judgment he deprive
them of their Reason, so as they degenerate into perfect Bruits, which was the
case of Nebuchadnezzar. But punishments of this nature are very rare and
unusual, and when they are inflicted, yet whatever a man shall do in such a
Condition, cannot properly be called a Sin, any more than the same Action would
be in a bruit Beast, which has no use of Reason, nor any government of its
passions, neither does it enhance or aggravate his punishment, but is a
punishment it self; and it is absurd, that that punishment in which we are
perfectly passive, should include in it the nature of guilt, and draw an other
Punishment after it.

Thus you see it is granted with much ado by Curcelleus himself, that God does
sometimes, harden, infatuate, and deceive men, but this he says is a very rare,
a very unusual thing, but by his favor, that is not the question, whether it
be unusual or no; but whether lawful and consistent with the justice of God to
do it. If it be not, why did he do it? And why does Curcelleus allow it to have
been done in the instance of Nebuchadnezzar? And if it be, then why should we
seek a thousand shifts and evasions to elude the force and evidence of other
Texts, that speak as plainly and as broadly as those wherein the story of
Nebuchadnezzar is told?

Curcelleus having thus plainly declared himself, it cannot be doubted but his
Master and Predecessor Episcopius, whom he does little else but Transcribe, and
Copy out will be found, when as thoroughly examined, to be of the same mind.

In the fourteenth Chapter, Section, the 4th. Of the fourth Book of his
Institutions, he says thus: I will repeat it although it be a very long
Citation.

Verborum istorum, [ego indur abo cor Pharaonis ut non dimittat populum meum]
hanc sententiam esse ex iis quae hactenus dictae sunt Colligo. Ego Pharaonem
Tyrannum populi mei crudelissimum, quanquam Jamdudum poena excidii dignum, non
tamen statim puniam, sed primum signis and portentis meis mirabilibus, quibus
similia Magi ejus praestare non poterunt, de divinitate and potentia mea
convictum, and longanimitate, and beneficentia mea induratum, pro malitia sua
ac contumacia qua eum repletum esse scio: and quanquam eo usque eum adducturus
sum, ut populum meum retinere amplius non sit ausurus, visa primogenitorum
omnium and primogeniti etiam filii sui caede, tamen quia invito id facturus
est, and animum retinendi ac reducendi dimissum a se aut extrusum potius
populum non est depositurus, uti eum non deposuisse legere est, Exodus 14. 4.
Occasionem ei dabo quam avide arripiet, nimirum populum meum in angustias quasi
redigendo, ut mare rubrum ante se and post se desertos montes habiturus sit,
absque ulla, si Pharaoh insequatur, cum instructo exercitu, contra inermes
atque imbelles, aut fuga, aut evasionis aut resistendi potentiae spe; ut ea
oblata, non sit dubitaturus infracto atque indurato animo populum in istas
angustias redactum insequi, and per ipsam usque maris abyssum, quasi fugientem
persequi, ut eo perductus, veluti in theat^um aliquod publicum, supplicio
illustri atque spectabili, summaque ejus crudelitate and pertinacia digno
afficiam, that is, the sense of those words: [ I will harden the heart of
Pharaoh, that he shall not let the people go] is this: I will not punish him,
till I have first convinced him by Miracles, which his Magicians cannot
imitate, of my Divinity and Power, and hardened him by my Mercy and forbearance
with him. And though I design to bring him to that pass by my Judgments, that
he shall not dare to detain my people any longer; yet because it will be only
by force and against his will, that he will at last suffer them to depart:
Therefore I will give him an occasion, of which he shall be sure to take hold,
that having the Israelites at a great advantage, hemmed in on one side by the
Mountains, and on the other by the Red Sea, being undisciplined, and unarmed,
unable either to fly or to resist; he shall pursue them with an obstinate and
revengful mind, through the Channel of the Red Sea, whither when I have brought
him as it were into a Theater, upon a public Stage, I will make him a
notorious example to all Mankind, and will punish him with that severity, which
so much Cruelty and so much obstinate perverseness have deserved.

This is all that Episcopius will be brought to say, but if you consider how
favorable he is in other parts of his writings, to those who deny God's
prescience of future Contingences, it amounts in a manner to as much, as if he
had spoken as broadly as Curcelleus afterward did.

Again, he acknowledges that God gave an occasion which he knew before hand
Pharaoh would be sure to embrace, that is, that he persuaded the Israelites to
go by the way of the Red Sea, as he did, Exodus 14. 2. On purpose and with a
design that Pharaoh should follow after them; and if he might justly lay such a
design as this, and contribute toward it by a positive Act of his will, as to
be sure he did, by commanding the Israelites to march that way, I cannot see
why he might not as well harden him into a necessity of following them in order
to his final overthrow and destruction.

The last Evidence I shall produce to corroborate what I have written, shall be
taken from the words of the late excellently learned and exemplarily pious Dr.
Hammond, in his little Tract concerning a Deathbed Repentance, where
discoursing concerning this very instance of Pharaoh, after much canvasing of
the Business in favor of those, who will not allow that Doctrine which I have
laid down to be true, he concludes thus, p. 16.

The result of all that I have labored to lay down concerning Pharaoh is this,
that although his State were a long time but reversibly ill, as long as he
hardened his own heart; yet when his own obdurations were come to the fullness
of measure, and he ripe and dropping into Hell; as after the sixth Judgment he
was: then God exchanged the first part of that due punishment of his in another
world, that was instantly to have Commenced, for a temporary cooler Hell here;
hardened his heart, and obstructed all possibility of Repentance* from him, and
so concluded him in this life in an irreversible Estate.

Which notion he afterward improves to the same purposes that I have done, and
after some further discourse upon this occasion, p. 18. He concludes thus: All
which being not only granted, but proposed as necessary considerations to be
taken along with this Doctrine; it remains still clear and uncontrouled, that
God may, if he will, thus punish a hard heart with total and final substraction
of Grace, and so with hardening irreversibly, either here, which I only say he
may, but know not that he will; or at the hour of Death, at which time there is
no doubt but he will thus proceed with every impepenitent.

I account my self very happy in having jumped so exactly in my sentiments of
things, with so famous and renowned a Champion of our Church, and I was the
more pleased in the first of these Citations to find not only the notion, but
the very words in which it is expressed to come so near to some of mine in the
following Discourse, though I had not the good fortune to see Dr. Hammond's
Treatise till near two Months after I had written mine; when upon showing what
I had written, to a worthy Friend, to have his opinion of it, he was pleased to
communicate that piece of the Doctors to me, which, when I found it so
agreeable to mine own thoughts; you may well imagine I read it with abundance
of satisfaction.

But still there is some small difference betwixt the learned Doctor and me.
He, as I do humbly conceive, out of a needless tenderness for the Honor of
God, and for the Glory of his attributes, to make his patience and forbearance
with us the more remarkable and conspicuous, will not admit of this way of
procedure till the last cast, when the man is grown desperate, and it is almost
in vain to expect any amendment from him; nay, he will not positively determine
whether ever God do visit men with final impenitence till the hour of Death.
But it is very clear that whatever God may lawfully do without any violence to
his Justice, that he may do at all times, whenever there is a lawful or
justifiable occasion: since therefore it is confessed on all hands, that God
may and does oftentimes take away Sinners in the midst of their days by a
particular Judgment, the consequence of which without all question is
inevitable Damnation; why may he not as well harden and blind men sooner or
later, as he pleases himself, into an irreversible Impenitence, so as it shall
be impossible for them to Repent, that he may reserve them on this side the
Grave, to be the public examples of his Justice to the world? For no man can
be any more than Damned, and therefore with respect to the offender himself;
these are but two several instances of the same rightful dominion and
Sovereignty over us, which may take the forfeiture of our Sins either way, and
at what time it shall seem best to the supreme Lord, and uncontrollable
proprietor of all things.

It is true indeed the common impressions which are so deeply rooted in us all
concerning the divine nature, and the daily experience we have of his infinite
Goodness, in the administration of this lower world, will not permit us to
think that God will do either of these without very great provocations, but we
are to consider, that all men are not equally ripe for punishment at the same
time or age; there is great difference as to the frequent repetition of Sin, as
to the different enormity or heinousness of the Crimes committed, and as to the
different aggravation of those circumstances under which they are committed;
one man sins against greater convictions, after greater Mercies, under more
powerful Influences of the holy Spirit than another, and these things would
make a vast difference as to the time of inflicting punishment, though the
divine Justice were always to be administered, ad pondus, and did always hold
the same proportion to the Sins of men: but then it is to be considered in the
second place, that God is not bound to extend the same patience to all, nor
indeed so much to any as he does; but in some he may take the forfeiture of
their Sins sooner, in some later as he pleases himself, which whoever shall
seriously reflect upon, will find it a Doctrine not only very reasonable in it
self, but in its Consequences so wholesome that nothing can be more.

For what greater Inducement can there possibly be to an holy and virtuous
life, to care and watchfulness in all our Conversation, than to think that we
are every moment upon our good behavior; and that God if we continue to
provoke him any longer, may the next minute seal our everlasting Doom, and
consign us over to eternal Flames, may put us into an irrecoverable State of
degeneracy and Apostasy in this life, that we may be made a Spectacle of shame
and horror in this world, and an eternal prey to infinite and everlasting
Torments in the next. Certainly if this one Consideration were but thoroughly
impressed upon the minds of men, there is nothing in the world that could have
better effects, or produce a more lasting or a more universal reformation in
it. And therefore as you cannot well, if you reflect upon the Circumstances of
most men, enlarge this power of obduration in God, so far as to make the
exercise of it unjust; so the farther you do extend it with consistency to
reason, and Justice, the better effects it will produce, and the greater
advantages will be reaped from it.

There are indeed two things which have made many learned and pious Persons
cautious of admitting so much as I have done.

First, Lest God by this means should be looked upon as the Author of Sin, and
therefore as the only way in their opinion, to avoid this inconvenience, they
generally interpret all those places only of a divine permission, without which
indeed it is impossible any Action should be done or any event come to pass;
because upon his will and power the very existence of all things does depend,
in him we live and move, and have our being; therefore if he did not sometimes
permit at least, and suffer bad things to be done, no such thing could ever
come to pass, besides that a divine permission is of absolute necessity to the
very being of virtue and true Religion in the world; for if men could not Act
otherwise than they do, they could not be said to be either good or bad: and
therefore that men may use that freedom which is given them aright, it is
necessary they should also have a power of determining themselves another way.
To be sure with respect to this life this must be granted to be unavoidably
true; for what is our whole life but a perpetual warefare with bad desires from
within, with importuning Temptations from without, with our own frailties, and
with the Solicitations of others, and with the crafty inveiglements of the
Devil, who will be sure to accost us on that side, which is weakest and least
defensible in us, by motives of Pleasure, profit, applause or Power; or
whatever else he shall judge most likely to prevail upon us? But now, I beseech
you, who is there, or who ever was there, or will ever be of humane race, so
perfectly pure and untainted, that he could not yield to the importunity of any
Temptation? or what Combat could there be if he could not resist?

Besides it is necessary there should be such a thing as the Schools are
pleased to call libertatem contrarietatis, a liberty of determining either way
in an Action or Case given, one of which said determinations shall be Culpable,
the other meritorious or praiseworthy; because to suppose otherwise, is to
deprive the divine Justice of any Foundation, to exercise it self upon. Justice
in the person punishing, and liberty in the person offending, do naturally
suppose one another: for to Condemn one who could not avoid what he did, or to
reward another who could not so much as endeavor to merit what he enjoys, may
be called Arbitrary, but can never be just. For what Judgment is there where
there is no difference? And what Justice can there be where there is no
Judgment, made of the merit of the persons that appear before it?

Both of which reasons of the divine permission of Sin, are excellently pointed
at by an ancient Writer, published among the works of Justin Martyr. (...),
says he, (...) that is, God permits us to commit those evils, which we
wilfully choose, not that he is not able to hinder it, but because we have a
liberty of doing otherwise, and because by this means he displays his own
patience and forbearance with us.

But yet notwithstanding though it be true, that God does and must be supposed
to permit Sin in the world, yet to interpret all those places which are the
Subject of our present debate only of a bare Permission, will appear very harsh
and uncouth, to any that shall peruse the places themselves, wherein a great
deal more than this seems manifestly to be contained, and is ascribed to God
in as plain words as it is possible for any Language to speak: Besides that it
is needless to the design for which it is done, because necessity destroys the
nature of Sin; and just so much as there is of freedom in any Action, so much
of moral good or evil there may be in it, but no more; he that is necessitated
is passive in what he does, neither are those Actions which he commits in such
a state to be considered as his, but they are the Actions of that Agent by whom
he himself is Acted. The case is this, one man kills another lying in wait for
him out of Malice, forethought because he bore him a grudge and had vowed
Revenge; or being in a cooler humor than this, he does it out of a wicked
frolic, resolving for a jest to kill the next man he meets, now it so happens
that this man himself is afterward destroyed by the goring of a mad Bull in
his passage through the Streets, or by the fall of a Beam from an House, all on
fire or the like; here is the same event on both hands, a man killed; but yet
to the Destruction of the one there is a guilt belonging, to the other there is
not, what is the reason of this? why the reason is plain, because the first is
the effect of a free, the latter of a necessary Agent. If therefore a man by
some external impulse be so far overrul'd that he is not himself, his Actions
are not his own neither, but he is in the nature and quality of the mad Bull or
the Beam, he does these things because he cannot help it; and therefore they
are no Sins. Or if sometimes there be a Complexion of the free Cause, and of
the necessary together, as I have shown there may be, yet the common Action
resulting from them both, partakes only of so much guilt, as it borrows of
Causality from the Free. It is impossible therefore that God should be the
Author of Sin in any other Sense, than as he is the Author of that freedom by
virtue of which we commit it: but yet to speak properly, it is not the freedom
it self which is the cause of Sin, but it is the abuse of that freedom which is
wholly owing to our selves, and God is no otherwise concurring to it, than as a
causa sine qua non, in as much as we could not have sinned if we had not abused
our freedom; and we could not have abused our freedom, if God had not made us
free. From all which it appears that to talk of God's being the Author of Sin
in men, is to talk not only (...), things that neither can nor ought to be
believed, but also (...), things that are utterly impossible to be done. For my
part I am so far from favoring any such opinion, that if any man should by way
of excuse lay his Sins to the charge of God Almighty, as necessitating him to
what he did, I think it is a plain Argument he is sensible of his having done
amiss, and consequently might have done better if he had pleased, and shall
therefore very heartily join in. Philo's imprecation against him. (...). i. e.
He that shall presume in his own excuse to lay his misdeeds to the charge of
God Almighty, let him be punished without mercy, and let no Sanctuary afford
him its protection: Sanctuaries not being intended for such as defend their
Sins, but for such as do humbly acknowledge and bewail them.

The second Reason, if indeed it may be called a second, and be not rather the
same, why some have been so extremely scrupulous in the interpretation of such
places of Scripture, as are now under Consideration, is to be taken from their
deserved hatred and utter Abomination, of Calvinistical Doctrines, by which God
is represented to be so cruel and sanguinary a being; but the exposition of
these texts according to their first and most natural sense, is so far from
bordering upon Calvinism, that it perfectly destroys it, since every such Text
is a new Argument for the liberty of the humane nature and will, in as much as
it would be ridiculous to say God hardens or blinds men by a particular
Judgment, if before that in their natural and best Estate, they had neither the
use of their reason, nor the liberty of their will.

There be four instances made use of in the ensuing Papers, for the
Confirmation of this Doctrine, which it will be requisite for the more complete
satisfaction of all those scruples, which either too much nicety, or too much
affectation may raise, a little more particularly to insist upon.

The First, is that of Nebuchadnezzar. The Second, of Ahab. The Third, of
Absalom. The Fourth of Judas Iscariot.
For the first of them, that is to say the instance of Nebuchadnezzar, I have
taken notice that though St. Jerome, in his Commentary upon that Chapter of
Daniel, wherein that Story is related; have with great Judgment rejected the
fond conceit of those Ancient Interpreters, who would needs turn the whole
business into an Allegory, yet that he himself is every whit as guilty in the
other extreme by taking all things in the literal sense.

Now that I may not seem to differ without reason from the opinion of so
learned a Father, I will repeat his very words, which are these, speaking of
Nebuchadnezzar's Transformation into a Beast. Quis enim amentes homines non
cernat instar brutorum animantium in agris vivere, locisque silvestribus? and
ut cuncta praeteream, cum multo incredibiliora and graecae and Romanae
Historiae accidisse hominibus prodiderint. Scyllam quoque, Chimeram, Hydram at
que Centauros, aves and feras, flores and arbores, stellas and lapides factos
ex hominibus narrent fabulae, quid mirum est si ad ostendendum potentiam Dei,
and humiliandum regum superbiam hoc Dei judicio sit patratum? that is, Who is
there that is ignorant that men oppressed with Melancholy to a degree of Madness,
do use to wander about like Beasts in the Fields and Deserts? Nay, when the
fables of the Heathen Poets do tell us such incredible Stories of Scylla,
Chimaera, Hydra, and the Centaures, of men transformed into Birds, and Beasts,
and Flowers, and Trees, and Stars, and Stones, what wonder is it, if God to
give a demonstration of his own infinite Power, and withal to humble the pride
and insolence of haughty Kings, should work so great a change as this by
transforming Nebuchadnezzar nto one of the Beasts of the Field? In which words
it is plain that he seems first doubtful what to do, and therefore expounds
this event only of a Melancholy and lonely way of life in Fields, and Groves,
and Deserts like to that of Beasts: But afterward by the example of such like
transformations, recorded to Posterity in the Greeek and Roman story, he is
induced to believe that such a change was literally wrought.

But now if those prodigious Metamorphoses did really never happen, as they are
reckoned by Palaephatus a very ancient Writer, among the (...), things that are
not, and ought not to be believed in the grammatical and dry sense, and are all
generally expounded by the ancient Mythologists, into a moral meaning, then no
argument can be fetched from thence to justify this pretended change of
Nebuchadnezzar; and consequently if St. Jerome have nothing else to produce in
favor of so strange an opinion, we may with modesty enough dissent from his
Authority, so far as it is grounded only upon that reason, and it does not
appear that he has any other Foundation: Wherefore the truth of the whole
matter, which has not yet that I know of been sufficiently explained by any
Interpreter whatsoever, seems to me to beas follows.

Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, had behaved himself with that Pride,
Insolence, and Tyranny toward his Subjects, oppressing them without any sense
of humanity or regard to Justice, and forgetting from whom, and to what
purposes he had received his Power, that God gave him over as a Prey to the
Pride and Haughtiness of his own mind, insomuch that he began now, not only to
oppress the meaner Herd as he had done before, but to exercise his Cruelty upon
the great ones themselves: those that had been the former Partners, and
Associates with him in his Exactions and Severities upon the lower sort;
wherefore as in a common Calamity they all agreed to acknowledge him no longer
for their Sovereign, but instead of that they drove him from men, that is, they
deposed him from his Royal Throne to dwell with the Beasts of the Field, and to
eat Grass as Oxen, that is, they had no more regard of him than as of an
ordinary person, or fellow Subject with them.

This is the meaning of Dan. 4. v. 16. Let his heart be changed from man's, and
let a Beast's heart be given unto him, that is, let him be utterly divested of
his reasonable or humane nature, and let a Beast's heart be given unto him,
that is, let him be given up as a Prey to the Exorbitant fury of his Passions,
and let those Passions be improved into all manner of savage Rapaciousness and
Cruelty, as in Carnivorous animals and Beasts that live by preying upon their
Fellows; and it is said let a Beast's heart be given unto him, because the
heart is the seat of the (...), it is usually esteemed the seat of Anger and
Revenge and of all the irascible Powers of the Soul.

The same is likewise the true and undoubted Interpretation of his hairs being
grown like Eagles feathers, and his Nails like Birds Claws, v. 32. For it is
manifest these things can never be understood in the literal Sense; for what a
Monster would this make of Nebuchadnezzar betwixt a wild Beast and a ravenous
Bird, that had the heart of a Beast, and eat grass as Oxen, having his body wet
with the dew of Heaven; his hairs grown like Eagles feathers; and his Nails
like Birds Claws? But if you apply all these things which are so perfectly
inconsistent with one another, to denote the inflammation of his passions into
all manner of exorbitance and excess, there will be at least a symbolical
agreement and harmony between them, inasmuch as the do all very properly
conspire to denote such a cruel and revengeful temper.

Which things being so very true and so very plain, and being a part and
consequence of that divine Judgment, which Nebuchadnezzar saw more darkly in
his Vision; and Daniel afterward declared to be hanging over his head, and
which he advised him to avert; or at least wise to procrastinate by an early
Repentance: what can be more evident from all this, than that such events do
sometimes come to pass, not merely by the bare permission, but by the immediate
hand of God, and by a positive determination of the divine will, or as the
words of the Vision have expressed it in a more prophetic Style, by the decree
of the Watchers, and by the word of the Holy ones, v. 17.

Lastly, That by eating grass as Oxen, is meant his being levelled with the
ordinary crowd of men, divested of all his Royal Majesty and greatness, I shall
now make out as plainly as I have the other, for I do not desire to impose my
own Fancies upon any man, any farther than they shall appear to be consonant to
reason, and so far they will shift for themselves without any solicitude or
care of mine. Dan. 4. v. 12, we find these words of Nebuchadnezzar's Tree, The
leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for
all: The Beasts of the Field had shadow under it, and the Fowls of the Heaven
dwelt in the Boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it, and what was meant by
this Tree, we find expressly set down by Daniel, v. 20, 21, 22. The Tree that
thou saw which grew and was strong, whose height reached unto the Heaven,
and the sight thereof to all the Earth, whose leaves were fair, and the Fruit
thereof much, and in it was meat for all, under which the Beasts of the Field
dwelt, and upon whose Branches the Fowls of the Heaven had their habitation.
It is thou, O King, that art grown and become strong: For thy greatness is
grown, and reaches unto Heaven, and thy Dominion to the end of the Earth.

Now if the King be this great Tree, then nothing is more clear than that by
the Birds of Heaven that dwelt in the Boughs thereof, and by the Beasts of the
Field that, had shadow under it his Subjects must be understood, (unless you
will suppose him to have been a King of Birds and Beasts instead of men) and if
so then by the Fowls of Heaven, we are to understand the Nobles, Grandees, and
Magistrates, the Ministers of State, and Officers of public Justice belonging
to his Kingdom. These are said to have dwelt in the Boughs thereof, that is, to
approach nigher to the Honor and Majesty of the supreme Lord, and still as
every man's dignity or Office is greater than that of an other, his roost upon
this Imperial and symbolick Tree approaches nigher to the top of it.

Again, by the same way of speaking, that the Fowls of Heaven are the great
men, the Beasts of the Field are the populace, or common crowd of his Subjects,
and these are said to have shadow under this Tree; as all Societies and Bodies
of men in the world owe their Security and defense to the protection of the
supreme Power, and in acknowledgment of this defense, and of the advantages
accruing to themselves, and their Posterities by it, they are to pay a suitable
obedience and submission to that supreme Authority from whence they receive it.

And therefore when this Tree was to be cut down: v. 13. 14. When the Watcher
and the Holy one came down from Heaven, and cried aloud and said thus, hew down
the Tree, and cut off its branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his
fruit; that is, let this King be deprived of his imperial Authority and Power:
It is added immediately, let the Beasts get away from under it, and the Fowls
from under its branches, that is, all the people as well the Commonalty, as the
Nobless, are for the present excused from all Duty and Allegiance to him, so
long as he continues to exercise his Power only by acts of Cruelty and
Tyrannick Madness, to the utter Ruin and destruction of his Subjects.

Now why may not these Beasts be the same with those that are afterward called
Oxen, with whom Nebuchadnezzar is said to have eaten Grass, for it is plain,
there was Grass under this prophetic Tree; and therefore they might Graze as
much and as often as they pleased? for it is said v. 15. Nevertheless leave the
stump of his roots in the Earth, even with a band of Iron and Brass, in the
tender Grass of the Field, and then it is immediately subjoyned. Let it be wet
with the dew of Heaven, that is, let him be exposed to the hardships and
uncertainties of Chance and Fortune, and let his portion be with the Beasts in
the Grass of the Earth, that is, let him not exercise any more Authority,
Dominion, or Kingly power, than any ordinary or private man, than the Beasts of
the people as the Psalmist in the mixed translation somewhere calls them, than
the very meanest of all his own Subjects and Vassals. So then he that was to
eat Grass with Oxen in an other part of this Chapter, was here to have his
portion with the Beasts in the Grass of the Earth, and v. 25, they are put
together; thy dwelling shall be with the Beasts of the Field, and they shall
make thee to eat Grass as Oxen: Therefore they are both the same, but I have
proved that by the Beasts of the Field the common Crowd of mankind are to be
understood; therefore it must needs be, that by having his portion with them in
the Grass, and by eating Grass as Oxen, must be understood, the being reduced
to an equality of Condition with them. This is not Fancy but Demonstration.

Again it is no less plain from other places of Scripture as well as this, that
by Oxen in the prophetic or symbolick style the gross of mankind are
signified, as in Pharaoh's Dream of the seven fat and lean Kine, the seven
plump and blasted Ears, these were not two several Declarations of the same
thing, as in the synchronisticall Visions of the Revelation; but they were two
partial Representations of one and the same entire event, which was afterward
to come to pass. The thin and full Ears, signified the plenty and scarcity of
all sorts of Grain; the number Seven, pointed at the duration of each of these
for the continuance of seven Years; and the Kine were the People or Inhabitants
of Egypt, and the neighboring Countries, who were to enjoy this Plenty, or
were in likelihood of being pinched and famished under the sad effects of
scarcity and want.

So in the building of Solomon's Temple, the Molten-Sea was contrived to stand
upon twelve Oxen, 1 Kings, c. 7. v. 25. with allusion to the twelve Tribes, not
reckoning the tribe of Levi who had no portion nor Inheritance among them; as
the Ark when it was an Ambulatory thing, was used to be carried to and fro by
the Levites, which Levites did represent the Firstborn of the twelve Tribes.
And thus likewise under the brim of the Molten-Sea, there were knops compassing
it, ten in a Cubit round about 1 Kings, c. 7. v. 24. Which knops. 2 Chronicles. c.
4. v. 3. are called Oxen, but much smaller it seems they were than those twelve
already mentioned. Now of these Knops or Oxen, there being ten in a Cubit, and
the Molten-Sea, being in Circumference thirty Cubits, it is manifest there must
be three hundred of these Oxen, that is five and twenty times twelve, still
with a mystical allusion to the twelve Tribes, of which the people of Israel
was composed.

Thus I have proved by more arguments than one, that by Oxen in the language of
the Scripture, the common crowd of men are sometimes denoted; and by their
eating Grass, the lowness of the plebeian or vulgar fortune is signified, as is
both reasonable in its self to believe, and is sufficiently intimated in the
story it self, v. 15. Leave the stump of his roots in the Earth, even with a
band of Iron and Brass, in the tender Grass of the Field, the plain sense of
which is, do not let him be perfectly rooted out, but let him be brought as low
as can be: Let him feed on Grass as Beasts do, which is an argument of the
baseness of their Condition, according to those known Verses of Ovid.

-- Recens tellus seductaque nuper ab alto
Aethere cognati retinebat semina coeli,
Quam satus Iapeto mistam fluvialibus undis,
Finxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta Deorum.
Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
And now from this story of Nebuchadnezzar, thus evidently and clearly
explained, give me leave to step aside into these following remarks or
Observations.

First, That when I say he was deposed by his people, I mean no more, neither
is there indeed any more in the truth of the thing it self, than that the
Administration of affairs by reason of his extreme madness and incapacity to
govern, was put into other hands, of one or more, but it is probable, in the
East where Monarchy was the only form of Government, of one; and he as it
seems, of the meanest of all the people, chosen perhaps by such another trick
as Darius is said to have been, v. 17. The most High rules in the Kingdom of
men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of
men; which in the language of an Heathen is as much as to say,

-- Valet ima summis
Mutare, and insignem attenuat Deus,
Obscura promens --
But yet notwithstanding, they did no otherwise disobey Nebuchadnezzar their
lawful Sovereign, than by refusing to comply with him, or lend their helping
hand to the executing his most unjust and barbarous Decrees; of which, no doubt
he gave many lamentable instances, before any longer Obedience was denied him,
and one of them we have no farther off, than in the Chapter immediately
preceding, where all are commandded through all his spacious Provinces and
large Dominions to be cast into the Fiery-Furnace, that would not fall down and
worship the golden Image which he had set up: A Decree so strangely Tyrannical,
and inhumane that it is an equal wonder that there should any where be found so
wicked a Prince as to enjoin, or such enslaved and miserable Subjects as dare
not refuse in such a case to obey so savage and so impious a Decree.

Secondly, The second thing which I shall observe, is that being divested of
all Power, and that Madness which was the cause of it, being by this means
improved to a greater height; there is no doubt but while he was in this
Condition, he did with his own hand commit many great and horrid outrages,
though he could not find any body to assist him, but all were either weary, or
afraid of being any longer the Executioners of his wicked Commands.

But yet Thirdly, It is plain, notwithstanding all this, that his person e
mained sacred and inviolate, neither was any man suffered to hurt or annoy him,
for the space, as is probable, of at lest seven Years together; which Religious
care of doing no manner of violence to the Majesty of Princes, which is next to
that of God, would without question have lasted longer, if the hand of God had
continued any longer upon him, which is a notable example of that strange
Veneration which the Liege men of old time did use to pay their natural and
rightful Sovereigns, and what an awe and dread they had for that Character
which they received from God, and that unaccountable Authority with which they
were by him invested.

Fourthly, No sooner did he return to himself, and the heavy hand of God being
removed from him, began to have a sense of his former Miscarriages, and to
recover the use of his reason, Dan. 4. 36. But the glory of his Kingdom, his
Honor and his Brightness returned together with them, his Counselors and his
Lords sought unto him, and he was established in his greatness, and excellent
Majesty was added unto him; which is a new sign how unwillingly they disobeyed
him, whom they looked upon as God's vicegerent, and that they thought nothing
but absolute necessity could excuse their noncompliance with his Commands, but
that when that necessity was once removed they were still under the same
obligation as before.

Fifthly, God's suffering him to remain so long a public example of inviolate
and sacred Majesty, his not taking him away, by any untimely death, and perhaps
protecting him against the course of Nature, his restoring him after all this
to the use of his reason, and to the full exercise of his imperial Dignity and
Power, is a plain argument how highly he approved this dutiful behavior of his
Subjects toward him; and a clear proof, especially if you consider how wicked
a King this Nebuchadnezzar was, that Princes are as to their actions
Unaccountable, as to their persons Sacred, and as to their Laws, that they are
by no means to be disputed or disobeyed by us; unless in cases of a plain and
absolute Necessity, where we cannot do it, without a manifest and open Violence
to the laws of God and Nature, to the common sentiments, or the common interest
of mankind: as it is when absolute Monarchs use that absolute and arbitrary
Power, with which they are entrusted only to the utter Ruin, Destruction, and
Extirpation of their Subjects, as Nebuchadnezzar by his sanguinary Edicts, and
barbarous acts of Sovereignty was used to do. In this case we are excused from
obeying his Commands, but we are in no case to resist or fight against his
Person.

The force of which argument will extend yet further if you consider, that
though indeed the Eastern Nations are, and have always been observed to be
composed of a sort of people, the fittest of all other to bear the Yoke, being
by nature the most perfect Slaves; being not only contented, but proud under
that Condition, and being strange admirers of the Majesty and greatness of
their Princes: yet when this Majesty was thus eclipsed; when all further
obedience was rendered in a manner impossible, It is an incredible thing that
such an awful respect for the person of their King, when they had shaken off
all obedience to his Commands, should still remain among all the sorts, and all
the several degrees, all the several Constitutions and tempers of men, through
all the spacious Territories of so large an Empire; had it not been that God
Almighty did some way or other interpose in his behalf, and did by an immediate
hand restrain the fury of those, who would otherwise have reeked their Revenge
upon his person, not so much out of kindness to him, so wicked a King, so great
a Rebel and Traitor to his God, as to put the world in mind of their Duty to
the supreme Powers, who are his Vicegerents and not ours, and therefore
accountable to none but him: and that it was God's design from the beginning,
that his person should not be touched, though his power were for the reason
above mentioned taken away, appears plainly from the 15 verse of that Chapter
so often cited: Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the Earth, even
with a band of Iron and Brass, that is, be sure that his Person, and his Life,
which are the Root and Foundation of Power, that these remain still sacred and
secure, from whence upon his Repentance and amendment, new Glory and Majesty
may sprout and grow.

This is the first instance, in which because I have been much longer than I
intended, I shall be the more careful to contract my self in those that follow.

The Second is that of Ahah, about which great stir has been made by learned
men, who will by no means admit that God did actually concur to his deceiving,
but without reason; for though I will grant that the thing was not exactly, as
it is represented in the 22th. Chapter of the first of Kings, I saw the Lord,
says Micajah, the Son of Imlah, v. 19. Sitting on his Throne, and all the Host
of Heaven standing by him, on his right hand, and on his left, which things
notwithstanding could not be seen, God not being a Corporal substance, and the
Angels, if they have any Bodies at all, yet they are of that fine and subtle
Contexture that they could not possibly be seen by mortal Eyes, neither has God
who is ubiquitary, who is coextended to all places, and to the utmost
possibilty of space, in propriety of speech, any right hand or any left; which
modes of expression must therefore be referred, not to the reallity of things
themselves, but to the prophetic Scene in which they were represented by
corporeal Phantasms to the Imagination of the Prophet, which Josephus
understood very well, and therefore has omitted a great part of this visionary
apparition, as not necessary to be exactly related: yet to affirm after all
this Pompous and magnificent apparatus, to signify the approaching fate of the
King of Israel, that God was no otherwise concerned in it, than by his bare
permission, seems to me so far from being true, that it is the most improbable,
unlikely thing in the world: we will grant that the Host of Heaven was not
assembled around the divine presence, in that manner which is represented, and
that one of those blessed Spirits, for such an one to be sure is here
described, did not step forth and proffer his service to deceive Ahab; yet thus
much is certainly true, that God did positively design to deceive him, and did
actually concur toward it, by dispatching a blessed Spirit, as the instrument
of his wrath, to be a lying or deceiving Spirit, in the mouth of Ahab's
Prophets.

And if thus much be not the least that is, or can be signified by this
prophetic Iconisme in the History of Ahab; then it must be confessed that here
is a very formal story that signifies nothing at all, which, whether it be
reasonable to suppose, whether it be for the honor of God, or of his Prophet,
or for the credit of that inspired Book, wherein matters, in which God Almighty
is not at all concerned, are so pompously related, as if it were designed to
show that he was concerned in an extraordinary manner, and that none but he and
his immediate Agents were concerned, I leave to the Consideration of every
sober and unprejudiced person.

To make this a little plainer by other instances of a like nature, the blessed
Protomartyr St. Stephen. Acts 7. 55, 56. Being full of the Holy Ghost, looked
up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God and Jesus standing at the
right hand of God, and said, behold I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of
man standing at the right hand of God, but now if it be true that no man has
seen God at any time, and that he has no shape, Color, or likeness by which
he can be seen, then St. Stephen did not see him, and consequently could not
see the Son of man standing at his right hand; besides if the Heavens had been
really opened, why did not the multitude see it as well as he? It remains
therefore that it was only a divine impression or signature upon the
Imagination of St. Stephen, he was filled with the Holy Ghost, and had a
visible Idea of those things which were indeed invisible, but yet all this was
not for nothing, it brought along with it a strong assurance of the truth and
goodness of God, and of his particular favor to him, and was a kind of
sensible prelibation of those intellectual Joys to which he was now going.

Again, Matthew. 25. 31, 32, etc. Christ at his second coming to judge* the
world, is represented sitting on his Throne with the Holy Angels about him,
dividing the Sheep and Goats from one another, and placing the one at his right
hand, the other at his left, and you have there also, as if it were an humane
Court of Judicature, where every respective Prisoner undergoes a formal process
at Law, the Pleas and excuses of the wicked in Justification of themselves: yet
this all the while must not be thought to be a true Scheme or Draught of the
day of Judgment, but it is only an allusion to the way of proceeding in
criminal causes upon Earth. For it is certain that at that day, the best of men
will be sufficiently sensible of many humane frailties, and of many wilful
Sins, Psalm. 130. v. 3. For if thou Lord should mark Iniquities, O Lord who
shall stand, but there is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared. The
most righteous and perfect man that shall appear before that great Tribunal,
when he compares his good deeds and his bad ones together, will put so little
Confidence in his own merit, as if he had never done any thing at all, Matthew.
25. v. 37, 38, 39. Lord, when saw we thee an hungered and fed thee? or thirsty
and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a Stranger and took thee in? or Naked and
Clothed thee? or when saw we thee Sick, or in Prison, and came unto thee? 1.
Pet. 4. 18. But if the Righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly and the sinner appear? To be sure there will not need the formality of
a Process for the reprobate world, their own Consciences without any further
proof will be sufficient to Condemn them, and vindicate the divine Justice in
their Condemnation. But yet after all, it would be ridiculous and impious
together to make such a magnificent Opera, for the Picture and resemblance of
the last Judgment, if there were no such Judgment at all; it is therefore at
least supposed in such a Description as this, that there shall be a second
appearance of the blessed Jesus with Majesty and great Glory to judge the
world, and that there will certainly be a final day of Doom, Matthew. 25. 46.
When the wicked shall go away into everlasting Punishment, but the Righteous
into life Eternal. And as for the pomp and splendour of this judicial Scene, in
the Gospel of St. Matthew, it is suited to the Capacity and to the Imaginations
of men; and all the show and formality belonging to it, is borrowed from the
Courts of Judicature upon Earth.

The Application of this, and the preceding instances to the Prophet Micah's
Vision in the case of Ahab, is so easy, and so obvious, that I need not insist
upon it. But because I have said it was a blessed Spirit, which God was pleased
to dispatch upon this fatal Errant, which there are many that will not grant,
that may be thought to need some Vindication. You must consider therefore that
it was one of those Spirits which are exhibited in the Vision, as standing
round about the Throne of God, but if it be impossible that an evil or fallen
Spirit, such as are the Devil and his Apostate Angels, should ever enjoy so
near a Communion with the divine presence; should bask and solace it self in
the comfortable Sunshine, of the divine Glory and Goodness, and should enjoy so
blessed a Correspondence, and so near a friendship with the immaculate Spirits of
those untainted Angels, who had never yet apostatized from their obedience
toward God: then without granting this to have been such a blessed Spirit,
that was employed upon this deceitful Errant, you must be forced to confess a
very great indecorum in the contexture of this Vision; which being impressed by
God himself upon the Imagination of the Prophet, it is not likely that it
should be so very disagreeable to the Nature, to the Order, and to the
possibility of things.

It is true indeed that in the Apologue or Parabolical Narrative of the
sufferings of Job, it is said, c. 1. v. 6* Now there was a day when the Sons of
God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them,
and c. 2. v. 1. Again there was a day, when the Sons of God came to present
themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them, to present himself
before the Lord.

But First, This in the very truth and downright reality of things can never
be, that being the very nature and mainly consistent cause of his Misery, that
he is banished from the company of blessed Spirits, and from all the favorable
influences of the divine presence.

Secondly, This in the parable it self, is represented as a very unusual and in
a manner impossible thing, such as God himself seems, as it were, to wonder and
be surprised at. Therefore he asks him, as if he little looked for his
appearance there, Whence come thou? c. 1. v. 7. and c. 2. v. 2.

Thirdly, In the story of Ahab God is represented, 1 Kings 22. 19. Sitting on
his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven sitting by him, on his right hand and on
his left. And it is to them that he propounds this Question, v. 20. Who shall
persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead? From whence there
are two things to be observed.

First, He is introduced as speaking to the Host of Heaven, but by that only
the blessed Spirits are to be understood: The Devils power and residence being
confined to a more feculent and earthy Religion; he is the Prince of the Air,
and of the powers of Darkness.

Secondly, God is made to speak indifferently to them all, therefore they were
all alike; but it is unreasonable to suppose an Host of wicked Spirits
encompassing the Throne of God: therefore I conclude, they were all immaculate
and good Spirits, that had never yet failed in their obedience to their Maker.
So that upon the whole matter it appears, that the form or modification of the
parable of Job, is so far from prejudicing what I have inferred from the
construction of that other parable in the story of Ahab, that it is indeed a
very strong support and a mighty Confirmation to it.

But you will say a good Spirit cannot deceive, why not if God himself may do
it, as I have proved in some cases that he may, and I affirm this to be one of
those cases? or if you will not believe my bare affirmation, I have
sufficiently proved it.

1 Samuel 16. 14. It is said the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
evil Spirit from the Lord troubled him; it was an evil Spirit, not so in it
self perhaps, but with relation to Saul, whom it was determined to torment and
vex. An evil Spirit from before the Lord say the Chaldee Paraphrasts; by which
they seem to have had just such another Idea of it, as Micah had of that
Spirit, that was sent to deceive the Prophets of Ahab.

Thus you may see how widely they are mistaken, who would needs ascribe this
Phenomenon of Ahab to no more than a divine permission, and not only so, but
the deception of the Prophets to the immediate agency of wicked Spirits,
without any necessity, and contrary to the decorum and Schematism of the place,
though otherwise, as I know, God does permit the Devil and his confederate
Angels to abuse and deceive mankind, otherwise they could not do it; so he may
also sometimes be supposed to employ a wicked Angel to be the Minister of his
wrath, as well as he may one wicked man to execute his Vengeance upon another,
or incite an Idolatrous King to be the scourge and chastisement of a
backsliding Nation, which yet no man who understands these matters will deny
but he may do, and that he has sometimes actually done it.

Nay, I think the construction of the parable of Job, for though it be very
true that there was such a man as Job, who was a great example of piety in his
Prosperous, and of patience in his adverse Condition; yet the story as it is
managed in that sacred volume that goes by his name, is not the History, but
the Character of a perfect person, and is a parabolical descant upon a ground
of truth: I say the construction or way of managing that sacred story, will, if
I am not mistaken, evince, that God does not only permit, but sometimes employ
the degenerate and fallen Angels upon his Errants.

For First, He so expresses his permission for the time past, that he gives him
a kind of invitation for the time to come, to make a trial of the virtue and
integrity of his servant Job, c. 1. v. 8. Have thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one
that fears God, and escheweth evil? and when Satan urged in derogation of his
virtue, that it was the effect of his interest, and that he served God only for
the advantages occurring to him by it; God gives him an express permission, v.
12. Behold all that he has is in thy power, only upon himself put not forth
thine hand: and if you consider all things with that exactness which you ought
to do, you will find that there was more than a permission in the case; It
being impossible for any finite Spirit by an act of his will to have such power
over the Elements, as Satan is represented to have had at that time, and it was
a convincing argument to the Disciples, that our Savior was an extraordinary
person, and had his mission from above, when the Winds and the Sea did hearken
to his voice, Matthew. 8. 27. What manner of man is this, that even the Winds and
the Sea obey him? Thus when the destroying Angel smote the Host of the
Assyrians, when Moses with his Rod divided the Red Sea, and when Gideon with
his Trumpets blew down the Walls of Jericho: We must not think that it was the
power of that Angel that wrought that execution, the natural strength or skill
of Moses or of Gideon by which those miraculous effects were brought to pass,
which are so plainly above the activity and beyond the sphere of all humane
efficiency and power; but it was the will of God overruling the ordinary course
of Nature, and positively concurring to make its laws give place, to the will
of these Instruments commissioned and employed by him, neither is this any more
than what Satan himself acknowledges in the parable of Job, where although God
is pleased to say, Behold all that he has is in thy power, v. 12. Yet Satan
plainly acknowledges, v. 11. That he had no power to do that mischief which he
did, but what was truly and properly the power of God, v. 11. But put forth
thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face.

My opinion therefore is, that real miracles, that is, effects far surpassing
the regular strength of Nature, and as much exceeding the power of those at
whose will those effects are brought to pass, may be and have been actually
allowed by God to false Apostles, and false Christ's, as well as to true; to the
Magicians as well as to Moses; and to the Devil himself who is the Prince of
darkness, as well as to an Angel of light; and sure they were not mere Juggles
and impostures, which our Savior honors with the Majestic titles of great
signs and wonders, so great that if it were possible for such to be deceived,
they should deceive the very Elect, and yet this was a power with which the
false Christ's, and false Prophets were to be endued, by the express prediction
of him who was truth it self, Matthew. 24. 24. Neither is it at all prejudical to
such a supposition as this, that the wonders of Antichrist and his adherents
are called lying wonders, 2 These. 2. 9, For I do not deny that many have
pretended to a power of miracles who really had it not, and besides if you take
the whole place together, you will perhaps look upon this place, instead of
doing any prejudice, to be a confirmation of my opinion, in the Greek it is
thus, (...) Whose coming or appearance is after the working or activity of
Satan, with all power and signs and wonders of a lie. Now it may seem very
strange that perfect Tricks and Juggles, the Cheats of Hocus Pocus and
Legerdemain should be called not only by the magnificent names of power and
signs and wonders, but of all power, all signs, all wonders, for the word all
is (...) to be referred to each of these.

It will therefore be better to interpret, (...), wonders of a lie, as if the
Apostle had said, wonders to confirm a lie, or in confirmation of a false
Doctrine, as those works may be said to be works of Darkness, which are done at
Noonday, because they tend to the confirmation and Establishment of the
Kingdom of Darkness, or to the promotion and increase of Satan's usurped rule
and Sovereignty over the minds of men.

In Miracles there are three things to be considered, the nature of them as to
their Causes, the nature of them as to their Effects, and the tendency of them
as to their design.

First, As to their Causes, it is necessary they stould be such as plainly
carry along with them, the marks and signatures of a supernatural power,
otherwise they are not miracles but Tricks and Juggles.

Secondly, As to their effects, if they do nothing but Mischief in the world;
or if they are calculated only for wonder and amazement, not for use, these are
not sufficient grounds to rely upon; that they are intended by God as a
testimony to the truth: but it is on the contrary justly suspicious without
some further reason for our belief, that it is a doctrine of Devils, not of
God; whereas the excellence of our Saviors miracles consisted in this, that
setting aside his Doctrine, they themselves were so useful and beneficial to
mankind, he healed Diseases, he cleansed Lepers, and he cast out Devils, and he
went about continually doing good; which was a very strong argument, that he
had no ill design to bring any damage or prejudice to the world, (which is the
whole tendency of Diabolical wonders) when all his miracles were so full of
Love, so full of Charity, and Goodness to mankind.

But Thirdly, The tendency of these miracles is to be considered, we must
examine carefully those Doctrines which they pretend to advance, if they be
inconsistent with right reason or with natural Religion, they are either
Juggles and Impostures, or at best they are but Diabolical wonders, or it is
the power of God cooperating with the wicked Insinuations of the Devil, for the
Sins of men, to harden and to blind the world; but it is impossible the Elect
should be deceived, they who are truly pious and sincere, God will not suffer
them to be so fatally imposed upon, and men of rational and sober minds will
easily conclude that these miracles are wrought in the name of Beelzebub because
they tend to the promotion of his interest, and to the advancement of his
Kingdom in the world. Whereas if the Doctrine be consonant to reason and useful
to mankind, then these miracles are divine miracles, then the Doctrine and the
miracles do mutually confirm and strengthen one another, because by our
Saviors invincible argument, it would be an absurd thing for the Devil to cast
out himself, since a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.

St. Paul seems to have foreseen that false Prophets might be and would be
endued with a power of working real miracles and that the Devil might and would
put on the appearance of an Angel of light, when he so straightly charges his
Galathians, Gal. 1. 8. If an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Nay, the
same Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 17. 1, 2. That though a man have the gift of
prophecy, though he speak with the Tongue of men and Angels, though he
understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and have all Faith, so that he
could remove Mountains, yet if he have not Charity he is nothing; that is, he
is nothing in himself, and to others he ought to be looked upon only as a
sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, that is, we are not rashly to believe
him, because without Charity, which is the Companion and intimate Friend of
truth, he may deceive us, and it is our Savior's own rule, we must judge of
Trees by their Fruits, of Doctrines by their Consonance to natural Reason, and
by their tendency to promote the honor of God and the happiness of men; and of
men we must judge by the agreeableness of their lives and Doctrines to the
revealed will of God, and to the voice of reason, speaking impartial and useful
truth in the minds of unprejudiced and sober men.

The sum of what I have been laboring by this digression, if it be one, to
establish, is this, That since false Prophets have wrought true miracles, and
since those effects which are sometimes in Scripture ascribed to the Devil, are
yet indeed far above the efficiency of any created being, without the
concurrence of the divine Power, cooperating with, and assisting the will and
intention of the evil Spirit, that therefore it is reasonable to suppose, as
well as very suitable to that Hypothesis which I have laid down, that God does
sometimes endue false Prophets with a power of miracles, (and more than that
with a persuasion that they speak the truth, which was the case of Zedekiah,
and all the four hundred Prophets, that deceived Ahab) the better to blind,
harden, and deceive those who have resisted the force and evidence of reason,
or who have either obstinately persisted in a wilful neglect of enquiry into
truth, or in an open rebellion and defyance to the Convictions of it; and that
he does sometimes not only permit, but actually employ the fallen Angels, and
degenerate Spirits, to be the Ministers of his wrath and vengeance, which to
conclude this business, I shall confirm by another instance. The new
Inhabitants of Samaria that were transplanted thither by Salmanasser in the
room of the ten Tribes, were visited with Lions, and multitudes of them were
slain by them, which is expressly said to have been a Divine Judgment inflicted
upon them for their Idolatry, because they knew not the manner of the God of
the Land; but now these Lions seem to me not to have been real Lions, but
Devils in their shape, both because, I suppose, it will be hard to find so
great a number of Lions in those parts, as might be sufficient to do so great a
mischief, and because common Lions might have been appeased by casting other
Prey in their way, or kept out by Walls and other Fences, or caught by Gins and
Snares, or shot by Arrows, or poisoned by scattering the Flesh of Animals
tinctured with the rankest Poison, in their walks; but nothing could destroy
these, but the Samaritans being instructed in the Law of Moses, and then they
went of themselves: And it is in allusion to this, as I conceive, that St.
Peter compares the Devil to a roaring Lion, walking about, and seeking whom he
may devour. 1 Pet. 5. 8.


The third Instance is that of Absalom, to whose lying with his Father's
Concubines in the face of the Sun, I have made God to concur by an express Act
of his will. A bold thing you will say, and I am glad with all my heart to hear
you say so; it is a very good sign you are no Calvinist, for they all say this,
and a great deal more.

But if God may make a Tyrant, which was Nebuchadnezzar's case, why not an
Adulterer too? For when the use of Reason is taken away, and a Man is given up
to his own Lusts and Passions, in one Man one Passion will prevail, and in
another, another, according as the Man's constitution is, or as opportunity
presents its self; besides, Tyranny is an Usurpation upon the Rights of all,
Adultery only upon those of one; so that though Adultery, like other sorts of
Injustice, be a very heinous thing, and because of the dismal Consequences of
it, the worst sort of private Injustice that can be committed, and the more,
because it is an unjust yielding to the importunity of those Desires which are
of the lowest rank, and belonging to us in common with the Beasts that perish;
yet Tyranny (if there be any Degrees of Comparison in matters of so foul a
nature) is so much worse than the other, as it is a greater injury to rob a
Caravan, than to pick a Pocket; to destroy a Nation, than to kill a Man; to
stop the whole course of Law and Justice, than to pronounce an unjust Sentence
upon one.

And though I am far from going about to excuse so nefarious and detestable an
Action, yet it is still farther to be considered, that they were not Legitimae
Uxores, but Concubinae; David had them not in Marriage properly so called, but
in Concubinage only; and it is very probable they had belonged to Saul, his
Predecessor, before him; for we must observe, that this fact of Absalom was a
Judgment upon his Father David, for his Adultery with Bathshebah, the Wife of
Uriah the Hittite; at which Wickedness of his, God was so heavily offended,
that he sent him this Message by Nathan the Prophet, 2 Samuel 12. 11, 12. Thus
says the Lord, Behold, I will raise up Evil against thee out of thine own
House, and I will take thy Wives before thine Eyes, and give them unto thy
Neighbor, and he shall lie with thy Wives in the sight of this Sun: For thou
did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the
Sun; which Wives are called Concubines, chapter 16. v. 22. and were probably the
very same that were before the Concubines of Saul, c. 12. v. 8. where God by
the Prophet Nathan upbraids David with his Bounty toward him; I gave thee thy
Master's House, and thy Master's Wives into thy Bosom, and gave thee the House
of Israel, and of Judah. So that though I will not extenuate a Fact, which no
good Man can think of without Horror, yet I would fain know upon supposition,
that God enflamed the Tyrannical humor of Nebuchadnezzar, why he might not
also heighten the lustful disposition of Absalom, these being but two several
sorts of Injustice, and the latter much less criminal than the former? besides,
that this Adultery, though very heinous, being a breach of Duty to his Father,
Loyalty to his King, and Justice to Mankind; yet it does not seem to have been
so heinous as that of Reuben, who went in unto his Father's Concubine Bilhah,
Genesis 35. 22. because she by being substituted in the place of her Mistress, was
to all intents and purposes in the nature of a lawful Wife, and had heritable
Children, which were his half Brethren descended of her Loins, and because
Reuben was under no necessity, as Absalom seems to have been; for if you
consider that this very event was foretold by Nathan the Prophet; if you
reflect upon the strangeness of so loathsome and abominable a deed, for of those
Concubines there were ten in number; if you consider the publickness of it in
the face of the Sun, it will seem a perfect Miracle, and can be owing to
nothing less than a supernatural Infatuation on all hands, that so grave a
Counselor as old Achitophel should give such Advice as this; o^ that Absalom
should take it, whether you reflect upon their Relation to his Father, or the
unusual horror of the Fact it self; or that the Women without any opposition
that appears, should suffer it; or the people of Israel, as if there had been
no natural Turpitude, nor so much as customary indecency in the thing should
flock together with an unanimous Consent and Approbation to so horrid, so
unclean a spectacle, to behold it: For it is said, 2 Samuel 16. 22. So they
spread Absalom a Tent upon the top of the House, and Absalom went in unto his
Father's Concubines in the sight of all Israel.

It being therefore expressly prophesi'd, that this event should come to pass by
one of David's own House, in the face of the Sun, and in the sight of all
Israel; which things were yet, if you take them together, (and the last of them
by its self) morally impossible to come to pass, if you will not turn all into
an Allegory, which you will find it very hard for you to do, (and if you
allegorize Absalom, you must do the same to David, and Bathshebah, and Uriah,
to the Menaces of Nathan, and to the Birth, Reign, and History of King Solomon,
because all these things have a Connection with one another, and you must
allegorize all or none) you must be forced to confess, that there was more than
a Divine permission requisite for the fulfilling of this Prophecy, and more
there cannot be, without the interposition of a Divine Power; whence God, as
being the cause of that necessity by which it was done, takes the whole Action
upon himself, c. 12. v. 12. For thou did it secretly, (speaking of the matter
of Uriah) but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun.

Now these things, as they cannot fairly be interpreted any other way than I
have done, so according to my Hypothesis they are all very just and reasonable
in themselves, as being only punishments to the several Parties for their
respective Sins; for Achitophel, Absalom, and the people that followed after
him, besides other Sins, of which we can give no account, had all of them
forfeited their Loyalty and Fealty to their lawful King, and joined together in
a wicked and unnatural Confederacy against him; and as for the Wives of David,
if they were consenting to so foul a thing, as it does not appear but they
were, for want of a better expedient, because we know nothing of the persons at
this distance of time, we must lay the cause upon their Adultery, first with
Saul, and afterward with David, for so Polygamy was in the strict acceptance
of Law, though Custom sometimes has dispensed with it, there being no
question, but by that Text in Levit. 18. 18. Neither shall thou take a Wife to
her Sister to vex her, to uncover her nakedness, besides the other in her life
time: Polygamy is forbidden, but of this I have spoken more largely in some
other Papers, which will shortly be made public: but if this will not satisfy
them, I think it is no unreasonable presumption to suppose they might be guilty
of many other Sins, sufficient to provoke God to cause them to be a spectacle
of so public shame.

You will ask me, because I generally speak of those who are thus hardened and
blinded, as if they were concluded under an irreversible estate, whether this
be my opinion of all those people, who were the spectators of such a strangely
abominable, and loathsome Scene: but to this question, it is impossible to
return any other answer, than that nothing certainly can be determined, but
that it is more reasonable, from the general goodness with which most of the
Instances of Divine Providence are interwoven, to believe that he would not
deal so severely with so vast a number together; but that to some, if not all,
of them he restored the use of a better Mind, and abated of the severity of his
Justice with them, as he has been observed already to have done in the instance
of Nebuchadnezzar.

But this can be no encouragement to any to continue in a course of Sin,
because such a continuance upon that presumption is the greater provocation to
Almighty God, and makes it more to be feared when he does visit us, that he
will not remove his heavy hand any more. Neither must I be thought after all
this to make God the Author of Sin, for where necessity begins, morality
ceases, and what ever we do, the case is the same in one Sin as another; after
being brought to such a pass, it is no longer a Sin, but a Judgment upon us for
our former Sins. In a word, the reasons of all Duty are some way or other
reducible to Interest, as I shall prove more largely in a Discourse of the Laws
of Nature, and their Obligation.

And the reason in particular why Adultery is a crime, is because it is against
the common Interest of Mankind; it is apt to breed Quarrels, Jealousies, and
Bloodshed in the World; it lays open the enclosures of Property and Right, by
which all humane Affairs are governed and supported; it is commonly joined with
a breach of Friendship and Trust, without which there can be no living among
Men; it creates an alienation of Affection in Men to their lawful Wives, with
whom, because the Laws and the Interests of all Societies have obliged them
inseparably to live, and to run the same risk of good and bad Fortune, it is
their mutual Interest to do nothing that may create a Jealousy in one another,
or make any lasting Feuds or Animosities between them. Lastly, it is the direct
Road to a prostitute and wandering Lust, which is a slavery so much beneath a
Man, that it scarce becomes a Stallion, or a Town Bull, and is always
accompanied with the most dreadful Miseries both of Body and Mind.

And herein consists the goodness of God to Men, that he has ordered all things
after such a manner, that our Duty and our Interest are both the same; and
besides that, virtuous Courses by the sad experience of those that are wicked
and sinful, have always been attended with the greatest outward prosperity,
health, and vigor; he has implanted in our Natures a love and admiration of
Goodness, he has given us a tender Principle within to be the Guide and
Counselor of our Actions, that naturally feels a sensible regret and pain from
every thing that is base to others, or prejudicial to our selves, but enjoys an
exquisite delight and pleasure in the sense of doing well, and in the memory of
it after it is done: but if Men will violently break through all manner of
Bounds, and let no consideration, how powerful soever in it self, be sufficient
to prevail with them to leave their Sins, what can be more just, since they are
wilfully blind against their truest Interest, and put such an open affront
upon him, who has with so much goodness and tenderness so carefully provided
for it, than that they should be given over to a reprobate mind, to do those
things that are unseemly, and to run on headlong with an impetuous rage and
fury upon the mutual destruction of one another? If we will not see our
interest when it lies so plainly before us, we are not certainly to blame
Almighty God, if upon so great a provocation to him, and so many wilful
affronts and abuses put upon our selves, he shall at length remove it perfectly
out of our sight, or make us persist in those courses, which he may do by
virtue of his despotical power over us, which tend to our mutual Ruin and
Destruction.

It is very foolish to make the loathsomeness or uncleanness of Adultery, that
is, its grating upon a modest fancy or Imagination, a reason why God may not in
some cases concur to it, as well as to any other fact, which has the appearance
of Sin, but is indeed the effect of an external necessity and fate: for the
Physical circumstances of Adultery, and of a lawful Bed are the same, only all
the difference is that in one case there is a violence done to the undoubted
right and property of another; but in the other there is not, in the one the
order and government of the world, upon which all humane affairs have a
necessary dependence, is disturbed, but not in the other, and it is nothing
else but this difference which makes the one criminal, and the other blameless;
otherwise a man of a nice and dainty humor, may apply to himself, though never
so honestly descended, as well as to one begotten in an adulterous coition, the
sarcastick Epigram of Palladas.

(...)
(...)
(...)
It may seem very unsavory to a squeemish apprehension, that the divine
substance which pervades all things, should be coextended to every Jakes and
Dunghill, to every rank Brothel-house or fulsome stew, that he should be as it
were a spectatour, at the lascivious dances of the Luperci, or at the more
execrable Conventicles of the Bacchanalia, that he should fill that Theater
where men are thrown to be devoured by Beasts, or where they are compelled to
sacrifice one another to the barbarous applause of a crowd that delights in
blood.

But yet all this while this is so very true, that without it there can be no
notion of the divine omnipresence, no, nor of the divine substance neither;
Nay, all his attributes will vanish into nothing, for he cannot operate where
himself is not, and if himself be every where, that cannot be conceived without
an infinite extension.

And this, if duly considered, is the greatest aggravation in the world to all
our Sins; that they are committed in the divine presence, and that we do those
things, as it were in the company of God Almighty, of which in the presence of
many of our fellow Creatures we should be horribly ashamed; neither can any
consideration be so effectual with us for the leading a virtuous and blameless
life, as to think that he is intimately present to all our actions, and all our
thoughts, all the most secret designs and Imaginations of our hearts, of whose
power we have most reason to be afraid; the transcendent excellence and
perfection of whose nature does rightfully challenge the utmost respect and
veneration from us, to whose goodness we are most obliged, and to whose Justice
we must give account of our selves. It behooves us therefore where ever we go,
or whatever we are about, to consider carefully in whose presence we are: To be
reflecting frequently within our selves in the language of the Psalmist, Psalm.
139. v. 7, 8, etc. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee
from thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven thou art there, If I make my bed
in Hell, behold thou art there; If I take the wings of the Morning and dwell in
the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me: If I say surely the darkness shall cover me, even the
Night shall be light about me, yea the darkness hides not from thee, but the
Night shines as the Day, the darkness and the light are both alike to thee: or
in that of Aratus.

-- (...),
(...)
(...) --
or of St. Paul,

In him (that is, in the large comprehension of the divine extension or space)
we live and move and have our being, which notion if we always take care to
preserve waking in our minds, we shall not fail to behave our selves as Seneca
somewhere in his Epistles has prescribed, Epist. 10.
Sic vive cum hominibus tanquam Deus videat, sic, loquere cum Deo tanquam
homines audiant: Let your converse with men be such, as if you were always
mindful that you are in the presence of God, and let your prayers to God be so
free from Lust, Ambition, Covetousness, or Revenge, that you may not be ashamed
to own them before men.

I come now to the last instance which is of Judas Iscariot, in which I shall
not engage my self at present in the famous Controversy of future
Contingences; only these two things I do affirm,

First, That it was beforehand designed by God, that one whose name should be
Judas, should betray his Master.

Secondly, That in the fullness of time Judas Iscariot was by God Almighty
necessitated to betray him.

The first Assertion depends upon these two reasons.

First, That Judas in his name did represent the Nation of the Jehud^jim or the
people of the Jews to whom he was betrayed, and by whom afterward he was
Crucified, as the Paschal Lamb was to be slain by the whole Congregation of
Israel in the Evening.

Secondly, There was a Typical necessity that his name should be Judas, because
it was by Judah's advice that Joseph was sold into Egypt for twenty Pieces of
Silver, as our Savior by Judas was betrayed for thirty, and all men grant that
the first of these events was Typical of the latter, which was also the reason
why Joseph and the blessed Virgin were warned by the Angel to fly into Egypt
with the Child Jesus, Matthew. 2. 15. To avoid the rage and Tyranny of Herod,
rather than into any other Country, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the Prophet Hosea, c. 11. v. 1. (...), Out of Egypt have I called my Son,
whose going into Egypt, and consequently his calling out of it, depended only
upon Typical reasons, that he might answer the like event of Joseph, and that
by this he might signify his calling us out of that spiritual Bondage, of
which Egypt was a Symbol, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

The second Assertion I prove from those words of St. John's Gospel, c. 13. v.
27. And after the Sop Satan entered into him, that is, he was actuated by an
evil Spirit of Envy, and Madness; and immediately went forth in a turbulent and
outrageous humor, to sell his Lord and Master to his Enemies the Jews, that by
Satan such a violent spirit of anger and revenge is signified will not I
suppose, by any be denied; or if you understand it of the person of that wicked
Angel who is called in Scripture Satan and the Devil, it comes to the same
thing either way, and it will seem either way very reasonable to believe that
Judas was necessitated to what he did.

Therefore all the question will be by whom this necessity was imposed, that it
was immediately from the Devil, is plain, if you take the words in the latter
sense, but yet that hinders not, but he might be commissioned or employed by
God: But I confess I am rather enclinable to interpret it in the former, for
Satan is from a word that signifies enmity and hatred, and so may properly
enough denote a malicious and revengeful temper, from whomsoever it proceeds,
whether from the naughtiness of a man's own heart, or by the permission of God
from the Devil, or by his immediate Judgment from himself.

However St. John tells us expressly that our Savior gave him that Sop, after
the eating of which Satan immediately entered into him; which manifestly
implies that he was at least more than consenting to it, not that this Sop is
to be looked upon in the nature of an efficient or instrumental cause, any more
than spittle was a cause of restoring the blind man to his sight; but together
with the delivery of this there was a concurrence of the Divine Power, by which
the Devil, that is a Spirit of masterless and ungovernable rage, immediately
entered into him, which is very agreeable to the Language of the Scripture,
very consonant to my Hypothesis and to reason to suppose, if you consider how
bad a man Judas had always been, St. John's own Character of him, is, that he
was a Thief, John 12. 6. And you may add safely that he was an Hypocrite too,
otherwise he had never pretended to be a Disciple, nay, which is more than all
this, the Devil had already put it into his heart to betray his Master, John
13. 2. And he had actually covenanted with the chief Priests for thirty pieces
of Silver, Matthew. 26. 14, 15. So that after all this it was no wonder, if he
were punished with a necessity of doing what he had so wickedly designed, but
was as yet under some kind of hesitancy betwixt resisting and yielding to the
importunity of the Temptation. Neither is it at all to be wondered (if by Satan
the Person of the great Apostate Angel, or of one of his Missionaries be to be
understood) that the same effect should seem to be ascribed to God and to the
Devil, to Christ who gave the Sop, and to Satan who immediately after it
entered into him; because in this case one may be considered as the impulsive
cause, the other as the immediate Instrument, Satan necessitated Judas, by God
commissioned or employed Satan, as it is said in the case of David, 2 Samuel 24.
1. That the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David
against them, to say, go number Israel and Judah, and yet notwithstanding, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Satan stood up against Israel and provoked David to number
Israel, where by the way it is an unpardonable presumption in Junius and
Tremellius, who have inserted the word Adversarius into the body of their
Translation of the former place, to make it answer the more exactly with the
latter. The words of their Translation are these, Perrexit autem ira Jehovae
accendi in Israelitas, quum incitasset Adversarius Davidem in eos, dicendo,
age, numera Israelem and Jehudam. I say it is an unpardonable presumption to
take such a liberty of Translation as this is, since these two things are so
consistent together, as I have shown them to be; but it is still more
unpardonable in them, according to whose principles there is nothing which God
cannot do, or may not decree, his power being the only bounds that can be set
to his will, and his power being infinite, that is, no boundary at all.

It is further observable in the instance of David, that he had no sooner
numbered the people, But immediately his heart smote him: And David said to the
Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done. 2 Samuel 24. 10. that is, when
this necessity was off, he was sensible that he had done amiss, and he seemed
to himself to have committed a great Sin, as not being sensible of that
necessity by which he was compelled to do it, which is every man's case who is
blinded or hardened by God; and indeed without a supernatural Fatality, it is
impossible to suppose that David the man after God's own heart, who was used to
put so great confidence in his God, and so little in the number or strength of
his Armies, who was used to overthrow multitudes with an handful of men, and
had done such incredible wonders, by such despicable external means: I say, it
is impossible to suppose that such an one, so long as he had the use of his
reason, and the full exercise of the rational faculties of his mind, should
ever distrust so gracious, or go about to disoblige so good a God, so far, as
to measure his strength by his numbers, as if he doubted the power of the
Almighty for the future, or had forgotten what signal deliverances had been
wrought for him, by such inconsiderable and weak Instruments as in which no
humane expectation could be placed, and all this notwithstanding the
dissuasions of Joab and of the Captains of the Host, who all unanimously
addressed themselves to him to divert him from so fatal an intention, 2 Samuel
24. 4. But it is said the King's word prevailed, and notwithstanding the
apparent unreasonableness and ingratitude of the thing, yet there being no
express law of God against it, the King was of necessity to be obeyed: I am
afraid there are those in our days, who would think a less reasonable pretense
than this sufficient to excuse and justify their disobedience.

What has been said of David's numbering the people, may be said of Pete'r
denying his Master, and of Judas his betraying him, that at that time when they
did it, they were not sensible of what they did, but were hurried on by an
irresistible force which it was utterly impossible for them to withstand, but
afterward when that impetus was abated, and they came perfectly to themselves,
they both of them relented, and being altogether insensible of that divine
Judgment by which they were violently compelled to what they did, they imputed
the whole action entirely to themselves; wherefore the one wept bitterly, and
the other went out and hanged himself.

For the instance of St. Peter, the circumstances with which that story is
related in St. Matthews Gospel will sufficiently evince what I have affirmed to
be true, Matthew. 26. from the thirty first, to the thirty sixth verse we have
these words, Then says Jesus unto them, (the Disciples) all ye shall be
offended because of me this Night. For it is written I will smite the Shepherd
and the Sheep of the Flock shall be scattered abroad -- Peter answered and said
unto him though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended. Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say unto thee, that this Night, before
the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice, Peter said unto him, though I should
die with thee, yet will I not deny thee: here we may see how firm and zealous a
resolution Peter had made, and we have all the reason in the world to believe
he was in very good earnest: Likewise also said all the Disciples, v. 35. But
none as it seems, with so much heat and asseveration as he, yet they all
forsook him when the Trial came, and Peter denied with the most horrid Oaths
and Execrations that ever he knew such a man, and all this the very same Night
in which they entered into so solemn an engagement to adhere and stick to their
Master to the last.

It will be worth our while to set down all the Circumstances of this
Transaction as they are related by St. Matthew, c. 26. v. 37. He took with him
Peter, and the two Sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.
The two Sons of Zebedee were James, and John, the Disciple whom Jesus loved,
and his taking these three asunder from the rest of the Disciples at that time,
was an argument of a particular favor and esteem for them above the rest; and
being done, immediately after they had all obliged themselves in so solemn a
manner to stick by him, it is an infallible Sign, that he thought their
intentions real, and that their love to him was every whit as passionate and
cordial in it self, as it seemed to outward appearance; for there can be
nothing more unacceptable to the searcher of Hearts, than a dissembled
Profession of faithfulness and obedience to him: Accordingly we find one of
them so mindful of his promise, and inspired with so affectionate a Zeal for
the safety and defense of his Master, v. 47. that when Judas, one of the
Twelve, came with a great Multitude with Swords and Staves from the chief
Priests and Elders of the people to apprehend him, behold, one of the Disciples
which were with Jesus stretched out his hand and drew his Sword, and stroke a
Servant of the high Priests, and smote off his Ear; and who should this
Disciple be but Peter himself, who seems to have done this in pursuance of that
Resolution which he had so lately made? John 18. 10. Then Simon Peter having a
Sword drew it, and smote the high Priest's Servant, and cut off his right Ear;
the Servant's name was Malchus: Neither was this all, but when all the
Disciples forsook him and fled, Mat. 26. 8. yet Peter still followed him afar
off unto the high Priest's Palace, and went in, and sat with the Servants to
see the end.

Thus far therefore his Resolution continued vigorous and warm, and he was
still mindful of his promise, not to forsake or to deny his Master: But now all
of a sudden, as if he had never dreamt of any such promise, or thought of any
such resolution, though he had but newly made it, it came to pass, v. 69. ad
74. That as Peter sat without in the Palace, a Damsel came to him, saying,
thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee; but he denied before them all, saying, I
know not what thou say: And when he was gone out into the Porch, another
Maid saw him, and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with
Jesus of Nazareth; and he again denied with an Oath, I do not know the Man: And
after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou
also art one of them, for thy speech bewrays thee; then began he to curse and
to swear, saying, I know not the Man. A wonderful alteration for so small a
time. What? Shall we think that he had the courage but just now to wound the
high Priest's own Servant in the midst of so great a number of armed Men, as
might be sufficient to justify and excuse his fear, or rather prudence, if he
had not done it, should now be so wretchedly possessed with fear, as not to dare
to own his Master to one of the weaker Sex; but on the contrary, rather than
confess him, should with such horrid Oaths and Imprecations impiously perjure
and forswear himself? Or is it not more likely, that he had indeed forgot his
promise to that degree, that he knew not the Man, and had lost all memory of
his having been once his Disciple? This is both more pious to believe, and more
agreeable to what follows, v. 74, 75. And immediately the Cock crew, and Peter
remembered the words of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the Cock crow, thou
shall deny me thrice; and he went out, and wept bitterly. But if he did not
remember this 'till then, it is manifest he had forgot it before, and
consequently had forgot also that vow and resolution, of which those words of
Christ were the occasion; and if you grant thus much, it will be no hard matter
to conceive, that he might speak truth also when he said, I know not what thou
say, and I know not the Man.

But when the Cock crew, then God was pleased to restore him the use of his
Memory, and the exercise of his rational and discoursive Faculties; he began to
perceive then what he was doing, and found himself denying his Master,
wherefore his Heart smote him, as David's did, when he had numbered the people,
And he went out, and wept bitterly, which is another very strange and sudden
alteration, from the cutting of Malchus his Ear, to such an obstinate denial of
his Lord; and from such an obstinate and stiff denial, to such a degree of
sorrow and remorse: All which things, as they cannot with any show of reason be
supposed to be the natural turns of a Man's own Mind, or the ordinary result of
humane Passions left perfectly to themselves, that a Man should be so constant,
and so false, and so penitent, all in a breath; so I think it is sufficiently
clear from v. 75. that Peter in his denial had lost all sense and memory of him
whom he denied, and that this forgetfulness of his was the effect of a Divine
Judgment.

If you ask me, for what reason such a Judgment should be inflicted? I answer,
It was a punishment to him, and to the rest, for their presumption; they leaned
too much upon their own strength, and thought themselves sufficient of
themselves to withstand any danger, and to resist any temptation how great
soever, not considering that humane Frailty is so far from being able to
maintain so great a Combat by its own strength, that setting aside the
assistances of Grace, without which no such Conflict can be successfully
managed, the very ordinary powers of Nature are at God's disposal, and he may
either permit or obstruct the use of them as he pleases himself; all our
Springs are in, and all our Faculties are from him.

It is observable therefore, that as the desertion of ten of them; (for Judas
is not now to be reckoned) and the denial of Peter was an effect of their
presumption: Though I should dye with thee, (said Peter) yet will I not deny
thee; likewise also said all the Disciples: Yet Peter was more positive, more
presumptuous than the rest, and therefore he is made the greater example of the
Infirmity of humane Nature; the rest only forsook their Lord, but Peter denied
him, which was much more; for it is in some cases lawful to fly from
Persecution, but in none to make an express renunciation of Christ, or of his
Gospel.

Upon the whole matter I make no scruple to affirm, That the denial of Peter
three several times, the Maidens and others giving him so many occasions by
their Interrogatories to do it, and the Cock's crowing just at the third time,
were all of them managed by a Divine fate.

Judas his case agrees in this with that of David and Peter, that he was
hurried on to what he did by a necessity not to be resisted; for it is said,
That Satan entered into him as he did into David; but yet as in the instance of
David, it was no less true, that the Lord moved him to number the people, by
which it must be meant, either that the Lord employed Satan as his Instrument
to harden the Heart, and blind the Eyes of David, or that there was a
concurrence of the Divine and Diabolical Power together in order to this end:
So also in the business of Judas, it is said, That Satan entered into him; but
that was not 'till Christ had given him the Sop, which seems to have been, as
it were, the signal for Satan to begin to play his part; and it is added from
our Savior's own mouth immediately after, speaking to Judas as he was going
out, (...) That thou do, do quickl^, John 13. 27. Which words, what are they
else but the Divine Will imbodied in an articulate sound, and hurrying him on
with an impatient madness to the execution of his treacherous Design? For there
is still this difference betwixt the case of Judas, and that of Peter and of
David already mentioned, that the two latter had no foregoing design to do what
they did of themselves; but David on the contrary did express upon all
occasions the utmo^^ trust and confidence in God; and Peter was so far from any
intention to deny his Master, that he had made the most obstinate resolutions
in the world never to be guilty of it. But in Judas it is manifest, that he had
beforehand harbored such a wicked intention in his Heart; that he had not
only designed, but that he had actually covenanted and agreed with the chief
Priests about it; which is but another instance, added to those of Pharaoh and
of Nebuchadnezzar, of the concurrence of the free and the necessary principle
together.

But now whereas I have affirmed that one Judas, and that this very Judas
Iscariot was beforehand designed and pitched upon by Divine providence to
betray his Master, I will now add, that he was the rather pitched upon, because
he was of the Family of the Iscariots, that is to say, the Lepers, because the
Leprosy was an argument of guilt under the Law: The Jewish Masters tell us, it
was the punishment of Pride; and therefore the scarlet Wool, Cedar Wood, and
Hyssop, which were the Materials made use of in the lustration of it, were to
denote partly the heinousness of Sin in general, which cannot be expiated but
by Blood, which was the meaning of the scarlet Wool, and the reason of those
Sacrifices which were enjoined in this case by way of expiation; partly that
Pride or haughtiness of Mind, of which the Cedar Tree, by reason of its usual
height, was a very fit and proper Emblem, which was the cause or occasion why
this Disease was inflicted; and partly that Humility, that pious Meekness and
equability of Spirit, to which the diseased party was warned by this way of
expiation to return, the Hyssop being to a very Proverb the most humble and
despicable of all kind of Plants whatsoever, 1 King. 4. 33. And he (Solomon)
spoke of Trees, from the Cedar-tree that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hyssop
that springs out of the Wall. Neither was the Leprosy only an effect of Sin,
but it was also by its spottedness and deformity a Symbol of it, and of its
spreading and infectious nature.

-- -- Sicut grex totus in agris
Unius Scabie cadit and porrigine porci,
Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva.
What fitter name therefore could there be than this, for him who was so black
a Traitor to his Master and his Friend, who was himself so bad a Man, and was
to dip his hands in the Blood of God?

And that this was the ture sense and meaning of his name, I will now prove as
plainly and as briefly as I can, before I pass any farther. Our Savior was
entertained at the House of one Simon, who is by St. Luke called (...), Simon
the Pharisee; but by St. Matthew, c. 26. v. 6. and by St. Mark, c. 14. v. 3.
(...), the Leper; which Epithetes it is manifest at first sight are consistent
enough, and do by no means exclude one another, so as they might not both well
enough be understood of the same person, though other circumstances of the
Story in all the Evangelists had not been so exactly the same as they are: Now
it is manifest, that at this Entertainment Judas was present; for it was he
that made that envious, or rather covetous and selfish Objection, when the good
Woman poured her precious Ointment upon the Head and Feet of our Lord, John 12.
5. Why was not this Ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the
Poor? And he is called every where by St. John, (...), Joh. 6. 71. and 12. 4.
and 13. 26. which is, as I have said, the same exactly with (...), being the
Surname given to their Family, as is probable some Ages before, but upon what
particular occasion, cannot now be determined: For Segirouth, or Segiroutha, in
the Chaldee Dialect, which was in those days much better understood than the
present Hebrew, signifies the Leprosy, to which it is but adding the Greek
Termination significative of a Person, and you have without any more ado the
very word (...), and besides, a plain demonstration that Judas was the Son of
that Simon who is called ^ (...), the Leper, which is nothing else but the
Greek interpretation of (...), the Iscariot, Mat. 10. 4. Mar. 3. 18. As
likewise in the number of the Apostles we find mention of (...), Simon the
Cananite, or rather the Cananite, by the same way of Analogy, that is, by
adding the Greek Termination, Exodus 34. 14. Deuteronomy. 4. 24. and 5. 9. and 6. 15.
and Nahum. 1. 2.
which is expressive of a Person to the Hebrew word Kanna, as appears from
this, that the same Disciple is by St. Luke called (...), Acts 1. 13. which is
exactly the rendition of the Hebrew Kanna, Exodus 20. 5. and in other places.

Which conjecture of mine concerning Judas Iscariot, is strangely confirmed by
Beza's excellent M. S. being the same that he afterward bestowed upon the
public Library of the University of Cambridge, which reads this Name all along
through the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, a little more near to the
Chaldee Segirouth, (...) (perhaps for (...)); and in the same M. S. in all the
five places of St. John, it is (...), for (...), the corruption arising from
the extreme likeness of S and K in the Majuscular Greek Character, by which it
happened that the K was twice repeated by some negligent Transcriber, and
afterward by one who was more carefully mistaken, one of them as being
needless, as indeed it was, was left out; wherefore (...), is Judas that was
descended from the Scariot, or Judas the Son of Simon the Leper, (...), as in
Thucydides, (...), are those who descended from the Athenian Planters, and so
in that of Virgil, -- Belus and omnes
A Belo orti --
That is, Belus and omnes Belidae -- (...).

I shall conclude this matter with reflecting upon a Note of Drusius upon Joh.
6. 71. upon these words, Judam Simonis; Theophylactus, says he, videtur
legisse, (...), nam alt Judam alio nomine Simonem appellatum fuisse, falsum nam
fuit Simonis Filius. But Drusius was mistaken, and so was Theophylact too,
whose words are these: (...) Not that this depended upon any corrupt reading of
any place in the New Testament as Drusius imagines, but it happened, as I
conceive, thus: Theophylact had read in some other History of those Times not
now extant, or in some other Author who had borrowed it from thence, of one
Simon Iscariot, for that was his proper Name, being the same with (...), the
Leper; and then thinking with himself that Judas was always called in Scripture
Iscariot, and looking upon this as a name peculiar to his person, not the
Surname of his Family, as indeed it was, he concluded that Judas Iscariot and
this Simon must needs be the same; or that Judas was otherwise called Simon,
which is so plain to every Eye, so easy and familiar for every Man to
conceive, and is withal so strange a confirmation of that Etymon which I have
given of the name Iscariot, that I conclude without any more ado, that (...)
and (...) are certainly the same, that it was the common name of his Family,
not proper to his Person, and that Judas Iscariot was the Son of Simon the
Leper. Which conjecture, or rather demonstration; when I consider how natural
and easy it is in its self, how useful for explaining the History, and by
consequence for vindicating the Authority of the Scripture: and when I compare
it with the frigid and farfetcht conceits of Zacharias Chrysopolitanus,
Theodore Beza, Camero, Drusius, Caninius, Grotius, Dr. Lightfoot, and others, I
can hardly forbear paying my acknowledgments to the Divine Goodness for so
useful a Discovery in the same Language, in which our Savior did it in behalf
of his Disciples, a few contemptible Fishermen, and Handicraft Mechanics, to
whom God by him had revealed those Mysteries which were unknown to the Sages
and Rabbis of the world, Matthew. 11. 25, 26. (...).

Thus much may suffice to have been spoken concerning those particular
Instances, which are most obnoxious to exception in the following Discourse;
but it is certain, that what God may justly do to one Man, that he may also do
to a whole Nation, which is but an aggregate of so many single Men, if the
cause for which a punishment is inflicted be as Epidemical as the punishment it
self.

It is no wonder therefore, when there were few or none of the Egyptians but
what were more or less concerned in oppressing the Israelites, and imposing
those intolerable Burdens upon them; it is no wonder, I say, if a divine or
fatal Obduration were superadded to that which was spontaneous and owing to
themselves, and if the one were alike Epidemical with the other, for the case
being exactly the same with Pharaoh, and with his Subjects or Servants, for
when Pharaoh saw that the Rain, and the Hail, and the Thunders were ceased, he
sinned yet more, and hardened his Heart, he, and his Servants; Genesis 9. 34. The
way of dealing or proceeding with them, must likewise in all reason and justice
be the same.

And what has been said of the Egyptians in the time of Moses, is true in its
proportion of the Jews in that of our Savior, and in all the succeeding Ages
down to this very day; they are the words of St. Paul, Romans 11. 25. I would
not, Brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this Mystery (lest you should be
wise in your own conceits) that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until
the fullness of the Gentiles be come in: But yet we must not think that this was
the only reason, and that God, out of no consideration but only his own
Arbitrary choice, did prefer the Gentiles before the Jews; or that he was
carried forth by something in his nature into a greater love for one than for
the other, for he is no respecter of persons; and besides, at this rate the
Gentiles would have had some reason, if not to be wise, yet to be pufft up and
exalted in their own conceits; but it depended originally upon the wilful and
voluntary Transgressions of the Jewish Nation, on whom God had in vain bestowed
the most particular and signal Marks of his favor. Romans 9. 4, 5. Who were the
Israelites to whom pertained the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants,
and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises; whose were
the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ came: And when he did
come, he spent the time of his Sojourning upon Earth among his Countrymen the
Jews, it was among them he preached, among them he wrought his Miracles, among
them he spoke by their own confession as never Man spoke, and did those Wonders
which it was impossible for a mere Man to do; and what he did himself, that he
recommended also in his Instructions to the practice of the Disciples when he
sent them abroad, Matthew. 10. 5, 6. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and
into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the lost Sheep
of the House of Israel: He did not forbid them wholly to preach to the
Gentiles, but they were to begin with the Jews, Go rather to the lost Sheep of
the House of Israel; which Instructions were afterward exactly observed by the
Apostles, who did not exercise their Apostleship among the Gentiles, 'till such
time as they had first been rejected of the Jews, Acts 13. 45, 46, 47. But when
the Jews, filled with envy, spoke against those things which were spoken by
Paul, contradicting and blaspheming; then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and
said, It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to
you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life: Lo, we turn to the Gentiles, for so has the Lord commanded
us, saying I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou should
be for Salvation unto the ends of the Earth. Esa. 49. 6. So true is it, that
sufficient means had been used to render the Jews inexcusable before they were
rejected. They did not stumble that they might fall, but they first fell of
themselves, and then they were blinded and hardened by God. Have they stumbled
that they should fall? says the Apostle, God forbid, but rather through their
fall Salvation is come unto the Gentiles; for to provoke them to Jealousy,
that is, to awaken them out of this benumbed Estate, and be a happy means of
their rising again.

The Jews for many ages before were in expectation of Messiah to come, and it
appears by several passages up and down in the Gospels, that he was expected at
that very time when our Savior appeared upon Earth: But there were three or
four several things which hindered them from believing him to be the person.

As First, That they expected a temporal Prince, that should deliver them from
the Roman Yoke, and should establish them in a lasting Sovereignty and dominion
over the Nations round about them; which appears among other things from
Herod's cruel Edict for the slaying the Male-Children in Bethlehem and in all
the Coasts thereof from two years old and under, with a design among them to
have slain the King of the Jews, Matthew. 2. 16. that is, the Messiah that was to
come, which proves plainly what notion the Jews had at that time of the
Messiah, besides that it would have been a ridiculous piece of Cruelty, for
Herod to have done what he did upon any other supposition, than that the
Kingdom of the Messiah was a Kingdom of this world, that so by slaying of him
he might secure the Sovereignty to himself and his Posterity for ever, which
was no question his design.

When therefore the Jews found themselves so much disappointed, in a mean,
mechanic and obscure person, the Son of Joseph the Carpenter laying claim to
so August a Title as that of the Messiah; and yet notwithstanding making no
pretenses to a temporal Kingdom, but on the contrary mightily disowning and
disclaiming it; and instead thereof preaching obedience to Caesar, and those
that were commissioned and employed by him, this was a mighty prejudice against
him, that he could not be the person designed; when the notion which they had
conceived of the Messiah, was so contrary in all respects to what he expressly
declared of himself, and so inconsistent with that contumelious usage, which he
not only suffered himself, but told all his followers they must expect no
better.

The second Prejudice was taken from his Parentage, they expected a Messiah of
the house of David, but Joseph the Carpenter, whose reputed Son our Savior
was, though he were of the Tribe of Judah, yet he was either not known to be of
the Lineage of David, or it was not thought likely that so mean a Sprout of the
Davidical Stock, should bestow the so much talked of, and the so long expected
Messiah upon their Nation: and therefore let him preach never so much to their
Astonishment and Admiration, let him do never so many Miracles, and work never
so great wonders; yet still they would be saying, Matthew. 13. 55, Is not this
the Carpenters Son? And Mark 6. 3, Is not this the Carpenter the Son of Mary?
As if it were impossible he should be the Messiah, the Christ, the great King
and Prophet that was to come among them, who was so poorly descended, and was
himself so very mean a person.

The third Prejudice was, that they thought him to have been born not in
Bethlehem of Judea, but in Nazareth of Galilee. Whereas it was believed to a
Proverb among them, that out of Galilee no good could come, and that out of
Nazareth no Prophet could arise: For so great was the hatred betwixt the Jews
and the Babylonish Planters of Samaria and Galilee, that they could never
believe God Almighty would send them a Messiah from thence; or that the most
mortal and avowed Enemies of the Jewish Nation, should ever have that honor
vouchsafed to them from above; as that the greatest King, the most infallible
Prophet, and every way the most illustrious and accomplished Person that the
Jews had ever seen, or were ever to expect, should be born among Heretics,
Idolaters, and such as were worse than Pagans* which was the best language a
Jew would be brought to allow to any Samaritan or Galilean; and though it is
true there were Multitudes of Jews interspersed about in Samaria and Galilee,
yet, as if they had all been blasted from the Cradle by a sort of Heretical
Contagion from the soil of so accursed a place, they would not allow that the
Spirit of God, or of Prophecy could rest upon them.

The fourth and last great Prejudice which I shall mention, was taken from his
laying so little stress upon the Ceremonial part of the Mosaical Institution,
and his so frequent, and so bitter invectives against the Traditions of the
Jewish matters, whose Authority among the Scribes and Pharisees of those times,
and consequently among the much greatest part of the people, was accounted so
Sacred, that it was held equal, if not Superior, to the written Law.

These were the main Prejudices, which the Jews in our Savior's time labored
under, these were the Reasons why they did not receive him as the Prophet that
was to come, the Messiah and the King of the Jews, and as these Prejudices were
all of them very great in themselves, very powerful obstructions against the
due reception of his Person, or his Gospel; so they were still further enflamed
by the perpetual inculcation of his mortal Enemies the Scribes and Pharisees,
and Lawyers of those times, who would have lost all Credit and Authority among
the people, if either his person had received that entertainment which was due
to the sacred Character of the Messiah; or if his Doctrine which was so great
an enemy to the Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, the Covetousness and Extortion,
the Pride, Affectation, and supercilious behavior of those whited Walls, and
painted Sepulchers, had ever prevailed or got to be in vogue among them.

But yet notwithstanding so great were his Miracles, and so useful to the
world, so holy was his Life, and so excellent his Doctrine, that they forced
Confessions from his greatest Adversaries, very much to the disadvantage of
their Cause; and if they would but have given themselves the trouble of an
impartial enquiry, they would have found that he was by Joseph his reputed
Father, and perhaps by his Virgin Mother too, though not at the next remove, of
the Tribe of Judah, and of the Family of David; they would have found that he
was not born in Nazareth of Galilee, but in Bethlehem of Judea; they would not
have wondered to see him put so ^ittle value upon the ritual part of the
Mosaic Law, when he came to introduce that purity of Mind and will, of which
those Mosaical washings and Lustrations were but a faint shadow and Typical
Representation.

Lastly, Though it was true they did expect then generally not a suffering, but
a Triumphant and Victorious Messiah, one whose head should be encircled, not
with a Crown of Thorns, but with a Chaplet of Laurels: yet this was an opinion
wholly owing to that exquisite hatred which they had conceived against their
oppressors, of whom they hoped to be sufficiently revenged in the Reign of the
Messiah, and to the pride and haughtiness of that humor which then prevailed
among them.

But if they had considered coolly and impartially with themselves, it would
have appeared very reasonable to believe that all the Sacrifices and expiations
of the Law were but Typical of that one great Sacrifice, which was in the
fullness of time to be offered up for the Sins of the whole world, and after
which there was to be no more Sacrifice for Sin: besides that it was prophesied
of the Messiah by the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 9. 27. That he should cause the
Sacrifice and oblation to cease. They might have learnt from the writings of
the same Prophet, ib v. 26. That the Messiah after a certain period of time was
to be cut off, but not for himself, but for the Sins of others: And that after
this the Destruction of the second Temple, and of the City of Jerusalem and of
the whole Jewish Economy was very soon to follow. They might have known from
the Characters which other Prophets have given, but more especially from those
of David and Isaiah, that it was a Suffering not a Reigning Messiah, that was
to come among them, and save them not from their Enemies, but their Sins.

Lastly, Their own traditions would have told them, if they had harkened to
them, what manner of Messiah that was, who was to be expected, for they all
agreed he was to come some time or other upon the Anniversary of the Feast of
the Passover; and it is a common observation among the Jews to this Day, that
all their great deliverances have happened upon this Day; they acknowledge
therefore that the deliverance of the Firstborn of Israel by the blood of the
Paschal Lamb, when the first born of Egypt was destroyed, and the passage, or
Passover through the Red Sea, that is, through a Sea of blood, was Typical of
that great deliverance which was in the fullness of time to be purchased for
them by the Messiah; but now nothing is more plain, than that the Sacrifice of
the Passover, and the Passage through the Red Sea, which was a shadow of
deliverance by blood, might be very proper Types of a suffering Messiah, but by
no means of a Triumphant. For what expiation is there in Conquest? How does
Confidence and Assurance answer to Fear? Security and Triumph to a dangerous
and uncertain passage through the midst of an impending Sea, and thorough the
dry places of a barren Wilderness into the land of Canaan?

It is so far therefore from being true, that such a temporal Prince as they
looked for, was really to be expected; that on the contrary all things were so
very plain against them the other way, that it can hardly seem less than a
divine Infatuation, for the Sins of that and former Ages, that the Jews in our
Saviors time were so generally and so obstinately of this opinion, especially
if you consider, that it was necessary in order to the bringing the designs of
Providence to pass, that they should be of this mind; For certainly had they
believed him to be the Messiah, and that the Messiah was no otherwise to
deliver them than by suffering for them; they, of all men in the world, would
not have embrued their hands in his blood, which yet it was Typically necessary
they should do, because the Lamb of the Passover was to be slain by the whole
Congregation.

But still the fatality was not yet so strong, but in many of them at least, it
might have been overcome, had they not provoked God to inflict a further degree
of Obduration by new Provocations, by the contumelious usage of his Person, and
by ascribing his Miracles to the efficiency of infernal Spirits,
notwithstanding they carried in themselves so plain Demonstrations of a divine
power, and were intended to promote a Doctrine so useful and advantageous to
mankind, for which our Savior tells them, that is to say, those of them who
were the most eminently and obstinately guilty of it; that they should not be
forgiven either in this World, or the next: what more plain therefore than that
their hearts from that time forward were hardened? That the sentence was past
against them by the just Judgment and decree of Heaven? and that they were
given over past all recovery to a final impenitence and irreversible doom?

Neither in truth is it possible to conceive that any thing less than this
could be the occasion of that execrable derision of our Lord upon the Cross,
when in the pangs of the most bitter Agony, that humane Nature was capable of
enduring, he cried out with a loud and mournful voice, Eli Eli
Lammahsabacthani, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? At which some of
them in derision said he calls for Elias: which knowing profanation of the
name of God, and from the mouth of Jews, with whom it has always been
superstitiously sacred, cannot easily be attributed to any thing less than a
supernatural obduration.

Nay, when the Sun it self astonished at so dire a spectacle, durst not behold
it, but darkness overspread the face of the whole Earth from the sixth to the
ninth hour; and when at his giving up the Ghost the Foundations of the Earth
were shaken, and the relenting Rocks were cleft in sunder; when the Graves were
opened, and the Dead by the groans of Nature were awakened; when the whole
frame and order of the Universe was inverted; when the vail of the Temple was
rent in twain; when the Centurion and the Guards amazed, smote every Man his
hand upon his Breast, and said, Truly, this was the Son of God; yet the Jews
nothing concerned all this while, were so far from being moved by so many, and
so great Testimonies given to the Divinity of his Doctrine and his Person, that
against the manifest convictions of their own Consciences, they persisted still
in an obstinate and open defiance to them both: nay, after his Crucifixion and
his Burial, when to prevent the pretense of his rising on the third day, a
strong Guard was set upon the Tomb, and yet after all this he did
notwithstanding arise, not by any trick or juggle, which that Watch was
purposely placed to obstruct, but in reality and truth, to the wonder and
astonishment of all Men, and of the Chief Priests and Elders themselves; yet
all this would not melt them into any degree of Repentance, but they were still
so far from yielding to so plain Convictions, that by the unanimous consent of
a numerous Assembly it was agreed, That the Soldiers must be bribed to confess
themselves not only negligent in their Duty, but that they were all fast asleep
at one and the same time, which was a very strange thing, and so fast asleep,
that all the noise and bustle of the removal of a massy Stone (on which it is
very like some of the Guard themselves might sit, as the Angel did afterward
when it was rolled away) would not awake one of them into the least sense or
knowledge of what was done. And yet if what they said was really true, if they
were all never so fast asleep, all that could be made of that would be, that
they could not tell whether his Disciples had stolen him or no, or whether he
was really risen from the Dead: So that by this pretense there was no proof
either way; and it being very improbable, that so many Men set purposely to
watch, should be so forgetful of their Duty, should do so notorious a violence
to Military Discipline, and commit a fault which is used to be so severely
punished by the necessary rigor of Military Justice, it is plain, that as what
they said was no evidence either way upon supposition that it was true, so it
was so prodigiously unlikely and improbable a story, that scarce any Man in his
wits would ever believe it to be so; but yet this ridiculous Tale was partly
swallowed by the Jews for truth, and partly embraced and abetted by those that
made it, and those that knew it certainly to be a very impious and wicked lie:
And now if you ask the reason of so great credulity on the one hand, or so
great impiety and impudence on the other, it will be impossible to ascribe it
with any show of probability to any thing less than a Divine infatuation,
according to that known saying,

Quos perdere vult Jupiter dementat prius. But yet, after all this, they were
not perfectly given over, but the Apostles (as I have said, according to our
Savior's Instructions) did begin the exercise of their Ministry with the Jews,
by whom when they had been scornfully and contumeliously rejected, they then
applied themselves to the conversion of the Gentile world; and though no doubt
it was then the case of very many of the Jews, that they were hardened into a
final Impenitence, yet there were also very many who were not in so deplorable
a condition, otherwise it would be ridiculous for St. Paul, as he does, Romans 9.
3. to wish himself accursed from Christ; (though you must not take that to be
spoken in the utmost rigor of propriety, but he does by this expression
signify a very passionate Zeal for the Salvation of his Brethren and Kinsmen
according to the Flesh) for what can be more absurd than such a desire, if he
knew there was an irreversible Decree gone out against them for their final
Impenitence and obduration? Or what more impious, than to set himself and his
will in opposition to the Divine Will and Decree, by which the Jews were
irrecoverably given over to a reprobate sense, and placed beyond all
possibility of Salvation? One would think he might at least have added what his
Master did before, when he was to drink that bitter Cup so disagreeable and
distastful to humane Nature, Nevertheless not my will, but thy will be done.

The same may be argued from c. 10. v. 1. My hearts desire and prayer to God
for Israel is, that they might be saved; and from c. 11. v. 14. If by any means
I might provoke to Emulation them which are my Flesh, and might save some of
them: For I bear them record, says he, c. 10. v. 2. that they have a Zeal for
God, but not according to knowledge: And how came it to pass that it was not
according to knowledge? Why for this he gives us two reasons, the one was the
Sin of the Jews, the other was their Punishment. First their Sin, c. 10. v. 3.
For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, (that is, seeking righteousness or justification not
by Faith in Christ, but by the works of the Law, as it is, c. 9. v. 32.) have
not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. And in this voluntary
resistance, or nonsubmission to the righteousness of God, that is, to the
Gospel of Christ, confirmed by so great internal evidence from the
reasonableness and beauty of it self, and by so large external attestations of
Miracles, and Signs, and mighty Wonders, their Sin consisted, for because of
unbelief (which must be understood of voluntary and wilful unbelief, otherwise
the cause was in God, and not in the Jews) they were broken off from the Root,
which Root was Christ, c. 11. v. 20. their unbelief was their Sin, and their
being broken off, was the punishment of that Sin; but they were broken off no
otherwise than by being blinded and hardened, v. 25. I would not Brethren, that
ye should be ignorant of this Mystery, that blindness in part is happened to
Israel; (...). Now this (...) is a word by which the Divine induration was
anciently understood; It would be better to read it, either by the exclusion of
(...), or by the transposition of it, (...), etc.
Glossae veteres, (...) perduratio, and Hesychius explains it of a benumbed
estate, as in a Lethargy, or a Dead Palsy, (...), says he, (...) Suidas
explains it as we do, by blindness, (...) and a little before, (...) (from
whence (...) may very well be derived) (...), the congelation or petrification
of any moist or fluid substance; and (...), to harden and petrifie; but yet all
this while it was but (...), a blindness, a benummedness, an induration but in
part, by which three things may be understood:

First, That this calamity (for that is another sense of this word taken notice
of by the ancient Lexicographers, (...) is (...), and (...) is (...)) was not
to last for ever upon the Nation of the Jews, but was only to continue 'till
the fullness of the Gentiles was come in, as it follows immediately in the same
Verse.

Secondly, It may be said to have been in part, in that all the Jews were not
hardened or blinded; but on some the Sun of Righteousness, and the Light of the
Gospel, shone as brightly as on the Gentile World.

Thirdly, Of those that were hardened and blinded, all were not in an
irreversible condition, but some had still some power and liberty left them of
returning to a better mind, or at least that God had resolved to deal so
mercifully and kindly with them, as to take off that supernatural blindness
from their Eyes, and hardness from their Hearts, that they might see and feel
the truth, and arrive at a due sense and knowledge of themselves and him, which
seems to be the meaning of that passage in the Prophet Isaiah, c. 10. v. 21,
22. applied by St. Paul, Romans 9. 27. The Remnant shall return, even the Remnant
of Jacob unto the mighty God; for though thy people Israel be as the sand of
the Sea, yet a Remnant of them shall return: And it was for these, not those
who were concluded under a final and irrecoverable Doom, that St. Paul's
Prayers and endeavors were intended; for these and none but these, that to the
Jews, he became as a Jew, that he might gain the Jews: And to them that were
under the Law, as under the Law; that he might gain them that were under the
Law, 1 Cor. c. 9. v. 20.

And now from this Account which I have given of Gods dealing with the people
of the Jews; I shall make these following observations.

First, That the design of these three Chapters, the 9th. 10th. and 11th. to
the Romans is only to give an account of the rejection of the Jews, and the
reasons upon which it depended.

Secondly, That one reason of their rejection was owing to themselves, for
having abused the Patience and the Mercy of God, and slighted the means and
opportunities of Salvation; which is so far from giving any Countenance or
favor to the Doctrine of irrespective Reprobation, that it perfectly destroys
it: In as much as here is, here all along a plain consistence observed to the
ordinary notions of Equity and Justice amongst men; nay, these three Chapters
of St. Paul are so far from giving any advantage to that cause, that after all
these provocations which might make it very just, a part Post to Doom so many
obstinate Sinners to eternal Torments* and though the Jews were under so great
disadvantages at that time, by the substraction of the divine Grace, and by a
positive Judgment of Blindness and obduration superadded to it; that it may
seem morally impossible for many of them to come to the knowledge of the truth,
and to an hearty Repentance for their Sins, that so they might be saved.

Lastly, Though it be very reasonable to believe that God did, as in Justice he
might, actually put some of them into such a Condition that there was a natural
impossibility of their Repentance; yet it cannot be proved from any thing in
all that long discourse of St. Paul, that any one Jew was so wholly blinded,
hardened, and utterly forsaken by the Grace of God, and by the natural powers
of his own mind and will; that it was no way possible for him to Repent, though
their Condition was such, that it was morally impossible as I have said, but
the far greatest number of them must be lost for ever.

Thirdly, It is very well worth our while to observe, that notwithstanding this
blindness or hardness, yet the Jews had all the while a zeal for God; though
that zeal was not according to knowledge. And St. Paul himself in the sincerity
of his heart, persecuted Christianity before his Conversion, as thinking he did
God good Service thereby; which was the case of almost all the Jews, as our
Savior himself had foretold it should be. From whence it is easy to perceive
that the zeal and heat of a Party, let it be never so much a pretended zeal for
God, nay, let it be never so sincere and real in it self, yet it is not always
a sign of truth; but on the contrary, when this zeal for God, is a zeal to
divide and break the Unity of the Mystical body of Christ, which is his Church.
A zeal without Charity and Brotherly kindness. A zeal of Calumny and slander
against all those that are not of the same party with themselves. A zeal to
believe all that may do hurt. And a zeal to report it that it may do the more.
A zeal of not reading or hearing what other Men can say for themselves, lest
they should be instructed or informed. A zeal that calls Truth and Sobriety
carnal Reason. A zeal that will still persist when it has nothing to say for
its self. A zeal that flies from Conviction, as if it were a Wolf in
Sheeps-Cloathing; or Satan in the shape of an Angel of light. A zeal against
the Order, Government, and quiet of the world. A zeal to see all things, like
it self on fire. A zeal to propogate Religion by Swords, or by Daggers: to
conclude, A zeal for God, but not according to knowledge. A zeal of Impudence.
And a zeal for Nonsense; this kind of zeal though it should be sincere, as it
is to be feared, that in many it is not: This is not that Christian zeal which
discovers it self chiefly by Charity, Humility, and mutual Forbearance, by
obedience to Superiors, and love to one another; but it is rather the zeal of
those who are given over to a repr^bate Mind, and who after all their
magnificent and swaggering pretenses, are in danger of greater Flames than they
endeavor to kindle.

Lastly, I think it very reasonable to believe, that this hardness of the Jews,
which was the Consequence of their many and great Sins; and was the occasion of
so horrid outrages committed against the person and followers of our Lord,
which we see no argument how powerful soever, had sufficient strength and
efficacy to hinder, was after his Crucifixion still greater than it was before,
because it is manifest they still persisted in the same impenitent and obdurate
State; and it is equally plain that the reasons which might induce them to a
sense and sight of their Sin, grew every day more strong and potent than the
other. For when the vail of the Temple was rent in sunder at the instant of his
passion, what stronger evidence could there possibly be given by the divine
Power or wisdom, that this was indeed that Messiah foretold by the Prophet
Daniel, and expected by their Fathers and themselves, who was after all their
ill grounded Imaginations of a triumphant Prince, after a certain period of
time to be cut off, and was to make the Sacrifice and the oblation to cease?
For when the Vail was torn, and the Holy of Holies laid open, and exposed to
every Eye, and consequently profaned, exaugurated, and unsanctified again; what
could be more plain, than that God did by this design to signify the abolition
of the Mosaic Law, and that he that sat between the Cherubims, which was the
reason of the extraordinary sanctity of that place, had now left that Station
for good and all, and had forsaken that ancient Seat where his honor had
accustomed to dwell?

Again, when after his Crucifixion he rose again from the dead, which I have
shown plainly they had all the reason in the world very heartily to believe,
and yet persisted in the same, or indeed greater incredulity, because the
Convictions were greater than they were before; what can be more reasonable
than to think, that for their not laying hold of the former possibilities of
Repentance, those possibilities grew every day more faint and weak; and that
there was less hold to be taken of them every day than other?

Again, when after his Ascension into Heaven, the Holy Ghost in the sight of
Multitudes of all sorts, did upon the day of Pentecost descend in bodily and
visible shapes upon the Apostles, confirming their Mission to preach the Gospel
of the crucified Jesus by a miraculous gift of Tongues; and when for ever after
they were endued with a power of Miracles, and with a gift of Utterance for the
more effectual Confirmation of that Gospel which they were to Preach; and for
the more advantageous delivery of it among prejudiced and unequal Hearers, when
they acted so much above all humane Power, spoke with a more than humane
Eloquence, and suffered with a Courage insensible of humane frailty, when they
baffled their Adversaries, convinced their Judges, converted thousands at the
hearing of one Sermon; what shall we think, but that they who saw all this, who
knew and understood it all very well to be true and yet did not believe
themselves, but on the contrary persisted in a furious and fanatic zeal
against all those that did: What shall we think, I say, or indeed what can we
possibly conceive to have been the cause of such prodigious unbelief, but that
for their former Sins, and for their not laying hold of those means, or those
possibilities of returning to a sounder mind, which were afforded them; they
were acted every day more strongly by a supernatural Spirit of Incredulity, by
the just Judgment and decree of an incensed God, whose goodness and patience
had been so much abused, the more effectually to hinder them from Repentance
and amendment?

Nay, When the Oracles grew dumb and silent, when the Devils were cast out, not
only in Judea and Palestine, but in all the World, when the powers of Darkness
gave place to the light of the Gospel, when the City and Temple of Jerusalem
were Demolished, their Altars profaned, their Priesthood rendered useless, their
Sacrifices not only excused, but forbidden, their New Mons antiquated, their
Solemn Feasts turned into Fasting and Lamentation. When the Scepter was not
only departed from Judah, and a Lawgiver from between his feet, which was an
infallible Sign that the true Shiloh was come, but they were dispersed and
scattered over the face of the whole Earth, looked upon as the Scorn and
Reproach of Mankind: Objects of the utmost hatred and Contempt together, more
loathed than their own so much abominated Swine, and more unclean than any of
those Beasts that were forbidden them by Moses. When yet after all this there
is no Sign appears that their affairs are likely to be in a better Posture,
neither are there any the least reasonable hopes of the long looked for Messiah
his appearance; when all that have pretended to that high Dignity, our Jesus
only excepted, have all of them sufficiently exposed their Nation and
themselves; have betrayed their own Impiety, and the folly of all their
Adherents, have lived without Miracles, and died without Pity, leaving nothing
but shame and confusion to their Disciples.

Lastly, When the Jews themselves are forced to confess that the time of the
Messiah his appearance upon Earth is now long since expired, but that he is
still denied them, and delays his coming as a punishment of their Sins; which
reason, or rather excuse, if it be any at all, will be better every Minute than
it was before, and consequently a reason why the Messiah should never come at
all. What can be more plain from so great obstinacy under so great Convictions,
than that their not believing him to be come already, is at once their
punishment and their Sin together?

For after all it is by no means consistent with those Notions which we are
used, and which we ought all to entertain concerning the divine goodness and
Justice; to think that any one Jew is or ever was so hardly dealt with, that he
never was under any the least possibility of Salvation; for this were to make
Power and Arbitrary will, the only Measures by which God proceeds in his
Government of the world: for it is manifest, that what he may justly do, that
is, without any violence to his Attributes or his Nature to one single Jew,
that he may do if he pleases to the whole Nation, and consequently to all
mankind.

The Ancestors of the Jews having embrued their guilty hands in the blood of
Christ, may be a reason why God may substract the special assistances of his
Grace and Spirit from their Posterity, which he is not obliged to vouchsafe in
an equal proportion to all Mankind; but it can be none at all why he should
destroy, or impair those natural Powers and faculties of the Mind, without
which it is impossible for them to know their Duty; neither is any thing indeed
a Duty any further than it is or may be apprehended by them to be so. Their
Fathers were hardened and blinded for their own Transgressions, but the
Children are not so dealt with for the Iniquities of the Fathers, which would
be unjust, because no man can help his Fathers having been a wicked Man, and no
Man ought to be punished for what he could not avoid; but all the Business is,
God may, as I have said, withdraw the special Assistances of his Grace, which
he is not obliged to vouchsafe to any, much less to the Posterity of those who
have been the most Notorious offenders against him; and he may take the
forfeiture of their own proper Sins (which he may justly do at any time when
ever he pleases) sooner than he would have done, had their Ancestors pleased
him better, which is plainly the meaning of that known place. Exodus 20. 5, 6. I
the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers,
upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation, of them that hate me,
and show Mercy unto Thousands, of them that love me, and keep my Commandments.
In the Hebrew, it is to them that hate me, and to them that keep my
Commandments; and so the 70. (...). Now if it be demanded what is meant by Gods
Visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers, upon the Children unto the third and
fourth Generation, to them that hate him: the true answer I suppose, on all
hands will be agreed to be, that he punishes the Posterity for the sake of
those that went before them; and so on the other side, his showing Mercy unto
Thousands to them that love him, must be meant both by the rule of opposition,
and by Analogy of Interpretation, the Hebrew particle in both cases being the
same, of his showing Mercy for the sake of those that love him.

Again, If it be demanded, how or in what sense it is, that God shows Mercy to
Thousands for the sake of them that love him, the Answer will be and must be,
not that he will ever suffer Sin, aggravated by impenitence and wilful
perseverance to escape wholly unpunished, for the sake of any man let him be
never so Holy: this would be a Doctrine very destructive to all manner of piety
and goodness among Men, and very inconsistent with the divine Justice, Nay, and
with his Mercy too; if you consider how many would be tempted by such a
supposition to Sin against him, and to abuse themselves and others: Wherefore
the meaning must be, that he will not be so severe, to mark what is done amiss,
with the progeny of those that have endeavored faithfully to serve and love
him, and to obey his Commandments; but will for their sakes bear with them much
longer, than otherwise he would have done; he will give them farther time, and
more Opportunities, greater Assistances, and more powerful Convictions that
they may Repent, and to render them the more ungrateful and the more
inexcusable, if they do not; and so on the other hand, he will visit the Sins
of the Fathers upon the Children, that is, not that he will inflict any
positive and real Punishment, which otherwise it had not been lawful for him to
inflict, merely because of the disobedience of their Fathers, which can no more
be the fault or action of the Children, than the person of the Parent, can be
the person of the Child; but there are some things which God may do by virtue
of his Despotical power, as he is the supreme Lord and Sovereign of all, and
there are others which he may do as an exercise of his Justice.

To the first Head there are two things belonging.

First, The Substraction of all, but so much necessary and indispensible Grace,
without which it is impossible for us in this degenerate and lapsed Estate,
either to withstand the importunity of Temptations, or to repent so effectually
for having yielded to them, as is necessary for the attainment of eternal
Happiness.

Secondly, The inflicting all those pains of Body, Calamities in our Fortune,
or Disappointments as to our Designs, which are not less eligible than
nonentity it self, but where there is either a mixture of present enjoyment to
make the pain more Tolerable, or an interval of indolency to make it less
Lasting, or a strength of mind that is able to combat with pain or with
Misfortune, and reaps some inward Satisfaction from the conquest to it self; or
Lastly, a ground of hope that such unhappy Circumstances will have a more
pleasing and agreeable Conclusion.

In this case it is plain, that what God may do without any violence to his
Justice, by virtue of his Arbitrary Power and will, for no reason at all, but
merely because it so pleases him, that he may do the sooner and the rather when
he has a reason for it; though that reason may not be founded in the person
himself, on whom this Calamity is inflicted; but in that of him of whom he is
descended, who having been a great example of wickedness, and of Disloyalty
against him; he may for his sake exercise his Sovereignty and Dominion upon his
Posterity, sooner or with more Severity than he would otherwise have allowed
himself to do, though he might have done it notwithstanding, if it had so
pleased him; and therefore it is an act of Mercy when ever he does it not.

As when the Disciples demanded of our Savior, John 9. 2. Master, who did Sin,
this Man or his Parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered neither has
this Man sinned, nor his Parents; but that the works of God should be made
manifest in him. Where our Savior grants that such a Punishment as Blindness,
being indeed no great infelicity to one who was never acquainted with the
advantages of Sight, might justly have been inflicted, for the sake, and upon
the account of his Father's Sin; because whatever God may do for no reason at
all, that it is certain he may do much more at any time for a reason, how small
soever that reason be: However in this instance he says plainly, that it was
not for any Sin of his Parents, but it was an Exercise of Gods despotical
Power; and this Blindness was the rather inflicted upon him, that after such a
period of time he might be healed: and by a miraculous recovery of his sight
give an attestation to the truth of our Savior's Doctrine, to the reality of
his Mission, and to the divinity of his Person: Neither has this man sinned,
nor his Parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him;
where it is true, that he was at length healed, and consequently in the General
was made Blind, that the works of God might be made manifest in him: but that
he was kept Blind so long from the time of his Birth, till he came to Man's
Estate, this was an exercise of despotical Power, since itis plain that the
same works of God might have been made manifest in a Child of a year, or two
years old, who had been Blind from the Womb for all that time.

This Sovereignty and absolute Dominion of God over his Creatures, which
consists in a right of taking away all that he has given, or in inflicting all
those Calamities upon us, which are not more dreadful to humane opinion or
Imagination than nonentity it self is acknowledged by Job, when the terrible
Judgments there mentioned had devoured all his substance, and destroyed all his
Children, leaving him destitute of all things for which life is desirable, c.
1. 20, 21. Then Job arose and rent his Mantle, and shaved his head, and fell
down upon the ground and worshipped, and said Naked came I out of my Mothers
womb, and Naked shall I return thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord takes
away, Blessed be the name of the Lord: and then it follows, v. 22. In all this
Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly, which it seems by this place he had
done, if after this severe usage he had charged God with injustice. And what
was true as to those goods of Life, which are external to a Man's person, such
as are his Children and his Substance, which it has been shown, may without
injustice be taken away by God, by virtue of his absolute Sovereignty over men,
the same is likewise acknowledged to be no less true by the same illustrious
example of an humble Resignation to the will of the great Disposer; as to those
things in which a Man's own proper person is more nearly concerned: For when
Satan had smitten Job with sore Blanes and Boils, equally loathsome and painful
all over his Body, from the crown of his Head, to the sole of his Foot, c. 2.
v. 7. and when his Wife upon so sudden occasion, v. 9, said unto him: Do
thou still retain thine Integrity? Curse God and Dye; he makes no other Answer,
v. 10, but, Thou speak as one of the foolish Women speaks, What? shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? and then it
follows again, in all this did not Job sin with his lips. Thus far therefore it
is Sin to accuse God of Injustice.

But this is not all neither, but it is still further true by Authority, as
great and as sacred as that of the Book of Job, and by the acknowledgment of
Abraham the Father of the Faithful, and the friend of God; that this same
absolute Dominion extends it self as far as to Life it self, which it is at
God's pleasure to take away by arbitrary measures without being accountable to
his own Justice or his goodness for it.

For though it be indeed the expostulation of that Righteous Person, with his
Maker in the behalf of Sodom, Genesis 18. v. 23, 25. Will thou also destroy the
Righteous with the Wicked? that be far from thee, to do after this manner, to
slay the Righteous with the Wicked, that be far from thee, shall not the Judge
of all the Earth do Right?

And though it be further true that as a Judge, God cannot slay the Righteous
with the Wicked, because considering him in that Capacity, he must act
according to the respective demerit of those that appear before him at his
Tribunal; yet as a proprietor and Sovereign Lord he may, this being in truth
the only proper exercise of his Sovereignty and absolute Dominion over us.

But yet notwithstanding, how closely soever he pressed this argument with his
God, he did not dare for all that to interceed any further, than that if there
were ten Righteous to be found in the City, he would be pleased to spare it for
their sakes; therefore by his own Concession, and as it were, in Complyince
with that agreement and Stipulation which was at that time made betwixt God and
himself, he might justly have involved nine Righteous persons in the common
Calamity of that wicked place; but he that may justly slay nine innocent
persons, or at least, without any injustice, for Justice supposes a Punishment
and consequently a fault, may likewise without any injustice slay nine
Millions, or an infinite number, if it so pleases him; for the injustice is
not to be fetched from the repetition, but from the nature of the fact, which
if it be once lawful, it can never be repeated so often as to make it otherwise
than it is in it self: so that if he may destroy one innocent man without
injustice, it is manifest there can be no reason, why he may not do the same to
another, and so in infinitum, it being utterly impossible to set any Bounds or
Limits to the exercise of this power.

It may seem something hard, to involve good Men in those Calamities, which the
Sins of the bad have given casion to; but it is next kin to an impossibility in
this great Ship of the world, where all Men's Concerns and Interests are
carried together in the same Bottom, and are so strangely perplexed and
entangled with one another, but the Righteous must needs partake in the
sufferings of the Wicked; Nay, it is absolutely impossible as to Men's Fortunes
or Interests or Affairs in the world, but it must of necessity be so: and as to
the taking away of their lives, or visiting them with any loathsome or painful
Disease, though it be not equally necessary that this should light in common as
well as the other, yet it is by no means inconsistent with the Justice or
goodness of God that it should be so. God is not obliged, when he visits any
Nation or pepple with a Plague or Epidemical Disease, to order the matter so
that the destroying Angel shall pick his way and make a distinction as he goes
betwixt the good and bad, such a choice as this would be contrary to the very
nature of the Judgment it self, which is as blind and impartial as the Grave to
which it sends us; and therefore that stroke which with respect to the wicked
is a Punishment, is in relation to the better sort of Men, an exercise of that
power which may justly take away all that it has given us, without doing the
least wrong or injury at all, and this must needs extend as far as life it
self; which together with all the Comforts and enjoyments that are consequent
upon it, is the immediate and only gift of God, who is the sole proprietor of
that vital warmth which awakens the stupid matter into an enjoyment of it self,
and from whom as from the root of life, and the eternal source of all the
inferior perceptive powers, that long meander of Energy and vital activity is
derived that passes thorough all the spacious Provinces of this same Secondary,
created World, watering the senseless matter as it goes, with an enlivening and
refreshing stream.

Thus much may be sufficient to have said concerning the lawful exercise of
God's despotical or arbitrary power: I come now to consider what he may do as
an exercise of his Justice, and I lay it down for a certain and self-evident
Maxim, that he cannot blind or harden Men from the Cradle all along to the day
of their Death, in order to their final Destruction and Damnation in the other
world, because the pains of that miserable State being supposed to be infinite,
both in degree and in duration; one of these two things must be granted, either
that God can do no wrong, let him do what he will or can, what ever is most
cruel or seems most unjust, but that he is nothing else but arbitrary will, and
that infinite Cruelty is sufficiently warranted and justified by infinite
power, which is Mr. Calvin's Doctrine, and the avowed opinion of Mr. Hobbs; or
else that in all instanc es of this nature where he first concludes men under a
miserable and fatal necessity of doing what they do, and then damns them for
doing or believing what they could not avoid to do or to believe, he is guilty
of manifest Injustice; one of these two things, I say, must be granted, for
there is no medium betwixt them.

But now as to the first of them, I do affirm it to be false, for two reasons;
the first of which is taken from the testimony of Scripture, the other from the
nature of God; it remains therefore that the latter must of necessity be true.

And first to argue from the testimony of Scripture, in the expostulation of
Abraham with his Maker, of which we have so lately spoken, Shall not the Judge
of all the Earth do right? It is plainly intimated that there are some things
that God cannot do, otherwise this would be a very impertinent, and a very
ridiculous Expostulation; and so in that of St. Paul, Romans 9. 14. What shall we
say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid, (...) By no means, let
not so profane a surmise as that enter into any Man's Heart; but still it is
certain, if there be such a thing as Unrighteousness, or such a thing as
Cruelty, which will admit of no plea or justification for it self, that of
condemning the Innocent to eternal and insufferable Torments is the (...), it
is that unrighteous and accursed thing, and it is as certain that all Men are
innocent, whose actions are overruled either by an internal necessity of
Nature, or by an external one from the will or appointment of God.

Wherefore it would have been needless for St. Paul to startle or boggle at the
business so much as he seems to do, as if he were in a fright at the very
apprehension of any such blasphemous and vile suggestion, (...), God forbid;
much less should he have gone about to justify the Divine procedure from those
two Topics; First, of his despotical Power (which I have shown how far it will
extend;) and Secondly, of his Justice, (which is a very idle insignificant
word, when Arbitrary Will knows no distinction, and Power justifies whatever
that Will can decree) both of which Topics I have shown plainly in the
following Discourse, that he does very industriously and solicitously insist
upon, in justification of God Almighty; but he might have told us, that Justice
is only a name between Man and Man, or a politic contrivance for the better
order and government of the World, because Men cannot subsist without one
another help, they receive equal benefit, and are in equal danger from one
another; and so it was necessary for the better preservation of Mankind, and
for the comfort and support of humane life, that there should be here and there
a dash of Justice to restrain Men's passions, and qualify their desires, and
to temper and allay such exorbitant and giddy Fumes as those of Malmesbury and
of Geneva, but that indeed Justice was only a matter of Relative necessity, not
of real or intrinsic goodness, and that none are unjust, but they who want
power to vindicate what they have done.

But because this place of St. Paul is connected with that famous instance of
Jacob and Esau, v. 12. 13. It was said unto her, the Elder shall serve the
Younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated: Which
instance, as well as that of Pharaoh, which is sufficiently cleared in the
following Discourse, is brought to patronize the Doctrine of absolute
Reprobation: before I pass any farther, I will do what service I can to true
Religion, by giving the genuine sense and interpretation of that so celebrated
place of Scripture, and making it for ever hereafter useless to serve any
Calvinistical or Blasphemous design; I say Blasphemous only for this reason,
because I am certain I can prove it, that Calvinism is Blasphemy in the highest
degree.

Let us therefore consider what S. Paul says in another place, Gal. 4. v. 22.
ad 27. It is written, that Abraham had two Sons, the one by a Bond-maid, the
other by a Freewoman; but he who was of the Bondwoman was born after the
Flesh, but he of the Freewoman was by promise, which things are an Allegory;
for these are the two Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, which gendreth to
Bondage, which is Agar; for this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers
to Jerusalem which now is, and is in Bondage with her Children; but Jerusalem
which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all.

By which we see plainly, not only that the Law it self, and all the
ceremonious scrupulosity belonging to it, was a type and shadow of a more
perfect Dispensation to come; but also that the very persons and actions
mentioned in the History of the Old Testament, had sometimes a typical
designment in them; which notion will receive yet farther advantage, when upon
an impartial enquiry into that matter we shall find, that what St. Paul has
said of Agar and Sarah, and their respective Offsprings Jshmael and Isaac, may
with equal, if not greater, probability of truth, to all outward appearance I
mean, be applied to the persons of Esau and of Jacob.

Genesis 25. 22, 23. When the Children strugled within the Womb of Rebecca, and
she went to enquire of the Lord; The Answer she received was this: Two Nations
are in thy Womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy Bowels,
and the one people shall be stronger than the other people, and the elder shall
serve the younger. Where the two Nations, and the two manner of people, are the
two dispensations of the Law and Gospel, which were of a nature so strangely
different from one another, the one all ceremonious and outward, the other all
simple, plain, and inward; neither will it be an easy matter in any other
sense but this, to give a fair exposition of what follows, that the one people
shall be stronger than the other people, or that the elder shall serve the
younger; but only that the Gospel should prevail over the Law, that the latter
should be subservient to the former, and be the Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, as St. Paul himself calls it, Gal. 3. 24.

And that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were Typical persons, and had a Typical
designment with respect to the Evangelical Dispensation, is clear; besides,
that their Names and their Histories do sufficiently speak for themselves, from
the express testimony of the same Apostle, Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. They are not all
Israel which are of Israel, neither because they are the Seed of Abraham are
they all Children; but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, that is, they which
are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children of God; but the
Children of the promise are counted for the Seed. And Gal. 3. 29. If ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed and Heirs according to the promise.

Nay, that the very loving of Jacob, and hating of Esau, was not so Arbitrary a
thing as is commonly supposed, but was at least founded upon Typical or
Prophetic reasons, seems clear to me from the testimony of St. Paul himself,
Romans 9. 11, 12. For the Children being not yet born, neither having done any
good or evil, that the purpose of God, according to Election, might stand, not
of works, but of him that calls, it was said unto her (Rebecca) the elder
shall serve the younger: As much as to say, that God made a distinction where
there was really none, as to the Children themselves, but only they were both
of them Typical persons, the one was a type or shadow of the Mosaic
dispensation, the other of that of Christ, and the difference put between them
was intended to show us, that by the works of the Law, or by an exact
obedience, which is morally impossible, no man shall be justified; but that
after all we must owe our happiness not to our selves, but to him that calls,
that is, to the mercy and grace of God in and through the merits of his Son,
applied to us by a steadfast and lively Faith upon the Evangelical condition of
Repentance, and that upon such terms as these, God will call us, that is, he
will do that as an act of Mercy, which as an act of Justice he was not obliged
to do.

To the same purpose are the next words, as has been said already, It was said
unto her, the elder shall serve the younger: For you cannot fairly expound it
in any other sense but this, That the Economy of the Law was to be subservient
to, and was to usher in that nobler and more perfect dispensation of the
Gospel, of which, and of the sufferings of Christ who purchased that
advantageous Covenant for us with his Blood, the Ceremonies and Sacrifices of
the Law were plainly significative and expressive: For it is clear,
notwithstanding this, that Jacob, together with his Wives and Children, did
afterward pay that homage and obedience to his Brother Esau, which by the
custom of those times, was usually given to the elder Brother, and is very
inconsistent with that temporal Dominion, which is pretended by this Blessing
of Isaac to be conferred upon his younger Son Jacob, Genesis 33.

Besides in the blessing, if it may be called one, which Isaac bestowed upon
Esau we find these words, Genesis 27. 4. By thy Sword shall thou live, and shall
serve thy Brother; which two things taken both of them in the literal and first
Sense are inconsistent with one another. For to live by the Sword, is to live
by Conquest, by Rapine and Spoil; and to Serve is to live in Subjection and to
obey. It is necessary therefore that they be understood in different Senses*
since, without a manifest Contradiction, it is impossible to expound them both
the same way; by thy Sword shall thou live, that is, thou shall be the Father
of Warlike and predatory Nations, (...), Nations that live upon Spoil and
Rapine without regard to Equity or Justice; that is, perhaps, of the Arabs,
Turks, or Tartars, all whose originals at this day depend upon very obscure
Conjectures, and they may either one or more of these people owe their descent
to Esau, as well as to any other. But then thou shall serve thy Brother;
neither must nor can be understood in the same way, and the clean contrary of
it is at this day manifestly true, but it is to be understood, not of his
Posterity, but his Person; which as I have shown, was Typically designative of
that State of the Church, which was to be subservient to and introductive of
the more noble and lasting Establishment of the Gospel.

All which may be still further confirmed from the story of Ishmael the Son of
Hagar, of whom the Angel of the Lord gives this Character, Genesis 16. 12. He will
be a wild man, his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against
him, which is to be understood of his Posterity, he being generally thought,
and that by the Jews themselves who call them Ishmaelim, or Ishmaelites, to be
the Father of the Turks of whom this Character is exactly true, which
Ishmaelites may also, for ought we know, be the same with the Edomites or Sons
of Esau too, that is to say, the descendants of Esau by his Wife Mahalath the
Daughter of Ishmael, Genesis 28. 9.

But now notwithstanding, he was to rule and to be so powerful, that all the
rest of Mankind would scarce be an equal match for him, which is the case of
the Turks at this Day; yet whatever he was in his Posterity, in himself he was
the Son of a Bondwoman and a Servant, a person Typical of the legal
Administration, which was in time to be rejected, to make way for the Son of
the Freewoman, that is to say, the Gospel, which Christ the descendant of
Isaac, and the rightful Heir of all things was to bring into the world. For
Hagar and consequently Ishmael her Son, is as St. Paul says, Mount Sinai in
Arabia, that is to say, the legal dispensation, and as the persons of Ishmael
and Esau, so likewise those of Isaac and Jacob too had a double respect, the
one to the natural seed, the other to the Children of the promise, according to
that place of St. Paul already cited. Romans 9. 8. They which are the Children of
the Flesh, these are not the Children of God, but the Children of the promise
are counted for the seed.

Again, Genesis 27. 40. We find it thus written, It shall come to pass, when thou
shall have dominion, that thou shall break his Yoke from off thy Neck; I speak
with all due submission to better Judgments, but indeed I think, nothing can be
more impertinent and trifling than this Translation: For it is plainly an
Identical proposition, and is as much as to say, when thou shall have dominion,
thou shall have dominion; for to have dominion, and to break a Yoke are both of
them the same thing, in the Hebrew it is thus: Vehajah caasher Tarid, 70.
(...), which the Roman Edition renders, Erit cum deposueris and solveris jugum
illius; there shall be a time, when thou shall lay down, and loose his Yoke
from off thy Neck. St. Jerome. Erit quando depones and solves jugum illud de
collo tuo, the Scholiast in the Roman Edition, (...), and it shall be, when
thou art bent or humbled, or when thou shall submit thy self, that thou shall
break this Yoke from off thy Neck, which manifestly respects the calling of the
Jews, by laying aside that Yoke, to which they now stoop with a voluntary
obedience, and which it either is or has been in all their powers to shake off
from themselves, which is as much as to say, they will never be an happy
people, never equal in any respect to their younger Brother Jacob: Esau in this
case being considered as their Father, till laying aside their obstinacy and
perverseness, and laying down the intolerable Yoke of the Mosaic bondage, they
shall submit themselves to the evidence of truth, and to the more gentle Yoke
of the Messiah, the common Savior both of Jew and Gentile, in whom all the
Families of the Earth are to be blessed: and as for those that expound this
place of the revolt of Edom from under the subjection of the Jews, in the
second Book of Kings, it is so poor a shift and so inadequate a fulfilling of
this Prophecy, considering what a small handful of Men those were, in respect
of those many and distant Nations descended from the loins of Esau; some of
which in all probability were not so much as known to the Jews, that it does
sufficiently betray its own weakness without any further animadversion of mine.

Esau then is the legal dispensation from Hasah, fecit, because the
Justification which is by the works of the Law cannot be obtained without a
perfect and unsinning obedience, and because of the many Ceremonies, and
troublesome external offices belonging to it; And Jacob is the Gospel by which
the dispensation of the Law was supplanted, a type of the seed of the Woman
that was to bruise the Serpents heel, Genesis 13. 15. Where the Hebrew word hakeb
is the Root from whence this name is to be derived.

Esau's selling his Birthright for a mess of Pottage, what was it else but the
Jews rejecting the Covenant of Grace, to whom the first offer of it was made,
and all for the sake of a few hartless Ceremonies, and weak Resemblances of
that more perfect dispensation, which was afterward in the fullness of time to
be revealed, and which are far from being able to satisfy the saint and weary
Soul?

Further the Pottage being red, was a Type of that Religion that consisted
mainly in the observation of Days and Times, which in ancient as well modern
Calendars were used to be marked with red Letters, and from hence he had his
name Edom, Genesis 25. 30. Which being likewise exactly the same, as to all its
Radicals with Adam, may also signify that Religion, which besides the divine
Revelation, was likewise, by the Pharisaick (...), or traditions, to be swelled
into so vast a Bulk of trifling by humane ordinances and Institutions.

Esau's being rough, and Jacob smooth, signified the intricacy and perplexity
of the legal, and the simplicity, and honest plainness of the Evangelical
Administration.

Jacob his name was called Israel from God's appearing to him in Padan Aram,
which is one reason assigned of that name, Genesis 35. 9, 10. And by this name he
was a Type of the Messiah, for Israel what is it but, Ishraah el? Man has seen
God, but the Scripture says expressly, Joh. 1. 18. No man has seen God at any
time, but the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him: Wherefore nothing is more plain, than that this name was typical
of the Messiah, and that more perfect Revelation of the will of God, (which is
there called, seeing and declaring him) which he was to introduce into the
World.

Farther, the hairyness of Esau was a sign of that Religion, which was to be
settled and preserved by force and violence, as the Israelites were first settled
in the Land of Canaan by the utter extirpation of so many Nations, and as the
Jewish Establishment did endeavor afterward in the beginnings of Christianity
to maintain it self by Persecution.

Horrida membra quidem and durae p^r brachia setae,
Ostendunt atrocem animum. --
This may also be the signification of his name Edom, which carries along with
it the notion of Blood and Slaughter, and with allusion to this notion it is
used, Esa. 63. 1, 2, 3* Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed Garments
from Bozrah? Wherefore art thou red in thine Apparel, and thy Garments like him
that treads in the Wine Fat? I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the
people there was none with me; For I will tread them in mine anger, and trample
them in my fury, and their Blood shall be sprinkled upon my Garments, and I
will stain all my Raiment; as on the contrary, the smoothness of Jacob was an
Emblem of the calmness and benignity, the peaceable and gentle nature of the
Gospel, which is likewise intimated in his name Jacob, to show the supplanting
and insinuating power of Truth, which does prevail upon Men's minds without
violence, by persuasion and gentle means.

Lastly, the hairyness of Esau was to signify the ferine or animal Life, and
portended the promulgation of that Law, all whose promises were Temporal, and
belonging to this lower state, being a sort of sensual and inferior
gratifications; as on the other side, the smoothness of Jacob was the humane
Nature properly so called, whose ultimate end looks farther than this life,
whose gratifications as they are distinct from the brutish Nature united to the
humane, so they are more refined and noble, more calm, serene, and quiet, and
look beyond the rough and turbulent enjoyments of this life, into the peaceable
joys, and the unspotted pleasures of another.

Thus I have proved, beyond all possibility of answer from the Authority of
Scripture, that there are some things which God cannot lawfully do; and if
there be any thing at all to which the exercise of his power does not extend,
it must be the condemning of Watches and Sun-dyals to eternal Torments, for
such are all Men who are acted either by an external fate, or by an internal
necessity of nature, being no more able to avoid what they do, than the hand of
the Watch can help obeying the motions of the Springs and Wheels that are
within, or than the Sun-dyal can resist the influences of the Sun, or help
discovering the time of day, when the Sun shines directly upon it; and if the
Watch be down, you must not blame that, but its Keeper, that it does not inform
you what it is a Clock; if the Sun does not shine, you must not blame the
Gnomon for not casting the shadow upon the hour of the day: if the Watch when
it is wound up will not go right, or the Sun-dyal, when the Sun shines never so
bright and full upon it, will not go so exactly as the Parish Clock: you may
blame the Artificer that made them if you please, but them you cannot, because
they are perfectly passive in the business, and can no more represent things
otherwise than they do, than Stones can fly upwards, or smoke descend to the
Center of the Earth.

I have proved likewise that the instance of Jacob and Esau, of which the
predestinarian parley is so fond, is nothing at all to the purpose; and that
though the preferring of Jacob before Esau was Arbitrary as to their person
considered barely in themselves, yet, as these persons were Typical of things
to come, there was a design in it, and it had at least a prophetical and
mystic meaning: and though this difference put between them were never so
Arbitrary, yet, if you exclude the Type and Mystery which was hid under it, it
concerned only temporal Blessings, in which after all, it does not appear that
Esau was ever exceeded by his Brother Jacob, and at this day it is certain, the
contrary is true. And what is all this to absolute Reprobation?

Lastly, I have proved, that those Chapters to the Romans, which are the main
Pillars on which Calvinism pretends to stand, are so far from giving
Countenance to any such pernicious Doctrine, that on the contrary they afford
very strong and very convincing Arguments against it.

I will now add, that if what Mr. Calvin himself has acknowledged be true,
Instit. l. 3. c. 25. s. 12.
That the pains of the damned in the world to come do not consist in those
bodily Torments by which they are described in Scripture, but that they are the
effects only of a constant sense of the Divine displeasure, and of a troublesome
and uneasy reflection upon the misdeeds and enormities of this mortal life;
then, if the Calvinistical Principles be true, it is utterly impossible for any
one Man to be damned, since God can never be displeased with perfect innocence,
which is the condition of all Men who are acted by an irresistible fate; and
since it is equally impossible, if they continue of the same opinion in the
World to come, which they would be thought to espouse and patronize in this, (
viz. that all their actions whether good or bad, are owing either to an
irresistible corruption, or an irresistible grace) that they should ever
reflect with any thing of trouble, dissatisfaction, or guilt upon those
actions, which themselves will then look upon to have been so wholly fatal,
that they will seem to themselves to have been merely passive in all that they
have done; nay, to have been overborn by a necessity so uncontrollable, that it
equals, if not surpasses, the brutality of the Beasts that perish, so
uncontrollable, that there is perpetual need of an irresistible Grace to keep
the world in any tolerable order or quiet, and to hinder the worst of Men from
being worse than he is: which opinion, how horrid and how execrably monstrous
soever it may seem, yet it is not only defended by Mr. Calvin himself, but it
is also of absolute necessity to be maintained by all that would truly assert
the Calvinistical Doctrine; because if Men be acted through the whole course of
their lives by a mere fatality, without the least mixture or contemperation of
freedom, then it is certain that all necessary Agents do and must always act to
the utmost of their respective strengths and powers; as the Fire cannot but
burn, and the Smoke cannot help ascending; Watches must go 'till they be down,
and Clocks must strike at the beginning of the hour; the Water must flow, if it
be not kept out by Banks or other eminencies intercepting, into all places that
are beneath its level; the Sun always shines as much as it can, gives as much
light and heat, draws as many Exhalations, ripens as many Fruits, and as much
as it is able. And if Mankind be managed by a necessity equal to that with
which these Agents are actuated and inspired, if there be in Men nothing else
but a constant and perpetual propensity to all manner of evil; and if this
propensity have no inward principle of choice or freedom whereby to regulate it
self, if it know no temper, and be incapable of any moderation, then it must
always act to the utmost of its force, activity and power: and consequently,
this propensity being in all the very same, every Man must be as bad as it is
possible for any Man to be, and it must be owing only to an irresistible grace
that Men do not tear and devour one another, and that all manner of wickedness
is not committed publicly in our Streets, in the sight of Multitudes, and in
the face of the Sun.

But if there be on the other side admitted the least blending or mixture of
Freedom with this Necessity, it is manifest at first sight, that this freedom
is a principle capable of improvement, it may exert it self by a constant and
habitual endeavor into still higher and higher degrees of self-activity and
selfmotion; and being assisted by the merciful encouragements of God's holy
Spirit, which is never wanting to cherish all good motions in us, these sparks
of Virtue and Religion, which are thus careful to preserve themselves, will be
awakened into a vigorous and lively flame: by which means it will unavoidably
come to pass, that the Calvinistical Hypothesis will be utterly overthrown,
there being no Man, if we allow thus much, who may not be in some possibility
of Salvation.

It is plain therefore as any thing can possibly be, that the Doctrine of
Calvin and his Followers is inconsistent with it self: For first, it damns and
reprobates the far greatest part of Mankind, and yet notwithstanding,
introduces such a fatality into all humane Actions as is perfectly inconsistent
with Damnation; and not with Damnation only, but with Salvation too: for
whatever the state and condition of the damned be, it is certain that the joys
of Heaven can consist in nothing else, but in a serene and healthful
constitution both of body and mind, resulting from a pleasant sense of the
favor of God, and from a no less comfortable reflection upon our steady and
wellpoised behavior in the midst of all the dangerous temptations and
allurements of this mortal life; or lastly, from the Spirits of the just, in
both of these respects, eternally congratulating and blessing one another. But
nothing is more evident than that God cannot be pleased with us for doing what
we could not possibly avoid; neither can we be pleased with our selves for
being irresistibly acted by another. So that Calvinism, let it pretend to never
so great seize of purity and truth, does yet in reality overthrow that
Religion, of which it would be thought the only ground and pillar; it perfectly
destroys the being of any future punishment or reward, and by consequence
banishes all manner of Religion and Virtue out of the World.

There is a very plain and a very close connection betwixt the liberty of humane
Actions, and the rewards and punishments of a future State, there being nothing
more inconsistent with a merciful Being, as God is represented in Scripture to
be, nor more repugnant to those common notions which all Mankind is used to
entertain concerning the Divine Goodness, than to endue Men with such a
self-moving Principle of choice and freedom, in the midst of so many and so
great Temptations, as we are daily and hourly encompassed and surrounded with,
and to the wrong use of which freedom, most of the miseries and calamities
incident to Mankind are owing, if it were not that we are sent into this World,
as into a state of Trial, where there being many dangers and difficulties to
encounter with, there must be a suitable reward annexed to the conquest of them;
otherwise the condition of Mankind would be much more hard than of any other
part of the Creation; and it would seem as if God had sent them into the World,
only that he might triumph over the infirmities, and sport himself in the
misery of his Creatures: for this, as I have said, is the usual effect of that
freedom for which I am now contending.

But now, if at the end of this Race there be a Prize proposed, if this
laborious Combat, which we are perpetually obliged to maintain with so many
unruly Lusts and headstrong Passions, be but to fit and refine our tempers for
the enjoyment of a better and a more exalted condition of life; nay, if the
very nature of that happiness do in a great measure consist in a comfortable
remembrance of, and reflection upon that successful Conflict, which we in this
life have maintained with the brutish and beastly part of our selves, then all
is made good sense again, and here is a very clear account given of the reason
of that spontaneous principle, which we find within our selves, and of its
Connection with the happiness or misery of another Life. Whereas on the
contrary, if all humane actions be necessary and fatal, the nature of rewards
and punishments is utterly destroyed: For though a Man may be plagued or
tormented, yet he can never properly be said to be punished for what he could
not avoid; for all punishment is either for the amendment of the offending
party, or for an example to others: Now where there is no fault, there can be
no amendment; and where there is no choice, there can be no fault.

Again, that Calamity which being inflicted upon one, is intended for an
example to others, must have its effect upon us, either by the way of a
rational motive, or of a necessary cause; if the first, that supposes that
freedom for which we contend, for deliberation without freedom is the greatest
nonsense in the world: if the latter, then I demand, whether before the
appearance of this necessary cause there were an Antecedent liberty or no; if
you say there was, then I do by no means understand, why the punishment of one
or more voluntary Agents should destroy the freedom of all Mankind, invert the
order of things, and alter the natural constitution of the world; and if you
will not grant it, then here are two contrary necessities contending with one
another, as a Body moved any determinate way, will continue the same motion,
and the same determination, if it be not hindered from pursuing its course, and
turned another way by another more powerful than it self, whether quiescent or
in motion, which it shall meet or overtake in its passage: but then how either
of these determinations shall be either culpable or meritorious, is another
thing which I do not understand, and I am afraid it will puzzle a wiser head to
give a tolerable account of it.

Again, the pains of the Damned in the life to come, consist, as I have said,
in a great measure to be certain, in a troublesome and uneasy remembrance of
the miscarriages of this: But how can I be troubled for what I could not avoid?
Or if I may be troubled, yet it is plain I am troubled without reason, and
consequently this is but the effect of another necessity, and so here is one
necessity punished by another, which is certainly the most unreasonable, and
the most unjust thing in the world; so that we must unavoidably grant, either
that there can be no such thing as Injustice, or that this is that very thing,
aggravated with all the circumstances that can make it most unworthy of God, or
most hateful to Men. For here is the greatest injury and the greatest deceit
together, the greatest injury for a Man to be tormented to all Eternity for
what he could not avoid, and the greatest deceit for a Man to think all the
while that he might have acted otherwise than he has; for that is the case of
every Man who is possessed with a sense of Guilt, Repentance, or Shame.

For what is Shame but a troublesome reflection upon Folly? And how can Folly and
Necessity be consistent together? What is Guilt but a certain pain and anguish
of the Mind arising from a sense of Sin? And how can that Action be sinful
which it was not in our power to eschew? Or why may we not as well conclude,
that the Sun commits a Sin when it parches the Earth with an immoderate heat?
Or the Rain when it poaches it with intemperate showers? What room can there be
for such a passion as Repentance, where there is nothing to be repented of? And
how can any Man repent of that, which it was utterly impossible for him to
avoid? And which being placed in the same circumstances, he must with the same
necessity act over again?

There are those whose dejection of Spirit is so great, under the perpetual
weight and pressure of misfortune, that they curse the unhappy day wherein they
were born into a World so full of misery and sorrow; but there are none repent
their being born, because Repentance is a reflection upon a Man's own action,
not upon the action of our Parents, or upon the consequence of it ^ No Man can
be said to repent that he was born blind, or that he became so by the virulence
of a Distemper which it was not in his power to prevent, he may wish it had
been otherwise, or he may be sorry that it was not; but this desire, or this
sorrow of his, is not accompanied with a sense of guilt or shame, which is
always requisite to fill up the notion, and constitute the nature of
Repentance. No Man repents his having had the Rickets in his Childhood, or his
being afflicted with the Gout in his old Age, so far as these Distempers depend
upon spermatick and hereditary Causes; but if by Lewdness and Intemperance he
shall contract a crazy and infirm habit of Body, and shall derive a sickly and
diseased Constitution down to his Issue, then he may and has reason to repent
for his own sake, and for theirs too to whom he is the occasion of so great
misfortune; he must needs look back with blushes and confusion of face upon his
own personal follies, and it will be still a farther aggravation to the trouble
of his mind, that he has poisoned Ages and Generations to come, that his name
shall either perish with himself, or dye together with his Children, or live
with infamy and disgrace in the infirmity of those that shall succeed them.

What has been said concerning Guilt, Repentance, and Shame, passions that do
unavoidably suppose and prove a freedom, the same is likewise applicable to the
business of Temptation: Watch and pray (said our Blessed Lord to his Disciples)
that ye enter not into Temptation, Mat. 26. 41. But now in all Temptations,
liberty is plainly supposed; for if a Man cannot yield, how is he tempted? And
if he cannot resist, it is more than a Temptation. So that the nature of a
Temptation evidently demonstrates a power, either of yielding or resisting in
him to whom it is offered, but this power can never be conceived without a
concession of freedom.

Again St. Paul tells his Corinthians, Epist. 1. c. 10. v. 13. There has no
Temptation taken you, but such as is common to Man: But God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but will with the
Temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Will he
so? will he enable us to bear it? but how will he bring this good Effect to
pass? why he will do it partly by the natural Powers, and Faculties which he
has given us, and partly by the blessed Influences of his merciful and good
Spirit, infused into our Hearts, and strengthening the natural force and
activity of our Minds. But yet after all this, we must make our escape our
selves; he will strengthen us with sufficient might in the inward Man, whereby
to repel the assault of any Temptation, but yet he does not so strengthen us as
to destroy that liberty by which we are still in a possibility of yielding: and
if there were not such a possibility, then St. Paul instead of encouraging his
Corinthians the more boldly and cheerfully to encounter with temptations, from
this Consideration, that they have such Assistances both natural and divine, as
cannot fail to make their warfare successful, might have told them in short,
that they were now arrived to an impeccable Estate, and that they need not
trouble their heads any further, with any idle apprehensions of the Devil, or
mistrusts of themselves; with any scruples of Conscience from within, or any
fears of Danger from without; for that they were now arrived at a degree of
Perfection, so high, and yet so steady, that it was impossible for them to fall
away, or to commit Sin any more: and by this means he might have saved himself,
and them the needless trouble of a long Epistle.

Lastly, when he tells them, that no Temptation has befaln them, but such as
is common unto Men, it is as good as to say, that all men who are not perfectly
forsaken by God, and hardened into a final impenitence for their former Sins,
though they are not assisted with those extraordinary influences of the divine
Spirit, which are peculiar to the Christian world, yet they have still such
helps both natural and divine, as are at least sufficient to subdue any
Temptation that can be offered; and if they had not, they could not be said so
properly to be assaulted by a Temptation, as compelled by necessity and
irresistible fate.

But to what purpose does our blessed Lord command his Disciples and
consequently us, to Watch and Pray, that we enter not into Temptation, when if
the Doctrine of Calvin and his Fellows be true, that all humane actions are
necessary and fatal, and that they are predestined from all Eternity to
determine themselves to such and such Objects, after such or such a manner, in
such and such periods of time? then it signifies no more to Watch and Pray,
than to whistle against the Wind, out of hopes to divert it into another
Quarter. We may as well sleep on and take our rest, for any good we are like to
do by Watching: For at this rate all our Watching will be ineffectual, all our
Prayers to no end or purpose, and all our Religion will be vain; for the fatal
Knots can neither be unti'd nor cut in sunder: And whatever has been resolved
in the utmost recesses of Eternity must come to pass in the predestined
intervals of time, so that the best way for us when all is done, will be to sit
down passively consented under every thing that can befall us, and sing the old
Catch on Consort with one another.

(...)
(...)
But alas, what do I speak of being contented, for we can neither be satisfied
nor displeased unless when the fit of necessity takes us. It is now somewha^
more than sixteen hundred Years ago, since a very wise, and a very witty man
told the world, ira furor brevis est, anger is but a shorter kind of Madness,
but it seems the air of Rome is nothing so sharp and so judicious as that of
Geneva, and the Italians may cease hereafter to upbraid the Tramontani with
want of understanding; for had he known so much as the Religionists of our
days, and in these parts of the world, he would have concluded that our whole
life was nothing else, but one continued frenzy, wherein we always sail by the
compass of Necessity, and flow hither and thither without any Guidance and
Conduct of our-selves by the Springtide of uncontrollable fate; he would have
seen that our very thoughts are straightened and enlarged, screwed up and let down
by the Eternal wheels and pulleys, and that we speak like Puppets with Bay
leaves in our Mouths: to so little purpose, is it that our Savior exhorts us
to Watch and Pray, that we enter not into Temptation, when we can do neither of
our selves, but when the necessity comes upon us, we must do both whether we
will or no.

Duc me parens celsique dominator Poli,
Quocunque visum est, nulla parendi mora est,
Assum impiger, fac nolle, comitabor gemens,
Malusque patiar quod Pati licuit bono.
But with your leave, Cleanthes, if the world be governed by such a Stoicall or
Calvinisticall Fate, there can be no such thing, as good or Evil in it; for
Necessity admits of no such moral Distinction: If all things come to pass,
because they cannot be otherwise than they are; then he that Prays to God, and
he that Curses him are equally excused: and it is true of the Rich, and of all
Men, what Juvenal thought applicable only to the Poor,

-- Jurent licet and samotheacum
Et nostrorum aras, contemnere fulmina pauper
Creditur, atque deos diis ignoscentibus ipsis.
For how can God with Justice blame us, for stooping to those Laws of Fate,
which cannot possibly be resisted by us, and by which he himself is governed,
For Eadem Necessitas deos irrevocabilis divina pariter atque humana cursus
rehit, alligat, ille ipse omnium conditor ac rector, siripsit quidem fata sed
sequitur, semel paret semper jussit: said Seneca according to the opinion of
the Stoic; and I shall prove immediately that the Calvinists would be bound to
defend the same opinion, if it were capable, as it is not, of being defended.

It is a prodigious thing that an opinion, not only so contrary to reason and
to truth, but to the usual Sentiments of those very men that defend it, should
ever find so much Countenance or protection among us. For show me but one man,
the hottest Pedestinarian of them all, who does not by most of the actions of
his Life, suppose and assert that freedom, which in a fit of disputing he
denies, and I will yield the Cause: all his Prayers do either return into his
own Bosom; that is, they signify just nothing at all, or else they fly in
his Face, and upbraid him with not giving Glory to God, by an humble
acknowledgment and a right use of that Freedom, which those very Prayers do
naturally suppose. For to what purpose do we pray, if all things are so
unalterably predetermin'd, that they cannot be reversed? and if it be so that
nothing can prevail with God, to alter or to suspend his decrees? or why in
truth should he be moved, more by our Prayers, than by our Curses? by the
supplications of those who call themselves the Sanctified and the Godly party,
than by the Blasphemies and Execrations of those who are not less wrongfully
styled, the wicked and unregenerate part of the world, when both of them with
respect to us are equally Necessary, and it is impossible for those that do
these things, to do otherwise than they do? or is not this to vilify and
ridicuel, if not perfectly destroy the Christian Life, when at this rate the
worst actions which we can commit are very excuseable things, and our Duties
are so far from having any rational expectation of acceptance at the hands of
God, that they are rather so many pregnant Instances of the Frailty and
infirmity of our Natures, overborn by the strength and power of those eternal
Decrees, which it is impossible to Conquer, and against which without their own
help we cannot strive? But tell us that Prayers, Almes-giving, Good works, a
good Conversation and the like, are means some way or other conducing by the
divine appointment to the happiness of men; to the procuring those blessings
for which, and to the averting those Judgments against which we pray, that he
that has predestined the end, has also predetermin'd the means; he that has
resolved from all Eternity to be pleased with such a set number or company of
Men, has also appointed that they shall please him, by his acceptance, or his
taking in good part such or such Actions which he has before hand determined
they shall do; or by his approbation of certain habits and dispositions of
Mind, which he has always resolved shall be iresistibly infused into them: The
English of all which is, That they shall be happy without any reason at all, if
Men can be happy that never were ^ood; or if Men can be good, whose ^ctions are
governed not by choice, but by necessity and resistless fate.

But let us admit that he does predetermine the means, as well as he does the
end, which it cannot be avoided, but he must do in that Hypothesis which makes
all things necessary, what is the natural consequence of this, but that when by
the same eternal Decrees he reprobates so unequal a proportion of Mankind: he
does also by the same act of his Will, necessitate them to the Commission of
such Actions, which he has resolved beforehand, though they be necessary, shall
be displeasing to him, and for which, as if they had been voluntary, he has
decreed to condemn them to everlasting Torments, or rather for no reason at
all, but what is founded in his own Arbitrary will and power, there being no
manner of natural Connection betwixt necessity and punishment, or reward.

But is it not a most astonishingly strange and surprising thing, that Men
should be so obstinate against their own sense and experience, and that they
should perpetually deny what they can never help thinking to be true What is it
for which we so much decry the Papists for asserting their bold and
contradictious Doctrine of Transubstantiation? Is it not for this reason that
their opinion includes in it so flat a repugnancy to their own senses? That it
is so full of absurdities and contradictions, that let them pretend what they
please, they can never heartily believe it themselves: Neither can any Man
indeed be said properly to believe such Propositions as have no ground of
credibility in them, but on the contrary are big with Arguments against the
belief of themselves.

And is not this reason every whit as good against those, who subject all
humane actions to an unalterable fate? For every Man, let him say what he
pleases in a fit of Disputation, yet he does naturally seem to himself to be
free and unrestrained in most of the actions of his life; neither can there be
any better Argument of that freedom which he denies, than that he finds himself
indu'd with a power of affirming or denying so contrary to the natural
sentiments of his own mind and understanding. One Man he looks upon himself to
be wise, another just, a third merciful and good, a fourth he is temperate,
chaste, and sober; and upon account of these several Accomplishments, they all
put a proportionable value upon themselves, and do at the same time despise or
hate their Neighbors, if they find them destitute of the same virtuous
dispositions and qualifications of Mind; and all this they do upon a
supposition of freedom, otherwise necessity makes all things equal, and they
would have no reason to pride themselves in doing what they could not avoid. It
would be the greatest nonsense in the world, when Fate and Mechanism are
perfect Strangers either to praise or to disgrace, for any Man to value
himself, or to despise and much more hate another. And as Pride without a
supposition of Liberty is a most ridiculous Passion, a Passion that deserves
more contempt than it bestows upon others; so is Anger too, unless we admit a
liberty in that thing or person, which is the object of our anger, whereby it
might have behaved it self otherwise than it has; but to be angry with things
that are acted by necessity, is the anger of Dogs that bark at the Moon, it is
what Solomon calls the Anger of Fools; and such may be angry, if they please,
with the Wind for blowing too rudely in their faces; or with the Dust, for
annoying them in a Summer's day.

Sometimes it is a Man's unhappiness to commit a grievous fault, or rather,
according to this Hypothesis, to be fallen into a grievous misfortune, for
which some are angry, others are sorry, and some endeavor to make him better
for the future, by giving him good and wholesome advice, and by showing him the
folly or wickedness of what is past; and these last no question look upon
themselves as very friendly and charitable Men, which it is manifest they
cannot do but upon supposition, that they might have done otherwise if they had
pleased; for Fate admits of no such thing as Charity, Friendship, Wisdom, or
Virtue; but it is the same necessity, neither commendable nor blameworthy in
any, which displays it self by different effects in them all, which makes one
of them commit such an action, another censure, a third pity it, and a fourth
apply himself to remedy the like inconvenience for the future, by his fruitless
advice and counsel, which can never hope to stand in competition with the
unalterable decrees of Heaven.

Sometimes again you shall have several persons promise or intend to meet
together at such a place, upon such a day, for such or such an end; and this
they do, supposing themselves to be free, and indu'd with an ability of being
as good as their word; and it is a shrewd sign that what they supposed was
true, when at a Club, a Coffeehouse, a public Feast, a Rendezvous, or an
Exchange, you shall find them all accordingly met together, which if the fatal
Hypothesis were true, it seems utterly impossible for them to be; but most of
them by that particular necessity by which they are governed, would either be
kept at home, or carried violently some other way, to which they were
predetermin'd before this assignation was made.

To conclude, we have had very warm and fierce Contentions about things
necessary, and things indifferent, and about the Civil Magistrates power as to
the latter in Religious affairs, which if the Calvinistical Doctrine be true,
is a very needless Controversy; for according to them, if they will stand to
their own Principles, there is nothing indifferent either in Sacred matters or
in Civil, but all things are necessary, because unavoidably determined: And so
the Controversy is happily at an end, and we should be much to blame for
censuring such innocent people for such unavoidable Scruples, but that we
cannot help it, which, if this Hypothesis be true, is the Universal reason and
excuse of all our actions.

And thus, I think, I have proved that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation it
self, how absurd or contradictious soever it may seem, yet it is not more
inconsistent with the common sentiments of Mankind, and with the plain
acknowledgments of its own Defenders, with reason, experience, and with common
sense, than this of the Stoical or Calvinistical fate, which most of the
actions of our lives, and most, if not all the Passions which we find within
our selves, are combined in a strict confederacy to overthrow, it being
directly contrary to the nature of the one, and to the suppositions upon which
the other proceed.

Another very just exception which has been made and managed to very great
advantage, by a very Reverend and Learned person, Dr. Tillotson Dean of
Canterbury.
against the absurd and blasphemous Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is this,
That it overthrows the whole Fabric of the Christian Religion, by destroying
that Foundation upon which it stands, that is to say, its Divine Authority
attested by those Miracles by which it was confirmed, because we have no way to
judge of Miracles, or to distinguish them from the ordinary and usual
Phenomenon of nature, but by the testimony of our senses; which if they may
deceive us in their proper objects, when they are placed in the most
advantageous circumstances to make an unerring Judgment, then it is impossible
for us in any case given to determine when a Miracle is wrought, and when it is
not, and consequently that Religion, whose Sanction and Authority is founded
upon Miracles, can never be thought to be sufficiently confirmed.

And what has been said of Transubstantiation, the very same may be applied to
the Predestinarian Doctrine, against which, as being founded in the fatal
determination of all humane Actions, there is a loud and a perpetual Clamor of
common sense and experience. But, besides this, it is farther evident from
other considerations, That if the Doctrine of absolute Reprobation be true, the
Scriptures of the New Testament are both a very false and a very impertinent
Book, it being not only plainly contradictory to so many plain Texts, of whose
true meaning and signification there can be no manner of doubt or question; but
to the whole Economy of the Gospel, to the design of Christ's coming into the
world, to the design of his Suffering, to the reason of his Intercession, and
Lastly, to the genius and temper of the Christian Dispensation.

S. John tells us, 1 John 4. 8. God is love. He that loves not, says he,
knows not God, for God is love, but you know it is a common rule, denominatio
sumitur a part potiori, if therefore of those who are born into this world,
there be not above one in a Thousand who are the Objects of this love and
favor, while all the rest are irreversibly doomed to be the eternal examples
of his utmost Vengeance and Displeasure; and all this for no reason, but what
depends upon his Arbitrary power and will without any other Consideration, then
it is manifest if a man were to draw a Character of God Almighty, and to exhort
Mankind to imitate his example, he must preach a Doctrine quite contrary to
that, which was taught by the Disciple whom Jesus loved, and who was himself so
full of love to his Brethren; it being more suitable to the nature of God, if
the Calvinistical Painters have drawn him right, to say, he that hates not,
knows not God, for God is hatred; the same may be said of all those other
Pathetical exhortations to the mutual endearment and love of one another, which
are to be met with in the same Chapter of that good Disciple: Beloved says he,
v. 7. Let us love one another, for love is of God, and every one that loves is
born of God, and knows God. And again, v. 9, 10, 11. In this was manifested
the love of God toward us; because that God sent his only begotten Son into
the world, that we might live through him, herein is love not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
Sins. Beloved if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. Lastly, v.
19, 20, 21. We love him because he first loved us: If a man say, I love God,
and hate his Brother he is a lar: For he that loves not his Brother whom he
has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? And this Commandment have
we from him that, he who loves God, love his Brother also. It is St. Paul's
own exhortation in the Epistle to the Ephesians, c. 4. v. 31, 32. Let all
Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil speaking, be put away
from you, with all Malice, and be you kind one to another, tender Hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. So the
same St. John tells us in the third Chapter of his Gospel, at the 16th. and
17th. verses. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son: That
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life: For
God sent not his Son into the World, to Condemn the World, but that the World
through him might be saved. And our Savior himself in his incomparable Sermon
on the Mount, exhorts his Disciples to mutual Kindness and Charity for one
another, and for their very Enemies, from the example of God, Matthew. 5. v. 44,
45. Love your Enemies, bless them that Curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye
may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to
rise on the Evil, and on the Good, and sends Rain on the just, and on the
unjust: And then concludes that Chapter with this general rule to make God the
universal pattern of our Imitation, v. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as
your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

But now if the reprobating Doctrine be consonant to reason and to truth, then
we must invert these exhortations from the example of God, and persuade men to
the mutual hatred and detestation of one another; because God who is the most
perfect being, and the most worthy of our Imitation, so hated the World that he
made the infinitely greatest part of Mankind, out of a design to destroy them,
not that they had, or that they could ever offend him, being acted by a
resistless Necessity in all they do, but only to reak his everlasting
vengeance, and gratify the eternal malignity of his Nature.

For though it be pretended, and it is very true, that Adam acted freely in the
Commission of the first Offense; yet it is true likewise, Qualis causa talis
effectus, such as the cause is, such is the effect; that very offense being an
effect and instance of his Freedom, it was impossible that a free action in him
should be the natural and proper cause of a necessary Nature in us; or indeed
that any one action which it was possible for him to Commit, especially that
for which the Son of Sirach tells us he made some amends by his Repentance,
should so far alter both his Nature, and ours who are descended from him, as
that we should be quite another sort and species of Creatures, from what we
should have been before: for Necessity and Freedom do, toto genere distare,
Heaven and Earth, East and West, the Northern and the Southern Poles are not
more Diametrically opposite, or more remotely distant from one another.

Since therefore God did at least forknow, that Adam would commit that offense,
which was so fatal to himself and his Posterity; and since upon supposition of
that offense, he did preordain that all Mankind should be tainted by such an
universal and irresistible Corruption, which was impossible to be effected by
any natural means, it is the same thing, as if he had simply preordained it,
without any respect to the fall of Adam at all, because a simple Decree, and a
Decree founded upon a condition that will certainly come to pass, are to all
intents and purposes the same.

But we need not be so nice and subtle in bringing our Adversaries to an
inconvenience, since Mr. Calvin himself is pleased expressly to acknowledge,
that God did not only foreknow the fall of our first Parent, but that by a
positive act of his will he did absolutely preordain it, as well as all the
Mischiefs and Calamities which are consequent upon it, and he refers it all to
God's arbitrary Sovereignty and lawless will, which he makes to be the only
square and measure of all his actions in the Government of the world. Since
therefore it is clear according to the Calvinistical Hypothesis, that God
pursues Mankind with such an exquisite and immortal hatred, and since he is
certainly the best and the noblest example of our imitation, how can we better
imitate and resemble him, than by hating one another? by persecutig and
tormenting every man his Neighbor? by arming and equipping our selves to the
mutual Ruin and Destruction of each other? neither is it any argument in this
ease that such a course of life is against our own interest, as well as against
that of those with whom we contend, there being no man who could promise
himself one minutes safety, when once he had made himself the common Enemy of
all Mankind; For if God hate us, how can we better express our imitation of him
than by hating our selves? or how can we better express that hatred than by
doing those things which tend to our Destruction?

And though it be true, that a Remnant shall be saved, that is, as our
Adversaries do very impiously, and very unreasonably interpret those words,
that a very small and inconsiderable party shall be culled out of the gross of
Mankind, to be the Objects of the divine Favor, while the rest are for no
reason, but his arbitrary pleasure, Condemned to everlasting Torments: yet de
non entibus and non appar^ntibus eadem est ratio, it being impossible for us to
have a real and inward sense of a another Man's Conversation, or to feel those
influences and intercourses of the divine Spirit which are reciprocated with
the Spirit of another man, the best way of imitating God will be, without any
respect or distinction of Persons to proclaim an open War against all Mankind,
lest by a too sollicitous pity for the Elect, who by the worst that can happen,
will but be dispatched to a better place, we spare the Reprobate whom God has
forsaken, and who to gain quarter will be sure to make large pretenses to the
Seal of the Spirit, whether they have received it or no.

And is not this a precious way of imitating God, which yet is the most proper
inference that can be made from that topic, if the Calvinistical reprobation
be to be admitted? are these the words of Peace? the Laws and Ordinances of the
Prince of Peace? the Doctrine of the Meek and Humble Jesus? or is it not rather
a perfect Burlesque, and Mocksong to the Bible? an Infamous Pasquil, and a most
scandalous Lampoon upon the Gospel?

Was it for this that Isaac the Type and the Progenitour of the Messiah, was
called the promised and the Holy seed, the happy Man from whose auspicious
Loins, that Bright, that Glorious, that Majestic Babe was in the fullness of
time to be descended; in whom all the Families of the Earth were to be blessed?
For this that as the watchful Shepherds were guarding of their sleeping
Flocks, the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone
round about them, and they were sore afraid: when the blessed Spirit Clothed with
a gentle and refreshing Light, uttered these words of Peace and Comfort to
them: Fear not, said he, for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all People, for unto you is Born this day in the City of
David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord? For this the Beautiful and immortal
Quire, that sing perpetually before the Throne of God, filled Heaven and Earth
with their triumphant Song: Glory be to God on High, on Earth Peace, and good
will toward Men? For this old Simeon hugged the mighty Infant, and welcomed
his approaching Fate with Notes more Charming than the dying Swan, or
Nightingals contending for the Mastery, with the most delicate and tender
touches of the fainting string: Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in
peace according to thy word, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou
have prepared before the face of all people; A light to lighten the Gentiles,
and the Glory of thy people Israel?

Was it for this the blessed and Immaculate Virgin, the Royal consort of the
Eternal Spirit, the happy Mother of the Son of God, broke out into that
thankful Rhapsodie of Joy and gladness. My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my
Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, for he has regarded the low Estate of
his Handmaiden; for behold from henceforth all Generations shall call me
Blessed, and more to the same or like effect.

But to what purpose is all this joyful, this triumphant Noise? this sound of
Peace, and Happiness, and Salvation? what reason have all the Generations of
the world to call the Virgin Mother Blessed? how did the Angel bring good
tidings of great Joy, which were to be to all People? how was he a light to
lighten the Gentiles? and how a Glory to his people Israel? or is he not rather
a Reproach to that Stock, from which he is descended, when he came into the
World, not so much to save, as to destroy Mankind? for if so vast a proportion
of those miserable Mortals, who are born into this world, are irreversibly
consigned to everlasting Torments, without any offense or provocation given on
their Parts; and if Christ himself be that Unmerciful, that Unrelenting Judge,
who at his second coming the Circuit of the world, is to pronounce that cruel
Sentence against it, and if this second coming cannot be without the
intervention of a first, then what was his first appearance; instead of
bringing health and Happiness to men, but the beginning of our Sorrows, the
Introduction to eternal Misery and Pain, the mournful Prologue to the Tragedy
of Hell? and is he not more fitly styled, the Destroyer, than the Savior, and
the Redeemer of Mankind?

Again, If it be demanded for what reason our ever blessed Lord, is said to be
the Savior and Redeemer of the World; I answer, there are three ways
especially by which he may be said to have purchased to himself those Glorious
and Magnificent Titles.

First, In that he came into the world to Redeem us, from the more than
Egyptian Bondage of Sin, and Darkness of Ignorance, by the precedent of his
Example, by the light of his Gospel, and by the Grace of his Spirit working in
the Hearts of his true and faithful Disciples: now all Example is in vain, of
which there can be no Imitation; and there can be no Imitation where there can
be no Endeavor; nor any Endeavor without an inward Principle of
Self-activity, and Self-motion; nor any Self-activity without Freedom, they
being indeed but two words for one and the same thing.

Secondly, He redeems us from punishment by his Satisfaction, or by the merit
of that propitiatory Sacrifice which he made of himself upon the Cross, for the
Sins of all Mankind; the atonement of which Sacrifice is applied to all, who by
a lively Faith, sincere Repentance, and hearty endeavor to please God by
obeying his Commandments, fulfill those Conditions by virtue of which this
application is made; but now where there is no Sin, there needs no
satisfaction, and where there is no Liberty there can be no Sin: St. Paul
himself tells us, Romans 4. 15. That where no Law is, there is no Transgression:
And the 1 St. Joh. c. 3. v. 4. That whosoever commits Sin, transgresses
also the Law, for Sin is the transgression of the Law* but every Law does
manifestly suppose a freedom in him to whom it is prescribed, for Laws are
given in vain to them that cannot Obey; and where men must Obey, whether they
will or no, there the promulgation of a Law is needless, because our obedience
is not paid to the Law it self; but it is an unavoidable submission to that
irresistible Grace, by which our non-complyance is rendered an impossible
thing: if then there can be no Law without a supposition of Liberty, nor any
Transgression without a Law, then it is manifest according to St. Paul's own
Concession, that without the same liberty, there can be no Transgression, which
was the thing to be proved.

And indeed how can it ever seem a likely matter, that the Blood of the daily
morning and evening Sacrifice, of the Sin and the Trespass Offerings, of the
Passovers, the Peace Offerings, and the Holocausts or Burnt Offerings, the
Blood of Rams, and Bulls, and Goats, the Blood of Beasts, and of Birds, should
with so great cost and expense, such indefatigable toil and labor, so much
address and ceremony be streaming perpetually under the Mosaic Law, as a
pompous and magnificent Introduction to that great Sacrifice, which was in the
fullness of time to answer and abolish the shadows of the legal Administration,
and all this by way of expiation for those who never had offended? Or did the
Jews undergo all this troublesome and ceremonious Fatigue? Did Christ himself
suffer upon the Cross only for the Sin of our first Parent, imputed without any
proper guilt of ours to his Posterity? No certainly, God is too just to condemn
all the World for what they could not avoid; and the Blood of Christ was too
precious to be spilt only for the single Transgression of one single Man. How
absurd? How ridiculous is it to say, that he dyed for those Sins which we never
committed? Or that he rose again for that justification which, by reason of our
innocence, we did not need? Or is it not better to acknowledge as the Scripture
does, that upon account of our own personal Guilt, as well as that of our first
Parent, we all lay in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, and that we all
have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; and that for this reason God
himself took our Flesh and dwelt amongst us, that he might be to us in the
nature of a legal Redeemer, who was always to be of the Kindred of the party to
be redeemed? Which custom of the Jews God could not any way so properly
imitate, as by taking our Flesh and our Nature upon him.

Neither will the intercession of Christ, which is the third way of saving
Mankind, according to this Hypothesis, make any better sense than his
satisfaction does; for if we will believe these very Writers themselves, the
satisfaction of Christ is alone available for all the Elect; and for the
Re-Probate, it is in vain to make use of any intercession: Therefore I speak it
not only with a becoming reverence, but scarce without trembling, what a
ridiculous thing do these Men make of the Mediatory Office of Christ in Heaven,
who spends so many Ages in a sollicitous, but fruitless intercession at the
right hand of God, either for those that cannot do amiss, or for those that
cannot possibly be saved. Whereas if we follow the truth it self, rather than
the fancies of particular Men, of how great name or authority soever, nothing
is more plain than the reason and the usefulness of his Intercession; for
Salvation being annexed to Faith and Repentance, and a good Life, and the
satisfaction of Christ being applied to the person of a Believer upon these
conditions, which conditions are not so fully performed by any as they might
be, nor equally by all, it is manifest there must needs be very many, whose
performance is so weak and imperfect, that without any breach of that Covenant,
which God has entered into with Mankind, he might very justly abandon them to
eternal Flames, to be tormented for ever with and by the Devil and his Angels,
but that the intercession of Christ extends and enlarges the benefit of his
satisfaction, and makes it more operative and available than otherwise it would
have been.

But, besides the Prophetic Office of Christ, under which I include his
example and his preaching, and the Priestly, to which his Sacrifice and his
Intercession in virtue of that Sacrifice belong; there is also his Kingship to
be considered, one great part of the exercise of which, consists in his sitting
in Judgment at the last day, to pronounce the irreversible sentence of Death or
Life upon all Men; but there can be no Judgment, where there is no difference
made betwixt the Moral good or evil of things: for to judge, is to act with
reason, and Fate and Morality are inconsistent together, which Fate if it were
the only principle and spring of Action, the Reprobate at the last day need not
stand in justification of themselves from other Topics, as they are made to do
in Scripture, but they need only say, that what they had done, they could not
avoid; which being a very reasonable excuse, and yet not urged where the Pleas
of the Wicked are set down by our Savior himself, it is a very powerful and
convincing Argument, that he will at that day proceed by other measures, and
that he will not, much less did he design it from all Eternity, condemn the
meanest Wretch that ever wore the shape and title of a Man for any but
voluntary and wilfully committed Sins. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do
right? said Abraham to his God, Genesis 18. 25. That be far from thee to do after
this manner. Which Expostulation and Appeal of his to the Divine Justice must
either be acknowledged to be very frivolous, and nothing at all to the purpose;
or else we must be forced to confess that Christ, when he sustains the person
and character of a Judge, and a Judge of all the Earth, as he will do at the
last day; he will not proceed by Arbitrary measures, which know no distinction
of Persons or of Causes, but condemn or save by unaccountable methods, without
any regard to reason or to justice, the exercise of which is founded upon the
differences of Moral good and evil, all which differences must come to nothing,
where the liberty of humane Actions is destroyed; but he will act with us upon
a supposition of Freedom, for the improvement or abuse of which, we shall reap
a proportionable punishment or reward.

And as nothing is or can be more contrary to the whole current of the
Scripture than the Doctrine of absolute Reprobation; so neither is there any
thing more destructive of that meek, charitable, and humble frame of Mind,
which it was the design of the Gospel to establish in the World, the natural
and immediate tendency of such Doctrines in the minds of inconsiderate Men,
though, if they consider all, they have no reason to be proud, being to create
a Spiritual Pride and overweaning Conceit of themselves, together with a
contempt and hatred of all others whom they call the Reprobate, and are pleased
to look upon as the Dross and Offscouring of the World.

There neither is nor can be any other opinion, which is so naturally fitted to
make distinctions and parties amongst Men, or to preserve those distinctions
when they are made, for what greater or what wider difference can there
possibly be thought of, than between the Reprobate and the Elect? Those who are
irrecoverably given over to everlasting Torments, and those who are out of all
danger of miscarrying, and past the possibility of not being as happy as God
and happiness themselves can make them? Or what greater indignity or reproach
can be cast upon one Man by another, than for some to separate from the rest,
under pretense that they are rejected and forsaken by God? This being, if those
that separate would speak their minds, one of the true reasons of their
separation, as it is likewise the strongest Prop and Pillar by which that
uncharitable Schism is supported; for I reckon that there are six accounts
especially to be given of the first rise of this absurd and impious Doctrine of
absolute Reprobation, and of its continuance in the World to this day.

The first of which is, that inconsiderate Interpreters, not minding the whole
scope and drift of the Writings of St. Paul, but looking only to the immediate
seeming sense of one single Proposition, and not considering that neither so
well as they should have done, have stretched the interpretation of those
places beyond their natural extent, wherein St. Paul sets himself in opposition
to the Jews, who expected Justification from the Law of Moses, or to the
Judaizing Christians, who would have retained that Law either in whole or in
part, as thinking that Justification could not be had without it; or, lastly,
to any other, who expected Salvation from an exact observance of the Duties of
natural Religion, or of the Law of Nature: For by the Law in the Writings of
St. Paul both these are promiscuously understood, as might be shown from
several places, but that of Gal. 5. 22, 23. is sufficient: The Fruit of the
Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, long Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance; against such there is no Law: that is, whether of Moses,
or of Nature: And the same may very well be the sense of all those places where
he says, That the knowledge of Sin is by the Law; and that if it had not been
for the Law, he had not known Sin; and that by the works of the Law no Flesh
can be justified; and that where there is no Law, neither is there any
Transgression. All which may very well be understood of the Law of Nature, as
well as of that of Moses, it being equally true of both. Now the reasons why
Justification could not be obtained by the works of the Law of Moses, were
these two.

First, That that Law containing the Types and Shadows of things to come, when
once their Antitypes appeared in the World, they could be of no longer value or
signification. And,

Secondly, That besides that those legal Rites and Ceremonies had a respect to
future events, which events were now exactly fulfilled; they did also under
them contain a shadow of that inward sincerity and purity of Mind, without
which, notwithstanding all the accuracy of external Observations, they could be
of no moment or avail with God, who is the searcher of Hearts, and delights
rather in the Sacrifice of a clean and humble Spirit, than in the fat of Rams,
or the blood of Bulls and Goats, which could not put away Sin, any otherwise
than in a Typical way, as they pointed at that great Sacrifice, which was in
God's appointed time to be offered up for the Sins of the whole World; neither
could they Atone for that uncleanness or insincerity of Mind, with which those
Sacrifices themselves were offered up, or those other Mosaic Ceremonies
performed.

These were the two reasons why Justification could not be obtained by the
works of the Law of Moses; but neither was the Law of Nature sufficient for
this purpose, not that it was not perfect in it self, for every Law is thus far
perfect, That it obliges no farther to punishment, than it does to obedience;
and so the same Apostle tells us, Romans 2. 14, 15. That the Gentiles which have
not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law; these having not the
Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their
Hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their Thoughts the mean
while accusing or else excusing one another. But though the Law of nature be
perfect in it self, that is, it requires nothing of us but what is truly and
intrinsically good: Nay, nothing but what, all things considered, is most for
our advantage: ^t exacts no more punishment than it requires Obedience, it
Commands nothing which is naturally impossible to be performed, which no Law
can be supposed to do; yet considering the many Temptations, and Infirmities to
which we are obnoxious, it is morally impossible but at some time or other, it
will so come to pass that what through in inadvertency, Temptation or Frailty,
we shall step aside out of the milky way of Innocence and Truth, into the
forbidden paths of Lust and Error; and it is certain that no man ever did
hitherto, nor will ever hereafter live in perfect Innocence, except our Savior
himself who was created in the utmost perfection of the humane Nature, assisted
and improved, by a most intimate presence and union of the Divine.

So that in this case, a Sin being once committed, it is necessary in order to
our Justification, that is, to our being freed from the punishment which is
consequent upon it; for the guilt can never be wholly washed away, any more
than it is possible for that never to have been, which is already past: I say
it is necessary that this Justification be attained, one of these five ways,
for there can no other be thought of.

First, We may please our selves with a conceit, that the Innocence of our past
lives may a tone and satisfy for the offense committed; but this cannot be,
because that Innocence how great soever, is no more than what we were obliged
to before: so that having done no more than our Duty, we have nothing left by
way of supererrogation to make amends for what we have done amiss, and set the
account right again between God and our selves.

Secondly, We may hope that our Repentance will be available with God, and that
he will set our Sorrow against our Sin, and let the former expiate for the
latter; and it is certain that the very next thing to Innocence is Repentance,
and that God will not despise a broken and a contrite Heart, but still it is
equally certain, that wherever there is Repentance, there is Guilt, and
wherever there is Guilt, the right of punishment still remains in him against
whom the offense is committed, if he have not actually remitted it already, or
at least obliged himself by promise that he will do it.

But then Thirdly, The third way from which some might peradventure promise to
themselves to be justified or pardoned for their Offenses, is by the Obedience
of the remaining part of their Life; but this will not do neither, for a reason
already mentioned, namely; because that Obedience is no more than we are
obliged to pay, and so has nothing to spare by way of Expiation, for all or any
of those Transgressions which we have committed: and though it be true that
this Obedience is a certain sign that our Repentance is sincere, which will for
that reason be sure to be the more available with God; yet whatever motive or
Inducement it may be to his Goodness, it lays no such Obligation upon his
Justice, as that his right to punishment will be by this means destroyed. But
then if you consider how great the frailty and infirmity of humane Nature is;
and how lyable-our very Duties are to a mixture of Guilt and Imperfection by
the coldness and indifference of their Performance; by the want of a due
fervor and ardency of Mind, and by the wandering of our thoughts and
affections toward unsuitable Objects and desires, in the very midst of our
Devotion, and much more in the usual course of our Lives, that Obedience, how
great soever it may Comparatively be, when we set it in opposition to that of
other men; yet in it self, it is so far from being able to expiate for the Sins
and Follies of our past Life, that it will upon account of its own defects
stand in great need of another Expiation.

Wherefore these three ways being found so insufficient for the Justification
of a Sinner, for the reasons already mentioned; the Fourth possible. expedient
that may be thought of in order to this end, is that of God's free pardoning
and remitting of Sin, as an act of mere Goodness, without any expiation or
satisfaction performed by us, either in our own proper Persons, or in that of
our Proxy: But it seemed best to his infinite Wisdom, to make use of this fifth
and last way, that is, to accept of a Proxenetical or Vicarious expiation in
our stead, not that the other way had any Repugnancy in it to any of the Divine
Attributes, for it is the undoubted right of all Personalities whatsoever to
remit those injuries which are done to themselves, but, as I conceive,
especially, for these three reasons, besides others which may very well be
unknown to us, and are only discernable to his unsearchable wisdom,

First, Because as the Author to the Hebrews tells us, c. 9. v. 22. Almost all
things are by the Law purged with Blood, and without shedding of Blood there is
no Remission; the Jews therefore, which was also more or less the case of all
the Heathen world, being used in their Religious rites to appease God's wrath
by Sacrifices, and by the shedding of Blood, and this by the express Command of
God himself, it would have been an excuse to them not to believe the Gospel,
nor to accept of that pardon and remission which it offered; if Justification
had been proposed upon any other terms than those o^ shedding of Blood, besides
that without this they would have had no reason to forsake the Mosaic platform
of Divine worship, which must have continued still in force, so long as those
shadows were not done away by the more perfect Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross.

Secondly, By this means God gave the world the strongest assurance that it
could possibly receive of his Veracity, or of his fixed and unalterable
resolution, to perform on his part the Conditions of that new Covenant which he
had entered into with Mankind, whose sanction was founded in the Blood of his
only Son, it being not only unreasonable, but impious and highly derogatory to
the Honor and Majesty of God, to suppose that the Divinity it self should
condescend to appear in the form and likeness of a Servant, should take our
Flesh and our Nature upon him; should stoop to those mean Indignities which
were offered him by the vilest of men, and should suffer such a shameful and
ignominious Death upon the Cross by the hands of Sinners, and in the scandalous
Company of two notorious Malefactors, and all this to no purpose in the world.

Thirdly, A third reason why this Method was taken, seems to me to have been
not only that by faith in a crucified God, we might have sufficient assurance
of the remission of Sins, but also that by his Resurrection and Ascension which
were consequent upon that Crucifixion, we might have the most sensible
Demonstration that could be given us of the certainty of our own Resurrection,
and of those Eternal Joys that expect us in Heavenly places, there being no way
so proper to bring life and immortality to light, as for him who first made so
clear and perfect a discovery of them, to rise himself from the Dead, and
become the first fruits of them that slept: and if to these three, you will add
likewise a fourth Consideration, it may be this; that if God had bestowed a
gratuitous remission upon the world, that is, for I would not be mistaken in
the use of that word, a remission without any satisfaction made for Sin, either
by our selves or our Proxy, it would have argued such an easiness in the Divine
nature, in the opinion of many men, that it would rather have proved an
encouragement to continue in Sin, than an obligation, as it ought to be in
point of Gratitude, to greater strictness and Holiness of Conversation, as on
the Contrary, if, for this reason, without shedding of Blood there could be no
forgiveness: it follows plainly that nothing less than the Sacrifice of God
himself upon the Cross, would serve the turn, because nothing short of this
could possibly be a complete Expiation and Atonement for the Sins of the whole
world; but it would be so far from it, that all the Sacrifice that could be
offered would fall infinitely short of the value of this, and God might as well
pardon us without any Atonement at all, as by that which would be so infinitely
disproportionate to the guilt of the offending Parties.

Further, Though it be certain that God could not possibly give the world a
more signal Demonstration of his love, than by sending his only begotten, and
his entirely beloved Son to die for it, for he that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things, Romans 8. 32? Yet this will but enhance and aggravate the Condemnation of
our Disobedience, if after so dear a purchase paid for our Redemption, we shall
still notwithstanding continue in an obstinate and wilful course of Sin; for
how shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?

And now having thus clearly explained, what is meant by Justification; namely,
the pardon of our Sins, or the remission of that right of Punishment which is
devolved upon God by them; and having likewise seen by what means this
Justification is to be procured, that it cannot be obtained by any thing in our
selves, but that it is wholly oweing to the Grace and Mercy of God, in and
through the meritorious Death and passion of his Son and our Savior Jesus
Christ the Righteous, who knew no Sin, neither was guile found in his Mouth;
and who by the Sacrifice of himself once offered upon the Cross, made a full,
perfect, and complete Satisfaction, Propitiation and Redemption for the Sins of
all Mankind. We may now from hence give such a clear and solid Exposition of
many places in the writings of St. Paul, which are so miserably abused and
stretched beyond their true extent by the Calvinistical Doctors, as to make
them for ever hereafter utterly useless, to that cause and party, which without
that method which I have used, cannot so convincingly be done by any other way
of proceedure.

St. Paul tells us, Romans 11. v. 6. (if we are saved) by Grace then is it no
more of Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace: But if it be of Works, then is
it no more Grace, otherwise Work is no more Work: and Gal. 2. 16. Knowing that
a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus
Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by
the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law: For by the works of the
Law, shall no Flesh be justified.

Lastly, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. God who is rich in Mercy for his great love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with
Christ, by Grace ye are saved: And again v. 8, 9. For by Grace are ye saved
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God; not of works
lest any man should boast.

Which places together with several others of a like purport and signification
are so far strained beyond their true sense and meaning by Calvinistical
Interpreters, as if God in the justification of a Sinner, had no regard to any
previous Conditions of Repentance or good Works; but that he proceeded
perfectly by an arbitrary Goodness, and had not the least respect to any other
Consideration whatsoever, which it is plain does not only destroy the necessity
of Obedience and a good Life, but renders all the exhortations and
Encouragements to it, which are so plentifully, and so pathetically
interspersed up and down the Scriptures, both of the old and the new Testament;
and all the arguments or menaces made use of, to deter us from sinful
gratifications or desires, not only useless but ridiculous, and consequently
very unbecoming the Majesty of that God, in whose name and Authority they are
delivered: and St. Paul would be very inconsistent with himself, if this
opinion were true; when in the 12th of his Epistle to the Romans, v. 1, 2. he
exhorts them with so much passion as he does: I beseech you Brethren, by the
Mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service; and be not conformed to
this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God. For why
should he exhort us to so great purity both of Body and Mind, if God Almighty
in the work of Justification had no manner of regard to those as the Conditions
of his Favor? or if indeed we cannot so much as endeavor to be transformed or
renewed of our selves, by the exercise of the natural Faculties and Powers of
our own minds, but all must be oweing to an irresistible Grace, by which we are
carried away, as by a mighty Torrent, without any the least ability or strength
to stem so rapid and so impetuous a stream?

Whereas if we go a middle way betwixt these two extremes, it will be very
easy to reconcile these places of St. Paul, to themselves and to one another;
to the faculties of men, and the nature of things, and to the rest of the
Evangelical, and Apostolical writings.

Follow peace with all men, says the Author to the Hebrews, c. 12. v. 14. and
holiness without which no man shall see the Lord. But now if a man should say
that the true and genuine sense of that place is this, that no man shall see
the Lord, but he that cannot help it, or he that must see and enjoy him,
whether he will or no; this would certainly be looked upon by all men as a most
absurd and impious Interpretation, and yet this is no other than the necessary
consequence of the Calvinistical Doctrine; if Holiness be merely owing to an
irresistible Grace; and if it be not, then nothing can be plainer, than that
there is something of Endeavor or self-activity required on our parts.

But you will say then how comes it to pass that St. Paul tells us so often
that we are justified only by Faith, and by Grace, and not by works? why this
with a very little attention upon what has been said already will become very
plain and easy: For it is one thing to say that Repentance and good works are
necessary to Salvation by way of merit, and another to affirm that they are
required as an indispensible Condition without which God will not impute
Righteousness, or make application of the passion of his Son to the person of a
Sinner: The first of these is manifestly false, because as has been said
already, all we can possibly do, is no more than our Duty, and our best
performances are accompanied with so many and so great imperfections, that
instead of expiating for our grosser Crimes, they themselves do stand in need
of an Atonement. But yet after all it is true, that without Holiness, and
without Repentance no man shall see the Lord; and it is so true that even in
those to whom God is pleased to extend his Mercy at the very instant of Death,
which we have reason to believe to be but very few, yet in these there is at
least required an hearty sorrow and contrition for what is past out of a due
sense of the foul nature of Sin, or of the heinous malignity of Disobedience
and ingratitude to so good and gracious a God; and there is required also such
a serious and devoutly fixed resolution of living better for the future, if in
case it shall please God to grant us a longer Life, as may be, not an
obligation, but a motive or inducement to his infinite Goodness, which in such
cases as these has great latitude of operation, to accept the will for the
deed.

Neither does it follow in the least, because Repentance and Obedience are
required, that therefore we are not justified by Grace or by Faith only; for
since our Repentance and our good works have no manner of merit or Atonement in
themselves, it is certain that that Atonement must be wholly oweing to
something else, and the Scripture tells us plainly what that is, namely to the
sufferings of Christ upon the Cross for our Sins, the merit of which sufferings
is by the Grace and favor of God, without any pretense or title which we have
otherwise to them, applied to every true Believer as the reward of his Faith in
him, by whom that expiation is wrought: which Faith, though it can never be
unaccompani'd with good works, yet it implies in its very nature so perfect a
reliance upon the merit and satisfaction of Christ for Justification and
Redemption, as does at the same time amount to an absolute Renunciation, or an
utter disowning of all kind of claim and title in our selves.

It is almost the same case, as if a Malefactor having committed something
worthy of Death, should yet notwithstanding in pity to the innocence of his
past Life before the commission of this offense have a Reprieve allowed him, to
put him upon a new Trial, and see how he would behave himself for the future;
and though neither his past nor future deportment be so absolutely blameless,
as that no advantage can be taken of them; yet since he endeavors to make up
in his Repentance, what in his obedience is defective; and since he plainly
acknowledges himself a debtor to the justice of the Law, and reposeth his only
confidence not in his own uprightness or sincerity, but in the goodness of his
Prince or Judge; he is upon these Considerations pardoned, which pardon though
without such Considerations and Circumstances it had not been past, yet the
very nature of a pardon implies a guilt in him to whom it is given, and a right
of punishment in him that gives it; so that notwithstanding these Conditions
the offender's Life is merely and entirely an effect of Mercy, because
notwithstanding them he might very justly have been Condemned to Die.

This may be sufficient to have said concerning the first of those six accounts
which I have promised to give of the first rise of the Predestinarian Doctrine,
that it is grounded upon a mistaken Interpretation of those places of St. Paul,
which are opposed only to those who had too high an opinion of themselves, or
were not so sensible as they ought to be, of the grace and favor of God
toward them, by sending his Son into the world to be the propitiation for
their Sins, and of the necessity of that Grace in order to their Justification;
but were by no means intended to destroy the necessity of Obedience and a good
Life, or to discourage our honest endeavors at Perfection, how short soever
they be of that mark at which they are directed; but it is rather, on the
contrary, a new obligation to watchfulness and diligence in all our
Conversation, that God has been pleased to apply so merciful and so effectual
a remedy to those Diseases and Dangers to which either the frailty of our
natures, or the perverseness of our wills, assisted by the malicious and crafty
insinuations of degenerate Spirits, do continually expose us: and I dare
confidently appeal to any man, let him be who he will, who is not enslaved past
all possibility of redemption to a Spirit of Bigotry and prejudice for a party,
without having patience to attend to the real Merits of a Cause, whether I have
not very fairly and clearly expounded those places of St. Paul which I have
produced upon this head, together with all others of a like meaning and
signification; which it is not necessary accurately to insert; so as that no
advantage can be reaped from them to the Calvinistical Doctrine.

The Second Account which I shall give of the origin and progress of this
Opinion, and of its Continuance among us to this Day, shall be taken from those
Texts in the Epistles of St. Paul where he describes the Lucta or Contention
which is to be found more or less in every man, for it is not equal in all,
between the two principles of the Flesh and Spirit; or between the natural
tendencies and desires of the humane Soul, as it moves from its self, by an
inward spring or principle of self activity abstracted from all Intanglement or
Encumbrance from the Body, which are all regulated by the sober and steady
deliberations of right reason without any Prejudice, Humor, Interest, or
Passion, and between those desires which are owing to the union of the
intellectual or spiritual principle with matter, from whence it comes to pass
that our nobler part is perpetually solicited and frequently overborn by the
importunity of sensual Pleasures, by yielding too frequently or too grossly to
which, it follows unavoidably that the natural strength and activity of the
mind will be by degrees impaired, as Elastical Bodies by moisture lose their
Spring; or as the Bodies of men or other Animals by want of exercise, and too
much ease are used to grow Scorbutic, resty, and unactive, but on the contrary
by constant breathing, activity and motion, they acquire new strength and
arrive to an Athletical firmitude and vigor, as it is also with the Mind,
which is not more impaired by a tame and cowardly submission to Animal and
fleshly desires, than it is improved and strengthened by a stout and resolute
resistance of them.

In this continual combat between concupiscence and reason, consists that
spiritual Warfare which we are obliged to maintain with the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil, in the conquest of which Enemies, or in our utmost endeavor
toward it; as being an effect of the natural strength and activity of the Soul
shaking off the Cloggs and Encumbrances of the sensual or lower Life, which is
wholly governed by gross and corporeal Impressions from without, the nature of
Virtue consists; a on the otherside, Vice is nothing else but an unnecessary
yielding to so mean impulses, or it is that decay or infirmity of mind which is
the consequence of such a yielding.

This Combat is excellently described by St. Paul, in the Seventh Chapter of
his Epistle to the Romans, from the 14th. verse, to the end of that Chapter in
these words. We know that the Law is Spiritual, but I am carnal sold under Sin:
For that which I do, I allow not: For what I would that do I not, but what I
hate that do I. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law
that it is good. Now then it is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in
me. For I know that in me that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good thing: For to
will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not, For
the good that I would I do not; but the evil which I would not that I do, now
if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in
me. I find then a Law that when I would do good, evil is present with me. For I
delight in the Law of God after the inward man: But I see another Law in my
Members, warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into Captivity to
the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this Death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, So then with my mind I my self serve the Law of God, but with the flesh
the Law of Sin.

Much such a Description as this we have likewise by the same Apostle in his
Epistle to the Galathians, c. 5. v. 17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the Flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other,
so that ye cannot do the things that ye would: Where he also acquaints us what
are the distinct works of the Flesh and the Spirit, the First consisting mainly
in the gratification of sensual Appetites and desires, or in an ambitious
pursuit after the Pomp and Vanities of this world, or in that turbulent and
uneven constitution of mind, in those either private or public Mischiefs which
are the usual consequences of Lust and Passion, as the latter are chiefly
discernible by such a calmness and serenity of Mind and Will, as does
perpetually accompany the Soul of man when it is moved from it self; from an
inward spring and principle of its own, and when its streams are not troubled
or turned back with violence upon their Fountain, by the tempestuous winds of
Passion; such a calmness and serenity as makes a man most easy to himself,
most acceptable to others, and most fit to enjoy an intimate Friendship and
Communion with God. Now the works of the Flesh says he, v. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23. are manifest which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath,
Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and
such like, of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time
past, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: but
the fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law. And from
this distinction of the Flesh and the Spirit; men are denominated according to
the respective Predominancy of either, sometimes Carnal, or Natural, and
sometimes (...) or Spiritual men. So in the next Chapter v. 1. Brethren if a
man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are Spiritual restore such an one, in the
Spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest tho^ also be tempted, (...), ye
which are Spiritual* that is, ye who have mortified the Flesh with its
affections and Lusts, ye who have given your selves up to the guidance and
conduct of the inward-man whose Souls are as far as may be, retired within
themselves, freed from the Dominion of Prejudice and Temptation, and making no
further account of any thing without, than it is necessary to the support of
Life, or serviceable to the noble ends of Happiness and Virtue, ye who measure
all things by a steady and impartial reason according to their true estimate
and value, and not as they are falsely and unskilfully represented by the
specious flatteries of a deluded fancy, and so those things or truths of which
the carnal or natural man, that is, he whose mind is too deeply plunged and
immerst in bodily pleasures or desires, can have no relish or savor, are said
to be Spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the natural man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him ((...), they
have no taste or savor with him) Neither can he know them because they are
Spiritually discerned, and then it follows, v. 15. (...), but he that is
Spiritual judges all things, but he himself is judged of no man, where (...),
in the first place is as much as (...), he discerns all things, that is, puts
a true value and estimate upon them* but he himself (...), that is, (...), he
cannot with Justice be judged or condemned of any.

And that by (...) or the natural man in this place which I have last cited, is
meant, as I have said, him whose mind being wholly intent and fixed upon sensual
Appetites and gratifications, is called off from the true improvement of its
intellectual Faculties and Powers, will appear not only from the tenor and
scope of the Context it self, and from its being opposed to the (...) or the
spiritual man, but also from this that it looks like a way of speaking borrowed
from the School and Philosophy of Plato; for we all know that in the Platonic
Triad there were three several Hypostases or Personalities, which had a
dependence upon, and a subordination to one another.

The First of which was the (...) or the (...), by which I understand the
divine substance considered as simply and abstractedly as may be, being
infinitely perfect and blessed in its self, without any relation to any thing
without, or besides it.

The Second was the (...), that is to say, the mind or understanding of God
furnished with an infinite variety of Ideas coextended to the utmost
possibility of things, and branched out into all the instances that were
possible to be given of the divine Wisdom or Power.

The Third and Last, Was the (...) by which they meant the Plastic nature, or
the formative and demiurgick power of God, united to a certain subtle or
Aetherial matter which it makes use of as its instrument, as well perhaps for
the first modelling or exemplification of the divine Ideas; (which matter is
capable of infinite Variety of possibe Shapes, Modifications and Respects) as
for the warming, enlivening and sustaining that Universe which the divine
Power, Wisdom and Goodness have created.

Which three subordinate Hypostases of the Platonic Triad, may be and are not
unfitly copied out by so many several resemblances in the humane nature.

For First, We may consider the mind of man barely as a simple, immaterial
substance, created after the Image of God, having nothing of composition or
impurity in its Nature.

Secondly, We may consider it as the recipient or subject of several notices
and Ideas, which it considers by themselves and compares together, with a cool
and impartial Reason not biased by Prejudice, or led aside by Passion, or
blinded by Humor, Interest or Fancy.

And Lastly, We may consider it, as united to a Body, and presiding over Animal
Spirits, which it sends up and down that Body on its Errants, and by them
performs the office of a plastic Nature, usiing them as its Instruments in the
formation of the Foetus and assimilation of Food, and by which union it is made
obnoxious to all the Passions and Impressions of the lower Life, and is but too
often overpowered and carried away into Captivity by them.

Further, that this meaning of the word (...), which we translate sometimes
Natural, and otherwhile Sensual in the writings of St. Paul; and other of the
inspired Writers of the New Testament whom I shall have occasion to mention by
and by, is borrowed as I have suggested from the School of Plato, will appear
yet more plain from these two considerations.

First, That this is not any where the notion of the word (...) from whence the
Adjective (...) is derived, but on the contrary it is every where taken for the
inward man or the pure, intellectual, and immaterial nature, considered as
distinct from that body to which it is united. So our Savior himself uses it,
Mark, c. 8. v. 36, 37. (...); What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the
whole World, and loose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for
his Soul? and 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and
Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, (...), which war against the Soul: In both
which places and in many others, (...) or the Soul is taken for the pure,
immaterial Nature in us, as it is distinct from that Matter or Body to which it
is united; and in whose Happiness or Misery that of the whole Man is
unavoidably engaged, and if (...) were here taken, as it is in its derivative
(...) for the sensual or animal Life in men, then fleshly lusts could not be
said to war against it, because they are founded and radicated in this lower
nature, or in the vital union of a pure and Heavenly Soul, with a gross,
feculent, and terrestrial Body.

It being clear therefore that the word (...) in has no such use or acceptance
any where to be met with in the New Testament Writers; it must of necessity be,
that so different an use of its derivative (...) must be owing to the use of it
in some other Author.

Neither must I from hence be supposed to insinuate, that there is any thing of
turbulency or passibility in the nature of God, if that nature be admitted
according to the Platonists, to be united to an Emanative or subeternal matter,
for though this be the consequence of the union of an humane Soul with its
Body, that it suffers from the Reaction of the Matter to which it is united;
which Reaction is caused partly by Impressions from without, and partly from
intestine Commotions and Disorders from within; yet that subtle Matter which
is supposed to be thus vitally united to the (...) or plastic principle of the
Universe, being created by it, and having no motion, but what it receives from
it; it cannot reverberate upon its own Cause, without which it has neither
being nor power, so as to create any disturbance in its nature, besides that
upon supposition of such a reaction in them both, yet the effect will not be
the same in a terrestrial and etheriall matter, as shall immediately be made
appear.

The Second reason why the signification of this word may be thought to have
been borrowed from the Platonic School, is that St. Paul in his use of (...)
or mind, which was the second Person in the Trinity of Plato; takes it every
where in the same sense, which those Philosophers are used to do, for a pure
and unprejudiced reason, or understanding furnished with multiplicity of Ideas,
of whose objective perfection, and of the motives which may induce it either to
pursue or avoid those Objects which they represent; it considers with a sound
and impartial Judgment. So Romans 7. 23. I see another Law in my Members, warring
against the Law of my mind, ((...)) and again, v. 25. So then with my mind, I
my self serve the Law of God: but with the Flesh the Law of Sin, where the same
word is still observed. (...).

However that by (...) in the language of the New Testament, that which is
carnal and sensual is to be understood, will appear no less plainly from
several other places, than from that which has been already produced. So James
3. 15. (...). This Wisdom descends not from above, but is Earthly, Sensual,
Devilish. And in the Epistle of St. Jude, v. 19. (...). These be they who
separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, and as (...) and (...) are
the same; so also are (...) and (...), the two first being taken for the
sensual and concupiscible, as the two latter for the more intellectual,
abstracted, and speculative life in man: for though (...) in propriety of
Speech do not signify an immaterial substance, but only a more subtle and
tenuious matter, yet that this is the signification of it in many places of
Scripture cannot be questioned, especially in that of the Acts, c. 23. 8.
(...). For the Sadducees say there is no Resurrection, neither Angel nor
Spirit: where by (...) or Spirit, it is plain an immaterial Nature must be
understood, for that there was such a thing as a Cogitant or thinking Substance
in general, they could not question, without contradicting themselves; the very
doubt of it being a proof of its Existence, neither could they any more dispute
the Existence of a subtle or Aetherial matter, of which common sense, and
every Moments experience would undeniably convince them. And this was the
reason, why they would not grant the liberty of the humane Will, because Matter
and necessity are exactly the same as I shall show more largely by and by,
wherefore looking upon the Soul of man, as the Stoics and Epicureans likewise
did, to be nothing else but a Collection of subtle Matter disposed
conveniently for the exercise of Cogitation and Perception, they could not
think it capable of Freedom, which implies some principle distinct from matter,
and for the same reason they denied the Resurrection, and the immortality of
the Soul, because as life according to the Sadducean principles, was nothing
but a Collection of subtle Matter disposed and modifi'd after a certain
manner; so Death was nothing else but the Dissolution or Dissipation of that
collective Substance: and therefore the Soul after Death must of necessity
cease to be.

Lastly, From this Notion of the word (...) or Spirit, we may frame to our
selves a clearer Explication of that famous Place of St. Paul to the
Corinthians* than has hitherto been thought of, where speaking concerning the
Resurrection, he says thus, 1 Cor. 15. 44. (...). It is sown a natural Body, it
is raised a Spiritual Body, there is a natural Body, and there is a Spiritual
Body. Where though it be true that by (...) or a Spiritual Body, may be
understood, such a Body as is of a more fine and subtle Contexture, than that
we now carry about us, if we regard only the Propriety of the Greek Language,
without respect to the peculiar Idiome of the New Testament; and though it be
likewise true, that the Glorified Bodies of the Saints will actually consist of
a more tenuious and Aetherial Substance, because the Scripture tells us that in
that State, there will be neither Marrying nor giving in Marriage, that is, no
sensual gratifications nor any sensual Desires, which cannot well be, if we
carry these Bodies of Flesh about us, which administer perpetual Food to so
many disorderly Passions, and in which St. Paul expressly tells us there dwells
no good thing, yet this does not depend upon the signification of the Word
(...), but upon the Nature of things themselves; wherefore he that would
rightly understand the true meaning of this Place, must consider the (...), or
Spiritual Body as it stands in opposition to the (...), or the Natural Body;
and it being manifest from what has been said already, that by the (...) must
be understood such a Body as is fittest for the (...) or Animal life to
exercise its Functions and operations in: nothing is more clear than that by
the (...) or Spiritual Body, such an one in General must be understood, as is
best fitted for the operations of the (...), or the pure, immaterial and
immortal Nature in us.

Having thus given an Account of that Contention which we find within our
selves between the two principles of the Flesh and Spirit, as that Contention
is described by St. Paul; let us now see what advantage may be made from it to
the Calvinistical Doctrine, and those advantages are chiefly two.

First, That he seems to speak in such a manner of the Spiritual principle, as
if it were perpetually overborn and kept under by the Carnal, so as it could
not possibly bring any thing to Effect of it self, nor were in the least wise
able to resist the perpetual Impulses of the Animal, or Brutish Nature, I am
carnal, sold under Sin, says he, Romans 7. v. 14, 15. For that which I do, I
allow not: For what I would, that do I not: But what I hate, that do I. Again,
v. 17, 18. Now then it is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me:
For I know that in me, that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good Thing: For to
will is present with me, but how to perform that which is Good I find not, and
more to the same purpose to v. 23, where he has these words. But I see another
Law in my Members, Warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into
Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. Which difficulty is
Capable of a fourfold Solution.

First, That even in profane Authors there are Expressions to be found, which
may seem at first sight to infer a natural Impossibility of doing Well; by
which notwithstanding no more than a Moral is to be understood, and that not so
neither, as if it were Morally impossible for us to act aright in any one
Instance; for at that rate a natural Impossibility, and a Morral, would be much
what the same: but it is to be understood of the whole Course and ordering of
our Lives, which for the most part are not governed by the Rules of sound
Reason and Judgment, but by Corporeal Impressions; by sudden Impulses and
Phantasms from without, and by half considered Appearances of things*

To this purpose are those known Verses of Euripides.

(...)
(...)
And Again,

(...)
(...)
And so Lactantius speaks in the person of a Pagan, de ver. Sap. l. 4. c. 24.
Volo equidem non peccare, sed vincor. Indutus enim sum carne fragili and
imbecilla: Haec est quae concupiscit, quae irascitur, quae dolet, quae mori
timet; Itaque ducor incertus; and pecco, non quia volo, sed quia cogor. Sentio
me and ipse peccare; sed necessit as Fragilitatis impellit, cui repugnare non
possum. Which words are rather more express in asserting Mankind to be
overpowred by an irresistible Necessity, than any that can be produced out of
St. Paul, and yet it is certain that nothing else is understood by them, than a
Moral impossibility of persisting in Virtuous Courses thorough the whole Series
of a Man's Life, as appears by Lactantius his Answer, who endeavors to take
off this Excuse by the Example of our Savior; who, as he says, how rightly I
shall not now dispute, did for that reason take our Flesh upon him, that he
might render those Men inexcusable who are used to lay their Sins upon the
infirmity of their Nature; when yet notwithstanding, Christ who was partaker of
the same Common Nature with us, did actually persist through the whole course
of his Life in such a perpetual and steady course of Innocence, as was not
chargeable with the least Sin, or deviation from the Laws of Reason, so much as
in any bad thought or vicious Inclination.

The last Instance which I shall produce, for it is not necessary to produce
many but pertinent Examples shall be taken out of Seneca; who in his 52d.
Epistle thus speaks to his Lucilius: Quid est hoc, Lucili, quod nos alio
tendentes alio trahit, and eo unde recedere cupimus impellit? quid colluctatur
cum animo nostro, nec permirtit nobis quidquam semel velle? Fluctuamus inter
varia consilia: nihil libere volumus, nihil absolute, nihil semper. Stultitia,
inquis, est, cui nihil constat, nihil diu placet. In which words, though the
former part of them may seem to assert that Necessity which the Stoicall
principles pursued into themselves will unavoidably infer, yet by the Close of
them it is plain that he did not attribute that uncertainty or fickleness which
he describes in the humor of most Men, by which it comes to pass, that they so
often change their opinion of things, and their practices which have an
immediate dependence upon the present opinion, to any Whirlwind of Fate veering
about on the sudden thorough all points of the Compass, but only to Folly and
want of Consideration; and indeed if all Events are owing to such an
unalterable Necessity, then the Stoical Wiseman who is used to value himself so
much upon his Patience, Equability, Magnanimous and Heroic temper, and such
like bigg words as the Gentlemen of the Portico are wont to speak, would have
as little Cause to boast, as he that could lay no manner of pretense to any of
those Qualifications, there being no virtue, nor any Endowment of the mind, how
Noble or Excellent soever it may seem, all whose Praise and Commendation is not
by a Supposition of such an absolute Necessity perfectly destroyed and
overthrown.

It is true indeed, that if the Stoical principles be admitted for true, which
did not allow of any thing but Matter in the World, that it will unavoidably
follow that all things are subject to Necessity and Chance, but yet it is every
whit as true, that the Stoics did not always own the Consequences of their own
Doctrine, but rather harkening to that inward Sense and Feeling which they had
of Things; did acknowledge the Government of a Man's Life and Actions to be in
his own Power, as is plain among many others by one place of Seneca in his
58th. Epistle, which I shall here produce. Illud simul cogitemus, si mundum
ipsum, non minus mortalem quam nos sumus, providentia periculis eximit, posse
tamen aliquatenus nostra quoque providentia longiorem prorogari huic Corpusculo
moram, si Voluptates, quibus pars major perit, potuerimus regere and coercere.

Nay, so great and powerful is the force of Truth, that it has sometimes
extorted from them a Confession of an immateriall Nature, from this
consideration, that Providence and Wisdom cannot with any show of Reason be
ascribed to mere Matter, and therefore must be the Attributes of some other
substance, which is distinct from it, at least thus much is evidently granted
by Seneca himself, who in his 58th. Epistle already cited has these words.
Imbecilli fluidique per intervalla consistimus: mittamus animum ad illa quae
aeterna sunt. Miremur in sublimi volitantes rerum omnium formas. Deumque inter
illa versantem ac providentem, quemadmodum quae immortalia facere non potuit,
quia materia prohibebat, defendat a morte, ac ratione vitium corporis vincat:
Manent enim cuncta, non quia aeterna sunt, sed quia defenduntur cura regentis.
Immortalia tutore non egent: haec conservat artifex fragilitatem materiae vi
sua vincens. Where it is plain that he supposes some other principle besides
the subtle or Aetheriall Matter, by which that Matter is ordered and disposed:
and this besides other Passages in this Citation which need no Commentary, is
the only possible meaning of those words. Manent enim cuncta non quia aeterna
sunt sed quia defenduntur cura regentis, that is, all things above continue as
they are, while Sublunary Bodies are obnoxious to Change, not because they
consist of an Aetheriall Matter, but because that Matter is preserved in the
same State of Fluidity and Motion by the care and Providence of a being
distinct from it. For by Aeternus there is no question, but the Aetherial
Matter is to be understood, and then all the rest is plain of it self. So the
same Author uses it in his Consolatio and Helviam, c. XI. Corpuculum hoc
custodia and vinculum animi, huc atque illuc jactatur: in hoc supplicia, in hoc
morbi exercentur: animus quidem ipse sacer and aeternus est, and cui non
possunt injici manus. Where what is meant by Aeternus will be best explained by
another place, c. 6. of the same Book. Mobilis and inquieta men's homini data
est, nunquam se tenet, spargitur, and cogitationes suas in omnia nota atque
ignota dimittit, vaga and quietis impatiens, and novitate rerum laetissima.
Quod non miraberis, si primam ejus originem spectes, non est ex terreno and
gravi concreta Corpore. Ex illo caelesti Spiritu descendit. Caelestium autem
natura semper in motu est: fugit and velocissimo cursu agitur, etc. And by
another in his Fifty Seventh Epistle. Nunc me put as de Stoicis dicere, qui
existimant animam hominis magno pondere extriti permeare non posse and statim
spargi, quia non fuerit illi exitus liber: ego vero non facio. Qui hoc dicunt,
videntur mihi errare, quemadmodum flamma non potest opprimi, nam circa id
disfugit, quo urgetur: quemadmadum aer verbere aut ictu non laeditur, nec
scinditur quidem, sed circa id cui cessit refunditur, sic animus, qui ex
tenuissimo constat, deprehendi non potest nec intra corpus affligi: sed
beneficio subtilitatis suae, per ipsa quibus premitur erumpit; quomodo fulmini,
etiam cum latissime percussit ac fulsit, per exiguum foramen est reditus, sic
animo, qui adhuc tenuior est igne, per omne corpus fuga est. And in his
Fiftieth Epistle. Nihil est quod non expugnet pertinax opera, and intenta ac
diligens cura. Robora in rectum, quamvis flexa, revocabis: Curvatas trabes
calor explicat, and aliter natae in id finguntur quod usus noster exigit,
quanto facilius animus accipit formam, flexibilis and omni hamore obsequentior?
quid enim aliud est animus quam quodammodo relabens Spiritus? Vides autem tanto
Spiritum esse faciliorem omni alia materia, quanto tenuior est. Lastly in his
Consolatio ad Marciam: he introduces her Deceased Father Cremutius Cordus
speaking to her, and endeavoring to give her Comfort upon occasion of the
Death of her Son Metilius. Cum tempus advenerit, quo te mundus renovaturus
extinguat, viribus ista te suis caedent, and sidera sideribus incurrent and
omni flagrante materia, uno igne quicquid nunc ex disposito lucet, ardebit. Nos
quoque faelices animae and eterna sortitae, cum Deo visum erit iterum ista
moliri, labentibus cunctis, and ipsi parva ruinae ingentis accessio, in antiqua
Elementa vertemur. All which places, as well as many more which might be
produced, are therefore alleged by me to show what opinion the Stoics had of
the Soul; Namely, that it consisted only of a certain Aetherial or subtle
Matter, and by Consequence it shows us what the signification of Aeternus is,
when it is applied to such a being.

Aeternus then is (...), that which is of an Aetherial Nature, and from hence
it came to signify that which is immortal. Gloss. Vett. Aethernus, (...),
either from the permanence of the Heavenly Bodies, while the sublunary are
obnoxious to perpetual Change and Alteration, or from this, that that those
Particles of which the Ether consists, being the most minute of all, and
therefore incapable of actual Divisibility, Resolution, or Corruption in Bodies
may proceed so far, but no farther: those particles being immortal and Eternal,
that is, they are not capable of any further Divisibility or Change, which may
be the meaning of that passage of Seneca in his Fifty Seventh Epistle. Nulla
immortalitas cum exceptione est, nec quidquam noxium aeterno est. That is, this
Aetherial Matter which contains the first Seeds and Principles of all things is
not it self capable of any lower Divisibility and Resolution.

The same is exactly the Signification of the word Aeternus, in two passages
already occasionally cited, but not reflected upon. The First, Epistle 58.
Mittamus animum ad illa quae aeterna sunt, miremur in sublimi volitantes rerum
omnium formas. Which two Members of the same Sentence are Exegeticall and
Explanatory one of another, and he speaks either of the first Models and
Schematisms of things below, which it seems are first drawn by the great*
Artist in the Aetherial Matter, or else of the Souls of Gods and Men, which
according to the Stoical Principles were but so many several Concretions of the
Aetherial substance, and that by Aeterna in this place cannot be understood
those things which are of an absolutely Immortal and Unfading Nature, is clear
from this, that in the Stoical (...) or conflagration all these Concretions,
whether of humane or Divine Souls, were to be dissolved and reduced into their
first Principles again: As is evident from many other places, which might be
urged, and particularly from that second Instance, which I am now about to
give, of the true signification and meaning of the word Aeternus. Nos quoqe
faelices animae, says Cremutius to his Daughter Marcia, and aeterna sortitae,
cum Deo visum erit iterum ista moliri, labentibus cunctis, and ipsi, parva
Ruinae ingentis accessio, in antiqua elementa vertemur; that is: And we our
selves the Happy Souls who are made Inhabitants of the Pure and Spotless
Ether, shall be dissolved when it seems good to Fate; together with all other
Terrestrial and Aetherial Concretions into the first Atoms of which we are
Composed, and beyond which there is no Resolution.

Lastly, This is the signification of the word Aeternitas, in two other
Authors, whose words I shall now set down.

The First is Pacatus in his Panegyric to Theodosius: Gaudent profecto, says
he, Divina perpetuo motu and jugi agitatione se vegetat Aeternitas.

The Second is Mamertinus in his Genethliacon to Maximian, who speaks to the
same purpose: Quicquid immortale est, nescit stare, sempiternoque motu se
servat Aeternitas. In both which places by Aeternitas is meant the Aetherial
Matter, which by perpetual Motion is preserved in a State of Fluidity, but
would otherwise cling together, and become as Gross and Terrestrial as any
thing below; and as Aeternum is that which is Aetherial and Volatile, so
Diuturnum is properly that which continues for a long time in such a State, and
Sempiternum that which always continues in it.

From all which it may be pretty plain, if that be the signification of the
word Aeternus which I have assigned, notwithstanding that the Philosophy of the
Stoics knew no such thing as an immateriall Substance, yet that Seneca by the
mere Force and Evidence of Truth, considering with himself how absurd a thing
it was to attribute Wisdom, and Providence to mere Matter; was compelled to
side with Anaxagoras and other Incorporealists in the acknowledgment of an
immateriall Nature, which was neither Matter nor a Modification of it; it being
absurd to conceive that a Thousand unthinking Atoms can ever be so ordered as
to produce Cogitation, for this were to produce something out of nothing, in
that Sense which is the most absurd, and Ridiculous to assert, if every
distinct Particle does think by it self, that Thousands of them joined after a
certain manner together should unite into one common Soul or Principle of
Sensation, or that they are any way capable of Communicating their respective
Vitalities to one another. And that Life, Cogitation and Sense were not owing
to any particular Modification of Matter, though this be all the Life which the
Stoical Philosophy will allow; he seems to me very inclinable to grant in his
39th. Epistle, where he has these words. I nunc and animum humanum ex ijsdem
quibus divina constant seminibus compositum, moleste far puta transitum ac
migrationem, cum Dei natura assidua and citatissima commutatione vel delectet
se vel conservet, by which he seems to me plainly to allow that the Fluidity of
the Aetherial Matter is not essential to the Life of God or of Nature, but
only more convenient for the Happiness of it.

But yet for all this in other places (so Confounded were the Philosophers of
old Time, betwixt the puzling Conception of an immaterial Being, and the
absurdity of attributing Life and Cogitation to Matter) he treads exactly in
the steps of his Masters the Stoics, and by Deus and Divina and such like
words, he means no more but the Aetherial Matter, as the Latins do, when they
say such a thing is done Sub Dio, as Lucretius, when he describes that which is
Born into the World, as entering in Dias luminis auras, and so Manilius very
often uses the name of Deus, as in the following Citations, out of his Fourth
Book.

Jam nusquam natura latet, pervidimus omnem,
Et capto potimur Mundo, nostrumque parentem
Pars tua conspicimus, genitique accedimus astris,
An dubium est habitare Deum sub pectore nostro,
In coelumque redire animas coeloque venire?
And presently after,

-- Quid mirum noscere mundum,
Si possint homines quibus est and mundus in ipsis?
Exemplumque Dei quisque est in imagine parva?
An quoquam genitos, nisi coelo, credere fas est
Esse homines --
And again,

An minus est sacris rationem ducere signis
Quam pecudum mortes aviumque attendere cantus?
Atqui adeo faciem coeli non invidet orbi
Ipse Deus, vultusque suos, corpusque recludit
Semper volvendo, seque ipsum inculcat and offert,
Ut been cognosci possit, doceatq, videndo,
Qualis eat, doceatque suas attendere leges.
And yet he himself seems otherwhiles to allow that there was a Being distinct
from the Matter of the Universe, by which that Matter was with infinite Wisdom
regulated and governed, in his first Book.

Hoc opus immensi constructum corpore mundi,
Membraque naturae diversa condita forma,
Vis animae divina regit, sacroque meatu
Conspirat Deus, and tacita ratione gubernat,
Et multa in cunctas dispensat faedera parts,
Alter ut alterius vires faciatque feratque,
Summaque per varias maneat cognata figuras.
And for the same reason that Seneca was so inclinable to believe and assert an
immaterial Nature, which was, as it were the common Soul of the World: he does
also sometimes, though not without some hesitancy, favor the opinion of an
immaterial Principle which is the source of Life: Cogitation, and Activity in
Men. So in his Epistles: Epist. 88. Innumerabiles quaestiones sunt de animo
tantum: unde sit, qualis sit, quando esse incipiat, quamdiu sit: an aliunde
alio transeat, and domicilium mutet, ad alias animalium formas aliasque
conjectus: an non amplius quam semel serviat and emissus vagetur in toto: utrum
corpus sit an non sit: and in his natural questions l. 7. c. 24. Multa sunt
quae esse concedimus, qualia sint ignoramus: habere nos animum cujus imperio
and impellimur and revocamur, omnes fatebuntur: quid tamen sit animus ille,
Rector dominusque nostri, non magis ubi quisqam expediet quam ubi sit: alius
illum dicet esse Spiritum, alius concentum quendam, alius vim Divinam and Dei
partem, alius tenuissimum aerem, alius incorporalem potentiam, non deerit qui
sanguinem dicat, qui calorem, adeo animo non potest liquere de caeteris rebus,
ut adhuc ipse se quaerat. Where incorporalis potentia being opposed to, and
distinguished from Spiritus and Concentus quidam: a subtle Matter, and a
Harmony resulting from the Modification of that subtle Matter, it is manifest
it can be understood of nothing else but an immaterial Being: a Nature
perfectly devoid of all Corporeity, and distinct from all impenetrable or
tangible Extention, and what he calls in Man incorporalis potentia, that
Paulinus a Christian Bishop Cotemporary with St. Austin, and St. Jerome in an
Epistle to Jovius calls vis incorporea in the Divine Nature. His words are
these Epist. 37. Quis enim non videt mundum istum corporeum vi incorporea
gubernari? totamque molem infusam atque permixtam magno universitatis Corpori
Divini Spiritus mente qua facta est, agitari ad vitam? temperari ad usum?
contineri ad statum? ordinari ad diuturnitatem? Cum ergo constet quod sentitur
aut cernitur, alienae opis ut consistat and maneat indigere, non potest ambigi
aliunde etiam ut crearetur eguisse.

What has been said of the Stoics, or at least of Seneca, who was their
avowed Disciple, that they did sometimes, constrained by the irrefragable
Evidence of appearances about them, acknowledge such a thing as Freedom from
Necessity, in the Actions both of God and Men, and entertain some though but
slender suspicions of an immaterial Nature, in which that liberty is founded.
The same is likewise true in its Proportion of the Epicureans, who though they
were of all others the most confident exploders of immaterial Substance, yet
rather than deny what they perpetually felt within themselves; they did
acknowledge that there was such a thing as Liberty in the World, though in the
Cause of that Liberty they were as widely mistaken, for it follows unavoidably
from the Epicurean principles, if there be nothing but Matter in the World,
that all events must be owing to Necessity and Chance, which when they felt so
plainly that they were not, there being every Day so many in their own Power,
and perfectly at their own disposal, they thought it more Philosophical to
assign a Cause which will by no means explain it, that is to say, the Deflexion
of their supposed Atomical lines from the Parallelism toward the intersection
of one another; a Solution which deserves Laughter instead of Confutation,
rather than with perpetual impudence to affront themselves and deny their own
inward Feeling and constant Sense of things

To Conclude, Des Carts, whom I think I can prove to have been as gross a
Materialist as any of them all, yet does not only grant the liberty of the
Will; but speaking of that famous Difficulty concerning the inconsistence of
the Divine Prescience with it, he says that we are not to deny the truth of a
Proposition or Notion which we feel, and of which we are intimately conscious
to our selves, for the sake of a Being, whose Modes of operation, and ways of
scientifical Intuition by reason of his infirnity we cannot comprehend.

And I do appeal to any Man in the World, let him be who he will, and of what
persuasion soever, if Posidonius in a raging fit of the Gout or Stone, should
yet out of an affected piece of Stoicism pretend, that all that while he feels
no manner of Pain, but that he is perfectly at ease, and should not have
suspected himself to be at all discomposed, were it not for the Visits of his
Friends, and the formality of a Nurse and a Physician by his Bedside, that he
is listening all this while with unspeakable Delight to the Tunefull and
Melodious Music of the Spheres, when yet his Groans and wry Faces do
sufficiently confess, that he feels no such Harmony within, would not every one
say that he does not believe himself, and that he has no reason to expect that
any one else should believe him? And shall we not with equal reason say the
same of him, who will needs argue and dispute himself into a necessary Agent,
notwithstanding he feels himself inwardly to be Free? Or how is it possible for
us ever to look on any Proposition as True, when the universal Seemings and
Appearances of Mankind, and those not of things without us, but such as, if
they be any thing at all, are a part of our very Nature, and are always, most
intimately present with, and in us, shall yet notwithstanding be looked upon as
no better than Dreams and Delusions of a sickly Mind.

This is the first Answer to the first Advantage that may be taken from the
consideration of that Lucta or Contention which there is between the two
Principles of the Flesh and Spirit, as that Contention is described by St. Paul.

But Secondly, The second Answer may be, that if this place of St. Paul or any
other be to be understood, of an absolute and uncontrollable Necessity
overruling all actions, and thwarting perpetually all our good Desires, so as
without the help of an irresistible Grace, they can never produce their effect,
this will destroy not only the Necessity but the nature of Obedience, for
Obedience and Compulsion are inconsistent together; to Obey is one thing, and
to be compelled is another, not only of a quite different, but of a quite
contrary Nature.

Thirdly, Since it is supposed at least from this very place of St. Paul, that
there are such good Desires implanted in us by Nature, which yet for all that
are everlastingly overborn, without being able to attain that end to which they
are directed; what is this but to represent God as the most cruel and arbitrary
Being, that can possibly be conceived, who does not only plague and torment us
in the other World, for no reason but his own arbitrary Will and Pleasure; but
to complete the Torment of those whom he has predestined to Eternal Flames, and
to signalize his utmost Vengeance and Displeasure against them? He begins the
Tragedy in this Life, and creates in them a longing after Happiness and Virtue,
only to make them the more exquisitely Miserable by an everlasting Frustration?

Fourthly and Lastly, St. Paul himself in the beginning of the next Chapter
has these words. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made
us free from the law of Sin and Death: For what the law could not do, in that
it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of
the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit: In which words it is plain beyond all possible color of Exception,
that we are capable by Nature of paying some sort of Obedience to the Laws of
God and right reason, for whatever is weak, is acknowledged to have a
comparative, though imperfect Strength, and whatever wants to be fulfilled or
completed, is at the same time acknowledged to have something of its own: And
so St. Paul tells us elsewhere, not that we cannot possibly do any good work,
or think so much as a good thought of our selves, by our own natural ability
and power, but that we have all Sinned and come short of the glory of God; that
is, that our Obedience though it is not nothing, and though it may be sincere,
yet it is imperfect and stands in need upon account of its defects of some
other Expiation, than what we are able to make; so that after all it is not of
him that wills, nor of him that runs, though we may do both; but of God
that shows Mercy.

It is so far from being true, that by reason of the Original corruption of our
natures, we are carried forth with such an irresistible violence to all manner
of Evil, that it needs a perpetual Miracle to hinder the most profligate
wretches from being worse than they are, which yet Mr. Calvin does expressly
assert; and I have shown that by his principles he is bound to do it; that on
the contrary it is acknowledged by St. Paul himself, that there are very strong
desires and tendencies to Goodness, very powerful inclinations and breathings
after Virtue implanted in us by nature, and it is manifest by experience that
all manner of Wickedness even in those who are arrived at the utmost perfection
of degeneracy and Lewdness; is at first accompanied with a sensible regret and
pain, that every man in the cool and unprejudiced retirement of his thoughts
condemns it, and finds always in it an harsh and grating Incongruity to the
natural grain and bias of his mind. Nemo repent fuit turpissimus, it requires
a great deal of exercise and practice, for a man to arrive at such a desperate
pitch of Madness and Folly; as to sin without any reluctance or pain, without
some inward blushing and secret shame; without a silent Confession of his
Guilt, and an earnest, though fruitless and impracticable Desire, that his lost
Innocence might be retrived: Every man is naturally desirous of a good name,
and a good name in the common judgment of all Mankind, not excepting those
themselves who have most grossly forfeited their Title to it, is only to be
purchased by worthy Inclinations and virtuous Deeds: and for what those Deeds,
and those Inclinations are, we have the same unanimous and universal consent.
All men admire and envy the Virtues of those who are better than themselves;
they excuse their own Follies, by comparing them with those of other men: and
they uphold their drooping Spirits, which would otherwise be oppressed, by the
too heavy weight of guilt and shame, either by such Intemperance as removes
from them the sight and sense of their Sin, or by such pleasant, though
uncharitable, searching into the more infamous Lives or Actions of their
Neighbors, as presents them with a comparative Innocence in themselves. There
are none so hardened, as to make a public profession, and shameless boast of
Sin, but downright madmen and fools; and there are many who by a long course of
Wickedness, have stifled the convictions of their own minds, who yet are
ashamed to own how bad they are, out of a fear and reverence for the common
sentiments of Mankind, in a word, no man ever had a good opinion of wickedness,
but he that was hardened in it by his own habitual Vices, or by the just
Judgment of God, or he that was not truly sensible of what he did or said, in
the heat and intemperance of a Debauch, but still as the Debauch goes off, and
the man returns to a sounder sense of things, reason by insensible degrees
recovers strength, and Virtue begins to shake her drooping wings, and pick out
the sickly feathers of the mind, till being too often, and too much oppressed by
the steams of Concupiscence and vain desire, this Candle of the Lord shines
every day with a more gloomy and imperfect light, and at length abandons us to
perfect Darkness, and leaves us to become a prey to those unruly Appetites,
whose end is temporal and eternal Ruin.

For besides the natural congruity and agreement which there is betwixt all
virtuous Actions, and a conscious reflecting nature, which cannot possibly look
back with comfort upon any thing but what is reasonable and like it self; there
are such plain advantages in point of temporal Interest and profit, which flow
in a perpetual and uninterrupted stream, from all the instances of Virtue and
Religion, that it may rather seem a Miracle that all Mankind is no better, than
that they are no worse than they are. And from hence it is that Piety and
Goodness, are by him who is by God himself honored with so great a Character
as that of the wisest of Princes and of Men, very fitly styled by the name of
Wisdom; as on the contrary all manner of speculative pravity of the mind, and
all external naughtiness of Conversation, is by the same Oracle of experience
and truth, branded with the ignominious and reproachful term of Folly: There
being no instance of Virtue which is not an argument of the truest Wisdom, nor
any example of Wickedness and Vice, which does not palpably discover the
greatest folly and Madness in the world. Shall we think that it needs an
irresistible Grace to persuade a man to be temperate or sober when the
experiments which almost every one may have made of himself, besides the sad
examples which every days experience will furnish him with, in others will tell
him, how destructive Intemperance is to health? how unfit it renders us for
Business? how incapable it makes us of that discretion and Prudence, without
which our persons must sink into Contempt: our Estates run to decay, our
Families be exposed to inevitable Destruction and Ruin? or Lastly, how it
inflames our Passions, disturbs our Reason, distracts and discomposes our
Imagination, and renders the whole man uneasy to himself, and insupportable to
others?

What better Remedy, or what more mitigating asswagement is there in
afflictions or disappointments then patience? and how does a careful and
habitual exercise of this virtue set us in a manner beyond the reach of
Fortune, and place us up on a Rock which no Calamity can shake? How does it
smoothen, polish and refine our Souls? How does it blunt the edge of Misery?
And how does it improve and heighten that calmness and serenity of Spirit, in
which the true Nature of happiness consists?

Lastly, How nigh of kin is Patience to Humility, which gives us Grace and
acceptance both with God and men? Which procures an easy pardon for our
faults; excuses and hides our Imperfections, and sets an additional brightness,
and luster upon all the valuable Endowments of our minds? How vexatious to our
selves, how troublesome to others, and how destructive of the Happiness and
quiet of all the world are Insolence, Impatience, and Pride?

What infinite Charms? What inexpressible Pleasures are there to be found in
Charity, Sincerity, Truth, and Justice? is it not plain by experience that they
procure us a lasting respect and veneration from others? That they create the
most certain delight and satisfaction in our selves? How do all Mankind
endeavor to avoid dependence and subjection? And how are they in love with
Power? And what nobler, or what safer exercise is there of that Power, than by
doing those things which make for the common Interest of the world? and procure
us the Friendship and assistance of all with whom we have to do? Or of whose
help we shall ever stand in need? What weakness does Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation betray? How bigg is it always with Jealousy, Suspicion, and
Shame? And how often does it lay open and expose it self by a too anxious fear
of being discovered, and by a too sollicitous and artificial provision against
it? How pleasant? How excellent, and how Godlike a thing is it to have Mercy,
and to forgive? How exquisitely painful and tormenting is an unsatiable thirst
after Revenge? And is it not more safe to pardon a great offense, then by
revenging every little one, to draw perpetual Dangers and Troubles upon our
heads? And since besides the outward advantages with which all the instances of
Virtue are so plentifully Crowned: there is also such a strange harmony and
agreement, between Happiness and Virtue, implanted by God and Nature in the
Souls of men, that we cannot enjoy the one without the other; but without
Virtue the mind is perpetually out of tune, and can make no agreeable Music to
it self: what Madness is it to affront, and abuse that conscious Nature in us,
in whose disquiet and pain the very nature of Misery consists, as Happiness is
to be measured by its satisfaction and Contentment?

What has been said of those Duties which are personal, and of those which
relate to our Converse with one another: the First of which have a Natural, the
Second only an Hypotheticall or accidental Obligation, because it is not
necessary to the being of a Man, that he should be a Member of a Society, or
that any other Man should exist besides himself; the same is likewise
applicable with the same evidence of Demonstration to those Duties which are
more properly and strictly denominated Religious, as being conversant about
Divine Worship, and having God for the Scope and Object to which they are
Directed, that these also are Founded upon principles of such undoubted
Interest and Reason; that as no Man but the Fool did ever say in his Heart
there is no God: so it is still an higher degree of Stupidity and Madness, to
acknowledge and believe that there is so Powerful, so Good, so Gracious, so
Wise, and so immense a Being, and yet not to pay him that Tribute which he may
so justly challenge of our Praise and Thanks, and the utmost submission of our
most humble and prostrate Adorations.

The Heavens declare the glory of God, says the Psalmist, and the Firmament
shows his handy work: Day unto Day utters Speech, and Night unto Night
shows Knowledge. There is no Speech nor Language where their Voice is not
heard. Their Cry is gone out through all the Earth, and their Words to the end
of the World. And to the same purpose the Apostle to the Romans tells us, The
invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead.

It is impossible for a considerate Man, either to look into himself, or to
look abroad into the World, and see the admirable Order, Variety, Usefulness
and Beauty of those parts of which it Consists, and shall at the same time
reflect, that he does not owe his Being to himself; that he cannot look back
upon any long period of time: that he is subject to a thousand Casualties and
Diseases; that he grows every Day more Crazy and Infirm with Age, that by the
experience which he may daily make both in Men and other Animals, that they are
perpetually liable and obnoxious to Death; he may very reasonably conclude that
himself is by no means exempted from it: that he finds in himself every Moment
many Frailties and Imperfections which are very inconsistent with a
Self-originated, and Self-existent Being.

Lastly, When in the World without him he shall consider that so much Harmony
and contrivance could not be owing to an agreement, or Conspiracy of the
insensible and inanimate parts of it between themselves, they being by their
Nature incapable of entering into any such Confederation, when he shall be
convinced, as he will be by a very little attention, that motion does not
necessarily belong to the Essence or constituent Idea of Matter, otherwise all
Matter would be equally moved, and that it must therefore be the effect or
activity of some immaterial Substance, which must of necessity be coextended to
its own Energy and Power, when he shall think that the particles of Air, or
Water, or Fire have nothing in themselves by which they are made capable of
continuing in such a State, and such a degree of Fluidity, without which
notwithstanding it is manifest, the world must run into a Chaos, and all the
Animals in it be deprived of Health, Respiration and Life, when he shall
discern that any of those fluid Bodies, which I have just newly mentioned, if
they should overflow their Banks, transgress their due Bounds, and exceed that
Barrier which is determined them by Nature, that is, if they were not Governed
by more steady Laws than they are Capable of prescribing to themselves, the
whole Universe must needs run into Disorder and Confusion. When he shall
Contemplate the regular and wellpois'd Motions of the Heavenly Bodies: the
wonderful Structure and accurate Organization of Plants and Animals in this
Lower World, the Formation of Mettalls and Minerals in the teeming Womb of the
Earth, the Provision which is every where made round about us, for the
Necessities and for the Pleasures of Life, all which it is Impossible it should
be oweing, or indeed any part of it, to nothing but mere Matter, which is both
a similar and a passive thing. He cannot choose from all this but lay it down as
a proposition of certain and undoubted Truth, that there is an immaterial, and
immortal Nature, infinitely wise, powerful and good, by which this Universe and
every part of it is after a wonderful and hidden manner maintained, Supported,
Governed, and Directed, and when he is Convinced of the Existence of such a
being, he can as little help paying it his utmost Love, Reverence, Praise,
Thankfulness, and Adoration.

For this is the nature of Power, that it is productive of Fear, of Goodness
that it excites our Love, of Wisdom that it fills us with Wonder and
Admiration: and therefore where all these three are met together, not only in a
transcendent, but in an infinite manner as they are in God; it must needs be
when ever we Consider it, that it must fill our Hearts with Fear and Reverence,
and Thankfulness toward him, and must by Consequence render him the most
complete Object of the utmost Worship and Honor.

For of whose Power have we more reason to be afraid, when we provoke it by
any act of impiety or Injustice, than of his who made all things out of
nothing, and can immediately by one single act of his will, reduce them into
their first nothing again? What goodness can excite in us a deeper or more
affectionate Sense of Love than his, who when he was endued with such a Power,
did notwithstanding use it after a manner so infinitely obliging to the
unspeakable Benefit and advantage of all his Creatures, and especially of Man
to whom all the rest are or may be some way or other subservient and useful?

Lastly, What Wisdom ought to fill us with greater Admiration, than his whose
Wisdom as well as Mercy is over all his works, and who in every part of the
Creation, and much more in the whole contrivance and contexture of it, presents
us with so amazing an Idea of his incomprehensible knowledge and skill?

How is it possible for us to be more happy then by employing our thoughts upon
the contemplation of so much Excellence and Beauty, by calling off our minds
from the rough and perishing Enjoyments of this Life, and by uniting them, as
much as may be, to his pure and peaceable and Eternal Nature? Whom can we
thank so properly for all our Enjoyments? Or whom can we rely upon so safely in
all our wants? or of whose forgiveness have we so much need for all our
Offenses? Or what greater Obligation can there be to all the instances of
Virtue in our selves, or of Justice and mutual Goodness to one another, then to
consider that he is always present to all our thoughts and actions, who has
provided with so much tenderness and Mercy for all the sensible Creation, and
therefore that it must needs be a very great offense to his Goodness and
Provocation to his Power, when ever we are either unkind to our selves, or go
about to annoy and hurt one another.

This is the great Flaw in Mr. Hobs his Politics, who by not taking in the
Existence of a God, and the Consideration of that influence which the belief of
it ought in reason and Interest to have upon our Actions, has destroyed the
main cement of Obligation, and removed the Top stone by which the whole Arch of
Virtue is preserved. He has by this means opened a fair passage for secret Sin
to enter in: Nay, and has made the most open and barefaced Villainies very
lawful things, if they have but Power sufficient to Justify and defend
themselves.

Whereas though it may be, and it is, as I conceive very true, that the only
principle of Obligation, is the interest or happiness of that being to which
that Obligation is Binding; yet it is equally certain that nothing can be for a
Man's interest, which is not only destructive to his own health or welfare,
but, whatever that be which makes for the Disturbance and disquiet of Mankind,
as all Acts of Violence and Injustice do, because God Almighty as well in the
works of Nature, as in the Administrations of his Providence has expressed so
tender a regard to the happiness of Men, that it is not reasonable to believe
he will afford that License to his Creatures, which he has denied to himself;
or that he will suffer that Barrier of Justice to be no less safely than
wrongfully invaded, which if it be once perfectly overthrown, all his other
provisions for the Quiet and Happiness of the World, will signify just nothing
at all.

If therefore there be any who do by Acts of Wickedness, and Injustice, disturb
and discompose the order and good Government of Mankind, and if after this they
escape without punishment in this Life, that very impunity compared with the
Justice and the Goodness of God, and with the nature of an humane Soul, which
being a Cogitant or thinking being, must be of an immaterial, and consequently
of an immortal and unfading Nature, is a sufficient argument to persuade us,
that there is another State yet to be expected, wherein they shall certainly
meet with a just Retribution of their unjust Dealing: the Consideration of
which ought to be so much more terrible, as an Eternal Punishment is infinitely
more dreadful than any Temporal Pain.

If then it be true, that Mankind are a sort of reasonable Creatures, as we
generally take our selves to be, and if all that is meant by a reasonable
Creature, is such an one as does, or may Act by principles of Reason.

Lastly, If there be no instance of our Duty, which is not very agreeable to
Reason, which is not therefore our Duty because it is Reasonable, and because
it makes for our Interest and Advantage, then it may justly seem a greater
Miracle that Men are so bad, then that they are no better than they are, and it
is every whit as plain that there is no instance of our Duty, which any man who
has his Wits about him, may not of himself perform.

But you will say then that I make the Grace of God of none Effect, and I say
God forbid that I should do any such thing; and therefore that we may steer our
Course safely between Scylla and Charybdis, the Heresy of Pelagius on the one
hand, and Calvin on the other. I think the use or necessity of Divine Grace, in
order to the right Conduct and Government of humane Life, may be reduced under
these heads that follow.

First, There is no instance of our Duty, which may not in some sort and
Degree, be performed by the natural strength and Abilities of men.

Secondly, There is a Common Grace dispersed over all Mankind, which does
encourage and assist the dispositions to Goodness wherever they be found, and
Acts generally according to the several Capacities or fitnesses of those
Objects with which it Converses, instilling its benign influences more or less
according as the Subjects upon which it Acts are in a greater or lesser
preparation to receive them.

This Spirit was the principle of Warmth and vital Heat to the Universal Mass,
in the beginning of things, this was that which first infused a vital warmth
into the sluggish and unactive Chaos. The Spirit of God says Moses, moved upon
the face of the Waters: in the Hebrew it is Merachepheth, which the Rabbis
take to be a Metaphor borrowed from an Hen, brooding upon her Eggs or Chickins;
and the Syriack Metaphrast produced by Basilius and St. Ambrose. (...), and the
same Spirit in Beings capable of being informed is a Spirit of Knowledge and
Instruction. For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance: but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even that he
has. Matthew. 13. 12. That is, the influences of the Spirit are dispensed among
Men according to their respective Talents, and their improvement of them, and
from him who shuts his Eyes wilfully against the Voice of his own Conscience
and understanding, or who Neglects to Improve and Cultivate those natural
Powers which he finds within himself, they are utterly taken away, which was
the case of the Jews in our Savior's time, as it immediately follows in the
same place, and this is exactly the Sense of an excellent passage in Seneca,
Epist. 41. Ita dico, Lucili, sacer intra nos Spiritus sedet, malorum bonorumque
nostrorum observator and Custos; hic prout anobis tractatus est, ita nos ipse
tractat: Bonus vir sine Deo nemo est.

Thirdly, As there is a common and Universal influence of the Spirit of God
belonging to all Mankind, so is there likewise a more peculiar and immediate
Emanation of it upon the Church of Christ, to which the Comforter was sent
after his Ascension, to be its perpetual Guide and Director; and which he
himself has promised to be with to the very end of the World, not by the
presence of his Person which is in Heaven, but by the Merit of his Passion, the
interest of his Intercession, and by the light and Grace of his Spirit.

Fourthly, Though it be true, that there is no instance of our Duty, but may in
some sort or other be performed by us, by the naked Strength and Ability of our
Natures, because they all depend upon principles of such undoubted interest and
Reason, that no Demonstration in Mathematics can lie more plainly before us,
then all the instances of our Duty do, to any man that will but keep himself in
a Cool and considering Temper: yet as there is an unquestionable Concurrence of
Divine Grace, with all our honest Endeavors after true Virtue and Goodness, so
it is yet further to be considered, that the frailty of our Natures, and the
predominancy of those unruly Appetites, which keep their inseparable Abode in
the very make and Constitution of our Bodies is so great, that without the
Assistance of the Spirit of God, it is for the most part Morally impossible for
us to perform any Duty, with that entire Resignation of our Minds and Wills, to
the Governance and Conduct of unprejudiced Reason, which is requisite to make
it acceptable and well pleasing in the sight of God; and therefore St. Paul
tells us in the Business of Prayer, Romans 8. 26. The Spirit also helps our
Infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes Intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered. And St. James says c. 5. 16. The effectual fervent Prayer of a
Righteous Man avails much. It is therefore Effectual because Fervent, and it
cannot well be fervent, without the Assistance of that Spirit which is the only
Effectual and certainly productive principle of Godly Fervor and Zeal. Such a
zeal as no Predominancy of Lust or Evil Concupiscence from within, no
allurement of any Temptation from without can withdraw from its wistly
intention and devout prospect upon that Glorious Object to which it is
directed: such a zeal as having burnt up all the tares and cockle of the
fleshly Life, is fruitful in pious and virtuous Resolutions, and effectual for
the bringing them to their intended Issue.

Now it being very rarely, if ever seen, that such extraordinary influences of
the Divine Spirit, are bestowed upon such as have no manner of preparation in
their Hearts to Receive them, and have not made some sincere at least, though
weak and ineffectual attempts toward the Conquest of themselves: from hence it
comes to pass that the whole Action resulting from the common Efficiency of
humane Endeavors assisted by the Divine Spirit, may in some Sense be
attributed wholly to the first of these Causes, as being the Causa sine qua
non, as the Schools love to speak, without which the other would not have
exerted it self, and the whole Action is acceptable to God on our behalf, for
the sake of that part of it which is owing to our selves, or for the sake of
those Virtuous dispositions of Mind, to which the influences of Gods holy
Spirit, which are always carried forth in Streams of Love and Goodness, toward
the whole Creation have such an unalterable Congruity that they will never fail
to be inseparably united to them, nither will they ever forsake us till we have
first deserted and forsaken our selves.

Besides that in those good Actions, or those pious Inclinations of ours, in
which the Holy Spirit has the greatest share; there may yet notwithstanding be
more of our own, then we are usually wont, or then we ought with any thing of
Arrogance or self Conceit, to attribute to our selves, for a man without this
Assistance endeavoring to make a perfect Conquest of his inordinate Appetites
and Desires, would find them so unruly and ungovernable, and Springing with
such perpetual Fruitfulness one out of another, that he would give over the
Conflict out of mere Despair, and yield himself tamely into an utter Vassalage
and Captivity to them, but when assisted by so potent Aids, this wonderfully
Excites the natural Cheerfulness and Vigor of his own Mind, and he Exerts those
Faculties and Powers which God has given him, with more Alacrity and with
better Success: it being the same Case, as if coming to lift a Burden, which
is plainly too heavy and unwieldy for us, we find a strange unwillingness so
much as to attempt it, but when encouraged by the assistance of another, we
then with Cheerfulness apply our Hands and Shoulders to it, and each man puts
forth so much strength and Vigor, as is almost sufficient to surmount the
whole difficulty by its self, and this is plainly the meaning of that Phrase
which we Translate, by helping our Infirmities. The Spirit also helps our
Infirmities, in the Greek it is (...) that is, it bears a part of the Burden
together with us.

Neither is it true only of Prayer, to which this Text has a more immediate
Relation, that the Spirit of God helps our Infirmities in the performance of
it, but it is the same case in all other Duties of the Christian Life, that
these also in their utmost Beauty and perfection are owing to a Concurrence and
Cooperation of the same Blessed Spirit, as is very reasonable to believe from
this, that Prayer is only a means for the better attainment of that great End,
the regular and steady performance of all other Duties in order to Eternal
Happiness.

By calling off the mind from Objects of a more gross and Earthly Nature, and
by engaging our thoughts in a pursuit after, and insinuating them into a
Communion with God: it Creates in us those Calm, Peaceable, and quiet
Dispositions, which put us in the best Condition both to know our Duty, and to
practice it, by a perpetual, but humble importunity, before the Footstool of
his Mercy, It calls down those Graces and Influences upon us, whose design and
Business is to guide us into all Truth, and to encourage us in every good and
Virtuous Undertaking, and it is still further to be considered, that the
performance of our Duty its self, is in the nature of a perpetual Prayer, and
carrys along with it a most powerful intercession on our behalf; and therefore
may Expect, and will Receive the Encouragements of Divine Assistance upon the
same Account, upon which they are afforded to our very Prayers themselves.

Another way by which it comes to pass, that the whole Action of a virtuous and
good Man, becomes wellpleasing, and acceptable to God on his behalf, though in
its utmost Integrity and perfection it be owing to a concurrence of the Divine
Spirit, is from hence, that his mind is not only in some degree of
preparedness, to receive those Blessed irradiations from above, but that when
he has received them, he affords them a welcome and suitable Entertainment, he
Improves and Thrives under the Influences of Grace: he Warmes and Cherishes his
Virtue by that Heavenly Fire, and makes himself every day by an improvement of
inward Purity, and outward Cleanness, a more agreeable receptacle for the Holy
Ghost, and he that does not quench and resist the Influences of the Spirit, by
slothful Negligence, or willful Sin, he that when it was in his power to
obstruct and hinder it, does on the contrary promote its Operations, and
conspire with it for the Accomplishment of the same Ends and Designs, may not
improperly be said to be the Author of those either good Actions, or pious
Thoughts, or virtuous Intentions in which he has so great a share, and which it
was in his power utterly to have Obstructed: And from hence it is that we are
exhorted in Scripture to be Watchful, and Diligent, and Sober, to be frequent
in Prayer, and Holy Meditation, because these are natural means to preserve us
in that temper of Mind, which fits us best for the performance of our Duty, and
for the preserving an uninterrupted Intercourse and Communion with the Spirit
of God.

Again, it is to be observed, that the Spirit helps the Infirmities of a good
Man, not only by Warming his Affections, but by Enlightening his Understanding,
and so far as his Actions or his Inclinations depend only upon this latter
Cause, they are as properly his own, as if no such illumination had been, the
case being the same, as if in any matter of Difficulty or Moment, in which I am
not so thoroughly versed my self, I should take the Advice of another more
skilful than I am, and if being convinced in my self of the reasonableness of
that Course which he propounds to me, I shall afterward follow his Advice, yet
the Action is nevertheless mine for having done it by the direction of another,
for so soon, as what he says appears reasonable to me, and till it does, my
understanding is not Enlightened, so soon his understanding becomes mine, I am
really of the same mind, which he is himself, and I act upon Principles of my
own, though I have received those Principles from him.

But after all it must be confessed, that of our selves we are a sort of frail
and imperfect Creatures, and that our best Actions, even when they receive the
greatest Advantages from the Divine Assistance, if they are not Imperfect in
themselves, yet they are interwoven with those that are, that so long as we
continue here below, we are still in danger of relapsing from our best and
firmest Resolutions, and that when ever we give any the least imaginable
Ground, we are still exposed to further and less avoidable Dangers, that we are
never wholly out of the reach of Temptation, and that nothing but the alone
Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ can make our Persons or Actions so
effectually acceptable and wellpleasing to God, as is necessary in order to our
Justification.

What has been said of all our good Actions, and desires in this Fourth
Consideration, that in their utmost Beauty of Holiness and Perfection, they are
owing to a Concurrence and Cooperation of the Spirit of God, the same is much
more true in the Fifth place of an habitual course of Virtue, through all or
any of the parts and Stages of our Lives, that this is under a vast degree of
moral Impossibility, of being ever effected without the same Assistance: If one
single instance of our Duty be so difficult to be performed as it ought to be;
a constant perseverance in the ways of Virtue and Goodness must of Necessity be
much more: for by perseverance nothing else is meant but an uninterrupted
Series or Complexions of many of those single Instances together, to make a
Man's Life appear of the same Grain and Color, and to be in all its parts
consistent to its self, and to the Beauty of every single Action, to add a
Beauty of Uniformity resulting from them altogether.

And this difficulty will appear stigreater, if we consider that we are not
only in danger from our selves, but from the Temptations of others, and from
the malicious Insinuations of Apostate and degenerate Spirits, besides that our
very Virtues themselves do border upon Vice, and the best Actions which we do,
are placed upon the brink of dangerous Extremes: how near a Resemblance has
frugality to Covetousness, Liberality to Profuseness, Zeal to Superstition,
Humility to a mean and sordid Temper, Prudence to Affectation, Patience to
Cowardice, a Generous contempt of Power and Riches to a Scorbutic Idleness and
Sloth: and how are Temperance and Sobriety themselves divided only by a
Mathematical Line, which is supposed to have no Latitude in its self, from the
opposite immoralities of Gluttony and Excess? It was but necessary therefore
for St. Paul to advise his Philippians, and consequently us, and all Mankind as
he did, to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, that is, with
their utmost Care and Circumspection, because of those many and great Dangers
with which this Warfare of ours is perpetually attended, to which it is
impossible any so effectual remedy should be applied, as by keeping a constant
and sollicitous Guard upon our selves, by examining the reasonableness of all
our Actions before we do them, and of all our designs before we enter upon
them, by entering every Morning into new Engagements of a virtuous Life, and by
calling our selves to a strict Account every Night, for the behavior and
management of the day, according to the excellent Discipline of the old
Pythagorean School.

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
But yet that we may not be discouraged from attempting to be good, by a too
fearful apprehension of those Dangers and Temptations to which we are exposed,
St. Paul adds immediately as a Reason why we should earnestly endeavor after
Holiness and Virtue, For it is God that works in you, both to Will, and to do
of his good Pleasure, that is, if we use that Diligence and Sincerity in our
Endeavors which is requisite, God will not fail to superadd the Assistances of
his Holy Spirit, to enable us effectually to perform his Will and our Duty.

In the Alexandrine Copy it is, (...), it is God that works those Powers, and
Abilities in you, which you have not, or at least not so entirely and perfectly
in your selves. And in another MS. Which Grotius refers to, (...), it is God
that works powerfully in you, for the bringing your good intentions and
designs to pass, to the utter Mortification of your Lusts and Passions, and to
the making you wellpleasing and acceptable in his sight, to the making you
pure, even as he is pure, and holy, as he which has called you is holy, and
perfect even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

Sixthly, It is very reasonable to believe that though God Almighty do afford
to all, especially those who are in the Communion of the Christian Church,
sufficient Assistances of his Grace, to mortify and subdue themselves, and to
persist in a regular and steady course of Virtue, if they be not wanting to
themselves, and though it be likewise true, that the improvement of those
Talents which we have already received, is still accompanied with further
Assistances from above; yet in the dispensations of Divine Grace, there is also
somewhat which is Arbitrary and founded upon no reason but the uncontrollable
determination of the will of God: St. Paul tells us in his time that there was
diversity of Gifts, though they were all of them owing to the same Spirit, and
it is certain that in that Age, and some that Succeeded it, the effusions of
the Holy Ghost were more plentiful, and of a more extraordinary Nature then
they are now, though that indeed depended upon particular Reasons, and was
necessary to support the Church in its Infancy against the heat and fury of so
many dreadful Persecutions; but yet notwithstanding, why may we not allow since
God is the sole Proprietor, and for that reason the unaccountable dispencer of
his own Grace and Favor, that he does sometimes by arbitrary Measures allot a
greater share of it to one man then another, or why may not this be a very
allowable Interpretation of that place which I have newly produced. For it is
God that works in you, both to will, and to do of his good Pleasure, that is,
that though he afford sufficient Grace to all, yet he does notwithstanding make
some unequal distributions of it, (...) that is, pro arbitrio, by Arbitrary and
unaccountable Measures.

Seventhly and Lastly, As to Faith in Christ, and the belief of the Gospel, if
we mean only an Historical Faith, it may certainly be attained by any
considering Man, without any particular Assistance of Divine Grace, by
considering only in a Philosophical way the power of God, and his ability to
produce those effects which exceed any humane Efficiency or Skill, and by
attending to the nature of that Doctrine which Christ is said to have Taught,
which conduced so much to the Benefit and advantage of Mankind, compared with
that human or traditionary Testimony, which has been handed down to us through
so many Centuries of years by Men of unquestionable Credit and Virtue, who
neither had, nor could propound any design of temporal advantage to themselves,
but on the contrary met with Trouble and Persecution, and expcted to meet with
no other for their Pains: I say, upon these Grounds any reasonable Man may of
himself believe that there was such a Person as Jesus Christ, Born of a pure
Virgin, who lived a most Holy and Exemplary Life, wrought very many, and very
great Miracles and Wonders among Men, who was the Promulger and Preacher, of a
most wise useful and Glorious Gospel to the World, who Died upon the Cross, to
Seal and ratify that Covenant which he had made between God and Men, and who
after his Crucifixion, arose again from the Dead, and ascended in a Glorious
and Triumphant manner into Heaven, having obtained a complete Victory over
Death and Sin, where he still continues performing the Office of an everlasting
Mediator, and making a perpetual Intercession for us all. This may be believed
barely upon the Credit of that Historical Testimony which is given to it, but
if by Faith we mean a practical and saving Belief, of these Truths, which by
being set home upon our hearts, and being always present upon our Minds, shall
have a lasting, and a powerful influence upon our Lives: this as I conceive,
cannot be had or hoped for, without the special influence of the Grace of God,
for the same Reasons upon which I have already asserted an habitual Goodness
not to be obtained without the assistance and influence of the same Spirit. And
therefore when Peter made that Confession. Matthew. 16. 16. Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God, Jesus answered, v. 17. Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona:
For Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven. Not that it was Impossible to come to the Knowledge of this in any
degree, without asupernatural Revelation: For several of the Jews did from the
greatness of his Miracles, and the Wisdom of his Doctrine suspect and partly
believe him to be the Prophet that was to come, by which they meant either the
Messiah, or his Forerunner, and the Centurion who cannot be thought to have
received his Information by any such Miraculous way, when he saw our Savior
giving up the Ghost, and considered the dreadful Agony of Nature, at the
instant of his Passion said, of a truth, this was the Son of God. But such a
Belief as Peter had of this Truth, that is a practical and deeply rooted Sense
of the Truth of what he said, whereby his heart was changed, and his affections
subdued, and his whole Man captivated into the Obedience of Christ and his
Gospel, this cannot be revealed by Flesh and Blood, which is apt to suggest
thoughts, and invite to practices of a quite contrary Nature, but it is owing
to the Grace of God, and to the supernatural Illuminations, and Influences of
the Divine Spirit, working upon those who have experienced the new Birth, and
are become Regenerate, and Born again into newness of Life, by the adoption of
Grace.

Thus have I endeavored to explain the operations of the Holy Spirit, upon the
hearts of Men, and especially of the Faithful, so as neither to make them
useless with Pelagius, nor irresistible with Calvin, nor unintelligible with
some of our Modern Writers, who are cried up by their Adherents for nothing
more, then that they understand not what they say or Write, nor the other, what
they Read or hear, and who do on both hands exactly fulfill that witty, and
Judicious Character which Lucretius gives of Heraclitus and his admirers.

Clarus ob obscuram linguam magis inter Inanes,
Quam de grates inter Graias qui vera requirunt,
Omnia enim stolidi magis admirantur amantque,
Inveris quae subverbis latitantia cernunt,
Veraque constituunt quae belle tangere possunt.
Aures and lepido quae sunt fucata sonore.
But now that I may not seem in what I have Written upon this weighty Question,
to depart from the Sentiments of the Church of England, to whose Authority I
shall always pay, as I am in Duty obliged a most profound respect. I will here
Transcribe those Articles of Hers, in which this point is Concerned, which are
these three which follow.

ARTICLE X. Of Freewill.

The Condition of Man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot Turn and
prepare himself, by his own natural Strength, and good works to Faith, and
calling upon God: Wherefore we have no Power to do good Works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will.

In which Article it is plainly implied both that we have some natural
strength, and that we are capable of performing some good Works, though that
strength be so imperfect, that we cannot by the sole Power and Virtue of it,
prepare and turn our selves to Faith, and calling upon God, neither are those
Works pleasant and acceptable to God in themselves, by reason of that mixture
of imperfection with which they are attended, and because they are interwoven
with many bad ones, (of both which Causes of their non-acceptation I have
already spoken,) without the assistances of Grace, by which the Crudities of
the carnal and concupiscible Life in us are attenuated and exalted, which would
otherwise ascend in gross and malignant Fumes, darkning the understanding, and
depraving the will, so as neither the one could discern its Duty with that
Clearness, nor the other execute it with that entire Resignation of it self, to
the conduct and governance of Reason, and with that inward Fervo^,
Cheerfulness, and Sincerity, which is necessary to make our performances
acceptable and well-pleasing in the sight of God, and which is that which this
Article calls a good will, to which as well in its Being, as continuance and
preservation, the Grace of God is of necessity required. Neither would our good
works though assisted and improved by these supernatural auxiliaries from
above, be acceptable and pleasant in his sight; that is, so as to be
subservient to the great ends of Happiness and Salvation, because in themselves
they are no more than what by the Laws of Reason and self-Preservation we are
obliged to do, and because they are allayed and tempered by so many
Misdemeanors, whose Guilt all our after-amendment can never wash away, if it
were not for the Blood of Christ, which God has accepted as an Atonement and
Propitiation for our Sins, and for the placing us in a State, if not of perfect
Innocence, yet of Forgiveness and Justification.

ARTICLE XII. Of good Works.

ALbeit that good works, which are the fruits of Faith, and follow after
Justification, cannot put away our Sins, and endure the severity of Gods
Judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring
out necessarily of a true and lively Faith, in so much that by them a lively
Faith may be as evidently known, as a Tree discerned by the fruit.

In this Article there is nothing which I have not already sufficiently
asserted, and insisted upon in what I have said above about Justification, and
in what I have just now observed upon the Article of freewill.

And Lastly, In what I have said concerning Perseverance, and of the case of
St. Peter, and that confession which he made, that Jesus was the Christ, and
the Son of the Living God.

ARTICLE XIII. Of Works before Justification.

WOrks done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God; for as much as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ,
neither do they make Men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School Authors say,)
deserve Grace of Congruity: yea rather, for that they are not done as God has
Willed and Commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of
Sin.

In which last recited Article, though more difficulty may seem to lie then in
the two foregoing, yet upon a more particular survey of it, it will appear that
there is nothing which is not very consistent to those principles which I have
laid down.

For First, This Article asserts plainly that good Works may be done, but that
they are not pleasant to God, before the Grace of Christ, and the inspiration
of his Spirit; forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ, of which
I have already spoken.

Secondly, This Article does not deny, that there is such a thing as Grace of
Congruity, and consequently that there may and must be, some manner of
preparation in our selves, by which we are made capable of receiving it, but
only that we cannot deserve this grace of Congruity, and that is very true, for
it is still an infinite condescension in the Spirit of God, that it will stoop
to our Infirmities, and enter into so strict a Friendship with such polluted
Beings, as the best of Men of themselves are found to be.

Lastly, When the Article tells us, that before the Reception of this Grace,
even our good Works themselves have the nature of Sin: it is not so to be
understood, that good Works proceeding out of an honest Heart, and a pious
Intention are or can be displeasing to God, so far forth as they are done to
good Purposes, and out of good Designs, for this would be to make them good and
bad at the same time; but before the Reception of this Grace, they are tainted
with much of imperfection in themselves, and by their having the nature of Sin
may be also meant, that before the Reception of this Grace, and without the
satisfaction of Christ, for the transgressions of our Lives, they are no more
available for our Justification, than if they had been bad or wicked Works,
because no future innocence or virtue can be a proper Atonement or
satisfaction for the guilt that is past; so it being no more than we are always
obliged to, it cannot expiate for our former Sins.

Neither is it affirmed as I conceive, in the tenth Article, that we cannot
turn or prepare our selves at all, or in the least degree, but that Article is
rather to be explained by this expression in the thirteenth, that we cannot so
turn or prepare our selves as to deserve the grace of Congruity, which I have
already granted to be True, and I have shown the Reason why it is so. St. Paul
tells us, Rom, 8. 7. That the Carnal Mind is at Enmity against God, by which it
is implied at least, that there is a friendship and Congruity, betwixt the
spiritual mind, and the mind of God. And the case of the Heathen world in the
first Chapter of that Epistle, who were deserted by the spirit of God, and
given over to their own beastly Lusts and Affections, to defile themselves with
all manner of Wickedness and Uncleanness, shows plainly that there is a common
Grace or Influence of the Divine Spirit running through the World, and that it
never forsakes us, till we by many acts of willful Sin, have broken, and
violated those Congruities to which its presence is inseperably united,
according to the greater or lesser proportions in which those Congruities exert
themselves, though since no Man by the Assistances of this common Grace, did
ever live up to the perfection of the law of Nature: I shall neither be so
Uncharitable as to exclude them from all benefit in the Passion of Christ, nor
so presumptuous as to determine how far the Merits of that Passion may be
applicable to them.

However if it be granted, as it is all the reason in the World that it should,
what we find contained in the twentieth Article, that it is not lawful for the
Church it self to Ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods word, neither may
it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another, then it
is easy to perceive what we are to pronounce of the Doctrines of irresistible
Grace, and of absolute Reprobation; if we will adhere either to the Judgment of
right Reason, or to the sentiments of the Church of England, it being
impossible to maintain either of these Doctrines without explaining one Text
after such a manner, as to make it flatly contradictory to another, and
consequently to invalidate the Authority of the Scripture, which if it be not
consistent to its self, can be of no force or obligation to us.

Besides what has been already largely represented, of the inconsistency of
these Doctrines, with the constant tenor, design, and current of the
Scriptures, if in the place of St. Paul so lately mentioned, where he exhorts
us to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, it be but granted, as it
cannot be avoided but it must be, that there is a Power or ability of working
supposed in them, to whom this exhortation is made, otherwise it would be a
very impertinent Exhortation, and if it be affirmed of the very next words, for
it is God that works in you, both to will and to do, that they are so to be
understood, as if he had said, that we are able to do nothing of our selves,
but that God does all by an irresistible Grace; then it is manifest that these
two places, though immediately Joined, are yet plainly contradictory to one
another: How is it possible then, if we will follow the Counsel of the Church
of England, but we must expound this latter so as I have done, since any other
way, they cannot be consistent together? And what can be a greater
disparagement to the Authority of the Scripture, then that in the compass of so
few Lines, which are immediately joined to one another, it should so grossly
contradict it self.

But the main inconvenience of the Doctrine of absolute reprobation is this,
that though it should be granted to be no other than the constant tenor and
Language of the Scriptures, which is all that its hottest assertours can
desire, yet this instead of proving that Doctrine to be true, will but prove
the Scriptures upon which it is founded to be of no Force or Authority in the
World. For if God Almighty in the distribution of Eternal Punishment or
Happiness to Men, have no regard to any Principle of Goodness or Justice in his
Nature, as he must not have, if he proceed only by arbitrary Measures, and if
God may deceive, as I have proved that in some cases he may, and as it is
granted to a degree of impiety by the Calvinists themselves, when they
distinguish so boldly betwixt his secret and revealed Will, by the one of which
he Damns the far greatest part of Mankind* and by the other exhorts and
threatens them, and uses such other means as if he intended their Happiness and
Salvation, Nay, if we all seem to our selves to be free, when yet
notwithstanding we are indeed necessary Agents, which is a strange and a
perpetual delusion imposed upon all Mankind: I say, if all this be granted,
then though we should suppose the Doctrine of irrespective Reprobation to be
the genuine and only Language of the Scriptures, yet how can we tell
notwithstanding, that there is any Truth in it? Or if we could be secured of
its Truth, and were as sure that we are of the number of the Elect, which is a
very comfortable assurance when there are so many that go the other way, yet
how can we tell that we shall be so to Morrow? What Hopes? What Confidence, or
Affyance can we put in so arbitrary, so deceitful, and so uncertain a Being?

Again, when he doomes so many to Eternal Flames, and so few to the blessedness
of a better State, if this depend only upon his arbitrary Will founded upon no
Reason, that Will may alter, for as little reason as it was made, or if it be,
that there is a greater propensity in his nature to Cruelty then Mercy, that
Cruelty will be better gratified by the Destruction of all, and the
consideration of it will but serve to afford us a very lamentable prospect of
what we are all to expect, so true is it, that this Doctrine is so far from
being solidly demonstrable out of Scripture, that it plainly undermines the
authority of Scripture, as well as the very nature of Morality and Goodness.

Much good therefore may it do our Adversaries, with their new-Friends, the
Articles of the Church of England, which how favorable they are to them, we
have already seen, and if they had been never so favorable, yet afterward
when they Confess, that even general Councils may Err, and when they refer all
to the decision of Scripture, as the only sufficient rule of Christian Faith
and Practice, they would by this means perfectly have overthrown themselves; or
if the Scripture could be supposed to favor such a Doctrine, that very
supposition would overthrow the truth and certainty of the Scriptures; but if
the Scripture and the Articles should happen to Disagree, as I see no danger
that they ever will, In this case it must be remembered that we have subscribed
to those very Articles, no further than they shall be found consonant to the
Scripture, and therefore unless we have a mind to be forsworn, and Damned into
the bargain, we must relinquish our Articles, rather than our Bibles.

But all this while I would not be so understood, as if I thought there never
was, or could be such a thing as an irresistible Grace, for this would be in
effect to assert that the power of God was not superior to that of a Mortal
Man. Besides that perhaps I have observed more Instances of it up and down the
Scriptures, both of the Old Testament and the New, then those who have made the
greatest Noise and Clamor about it. The Song of Moses, and the Children of
Israel, in the 15th. of Fxodus, after their deliverance from the pursuit of the
Egyptians, and the Dangers of the Red Sea, the prophetic Benediction of Jacob
to his Sons in the 49th. of Genesis, and the Song of Deborah, and Barak in the
5th. of Judges, seem all of them to me to have been inspired and uttered by an
irresistible Grace, as likewise in the new Testament, the Songs of Mary, and
Zachary, and old Simeon upon occasion of the Births of John the Baptist, and of
Christ, either shortly expected or already Accomplished, are without question
owing to the same Cause.

When Balaam being sent for by Balack, to Curse the people of Israel, could not
do it though he would never so fain, but on the Contrary delivered himself in
words Expressive of the greatest Blessings which God could bestow upon his
chosen People, when Cajaphas being High Priest, prophesied by vir^ue of his
Office, when Pilate, notwithstanding the repeated instances of the Sanhedrim
and chief Priests, could not be diverted from an unaccountable pertinaciousness
in asserting the Kingship and Dominion of Christ over the Jews, all this was by
an irresistible Grace or Spirit.

When the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost descended on the Apostles enduing
them with a gift of Tongue, not understood by themselves; by which they
delivered themselves to a mixed assembly made up of diverse Nations, so as every
Man heard the glad tidings of Salvation in his own Language, when the primitive
Christians upon their being brought before the Magistrates and Judges of the
Heathen world, instead of being abashed or dismayed out of an apprehension of
Fear or Danger, expressed so strange a confidence and assurance, as struck a
Dread and Terror into their very Enemies themselves, and besides were endued
with a gift of utterance, peculiar to those times, and in vain pretended to in
these, by which they expressed themselves without Fear or Hesitancy, and beyond
their own natural faculties and skill, in the defense of themselves, and to the
advantage of the Gospel, when three Thousand, and five Thousand, and multitudes
were converted to the Christian Faith, and received the Holy Ghost upon the
hearing of one Sermon, all this was by an irresistible Grace.

Nay, the very phrases of receiveing the Holy Ghost, and of the Holy Ghost
falling upon them, and of being full of the Holy Ghost, and being in the
Spirit, which we find in several places of the new Testament, imply a strong
and powerful influence of the Spirit upon their Minds, which they could easily
distinguish from the ordinary results of their own thoughts, though we cannot
do it now adays; and from hence it is, that St. Paul speaking of Marriage and a
single Life, and of the respective Obligation to each for the better
furtherance and promotion of Godliness, distinguishes so exactly betwixt his
own advices and the dictates of the Spirit, and otherwhiles he is in doubt,
whether what he says be from himself, or from the Spirit of God, the influences
of that Spirit not being so potent and sensible at one time as another.

To conclude, when Jesus was driven of the Spirit into the Wilderness, when
Philip was carried through the Air to Azotus, when Paul went bound in Spirit to
Jerusalem, and when he assayed to go into Macedonia but the Spirit suffered him
not, all these were influences of an irresistible Grace, or Power proper to
those times, and of which there are no instances to be found in these.

Nay, so violent were the Paroxysms of the Spirit at some times upon them, that
they were perfectly distracted and besides themselves, scarce knowing what they
did or said, and by the extreme eagerness and zeal with which they delivered
what they had to say; they seemed so to others oftener than they were. So the
Apostles on the day of Pentecost, seemed to some to be full of new Wine, Acts
2. 13. And though we shall allow it to be true, as the Text tells us, that they
only mocked when they said this, and it is likely some of them did not believe
it themselves, yet this had been but a cold sort of mockery, had there been no
manner of resemblance betwixt Men acted by the Spirit, and Men that were full
of new Wine. For this reason it is that St. Paul to the Ephesians opposes
these two, being drunk with Wine, and being filled with the Spirit, as having
some kind of proportion and Analogy to each other, c. 5. v. 18. Be not drunk
with Wine wherein is Excess, but be filled with the Spirit. Upon which place
Grotius has these words, though I am not beholden to him for the Observation,
opponit res in aliquo similes, illi vino implentur, vos Spiritu. And Peter
standing up in defense of himself, and of his fellow Apostles on the day of
Pentecost, lift up his Voice and said unto the Mockers, v. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Ye Men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you,
and harken to my words: For these are not Drunk, as ye suppose, seeing it is
but the Third hour of the day: but this is that which was spoken by the Prophet
Joel, and it shall come to pass in the last days, says God, I will power out
of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons, and your Daughters shall Prophecy,
and your young Men shall see Visions, and your old Men shall dream Dreams, and
on my Servants, and on my Handmaidens I will power out in those days of my
Spirit, and they shall Prophecy: in which place it is manifest though he wipe
off that slanderous and disgraceful aspersion of their being Drunk with Wine,
yet he plainly acknowledges a resemblance as to outward appearance between
those in that Condition, and those who were acted with the Spirit of Prophecy,
and that this was the reason why the one was by some wilfully, and perhaps by
others ignorantly mistaken for the other. And what else, I beseech you, is or
can be the meaning of that place of St. Paul to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5. 13.
For whether we be beside our selves it is to God, or whether we be sober it is
for your Cause, then this, that whether we be in the Spirit or out of it, we
lay out our whole time and strength for your Edification. In the Greek it is,
(...), where though (...) in its most proper notion signify to be in a Swoon
or Trance, and it is as much as (...) (...), yet being opposed as it is in this
place to (...), which signifies a calm and composed temper of Spirit, it must
here denote that turbulent and unquiet disposition of Mind, which is proper to
Men, in fits of Madness or Distraction. Though sometimes itis true, that the
influences of the Spirit were so powerful upon them, that they fell into a
perfect Transe, having lost all Motion or sense of any thing about them. In
such a transport as this, St. John saw his Apocalyptick Visions, and the
Prophets beheld insensible Representations, the lively portraitures of things
to come, and St. Paul, whether in the Body, or out of the Body he could not
tell, was wrapped into the third Heaven, and saw those Glories which it was
neither lawful nor possible to utter.

To the same purpose it is what Festus said with a loud Voice to Paul, Acts 26.
24. Paul thou art beside thy self, much Learning does make the Mad. To which
though St. Paul do there make answer, v. 25. I am not Mad, most noble Festus,
but speak forth the words of Truth and Soberness. Yet there is no question, but
what with that heat of Temper which was natural to St. Paul, and what with the
concern he was in for the just Vindication of himself, and his Religion.

And Lastly, What with the influences of that Spirit, by which in the defense
of both these he was acted, he did seem by his Mine and Voice, and his unusual
earnestness in the delivery of himself, to be somewhat Distracted and besides
himself, which was so far from doing any prejudice to the Gospel, that in the
first place it freed those that heard it from any suspicion of design, and in
the Second it appeared so plain, that the Men were hearty and in earnest in
what they said, and that there was an unusual Spirit going along with them,
that though some looked upon it as no better than Madness, yet with others it
had a strange perswasiveness, and was no doubt one of the main causes of those
great Numbers which were used at once to be Converted to the Faith by the
Ministry of the Gospel in those days, upon whom though there usually fell a
plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost, yet this was not till after they were in
some measure converted by the Preaching of the Apostles. So we find here in
this very place of the Acts, though Festus was not willing to allow that this
earnestness of St. Paul, was any thing better then Madness, yet Agrippa
notwithstanding his Jewish prejudices, which were every whit as inveterate as
the Heathen, could say, almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. And this
no question is the meaning of that phrase of Preaching with Power, and with
Authority in opposition to the cold way of delivery of the Scribes and
Pharisees, that is, Preaching with such a Mine and assurance, such a Vigor,
strength and earnestness of Voice, gesture and pression, as had with some a
strange perswasiveness, though there were others who looked upon our Savior to
be Distracted, or at least would have had it thought so, as well as his
Apostles.

To conclude, under the old Testament, there wanted not many instances of a
like Nature, all the Prophets had usually the Garb and deportment of Mad and
Frantic Persons; Saul being amongst them, stripped himself stark Naked, and lay
without his Clothes for an whole Night and a Day together: It is the Character
which one gave of the young Prophet, who was sent by Elisha to Anoint Jehu, 2
Kings 9. 11. Wherefore came this mad Fellow to thee? and whoever shall read the
Stories of Elijah and Elisha, and his Servant Gehazi, will without much
difficulty, be induced to believe that the Spirit of Prophecy was usually
attended with a sort of Madness, insomuch that it was the usual Opinion both in
the Jewish, and the Heathen Nations, that there was somewhat Sacred and Divine
in Frantic Persons, as it is still among the Turks to this day, which was
therefore so far from being a disadvantage to the Message of a Prophet, that it
rather gave new Authority and Recommendation to it. But since these
extraordinary effusions of the Holy Spirit are now wholly ceased, together with
the reason of them, there being no new Revelation to be expected, and there
being sufficient reason, especially in these parts of the World, to render
every man inexcusable who does not believe this. What folly is it to talk of
irresistible Grace, when the influences of the Spirit are so Gentle, that they
cannot be distinguished from the motions of a Man's own Mind? When we can give a
reasonable Account of what we do, and are not sensible of any Violence from
without, by which our natural Propensities are forcibly overruled? though that
there may be sometimes, and in some particular Cases, such an unaccountable,
and perhaps irresistible bent of our Minds, which cannot well be attributed to
any other Cause then to the spirit of God, is a thing which I will not deny,
but since the Apostles themselves were not always in the Spirit, and under the
influences of such an irresistible Grace, what Madness is it to affirm it of
these Times, when there is not the same occasion for it? or do not Men's
Consciences give the Lie to their Tongues, when they talk of an irresistible
Spirit, in those very actions in which they seem to themselves, and others to
be the most perfectly free and unrestrained.

Thus much is sufficient, if not too much, in answer to the first Advantage,
which may be taken from the consideration of that Lucta or Contention which
there is betwixt the two principles of the Flesh and the Spirit.

The second possible advantage which may be made is this, that the Spiritual
principle there mentioned, may be pretended to be no part of the humane Nature,
but that it is only a supernatural influence of Divine Grace from above, Romans
8. 9. But ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit
of God dwell in you, and verse. 13, 14. For if ye live after the Flesh ye shall
dye, but if ye through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the Body ye shall
live, for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

But to this it may be answered.

First, That there are plainly in every Man, if we will believe the express
affirmation of St. Paul himself, two distinct principles of Action, which he
calls the Flesh and Spirit, and the latter of them sometimes the inward Man,
which is a sign that it is a part of our Selves, c. 7. v. 22. For I delight in
the Law of God after the inward Man, and sometimes the Mind, v. 23. But I see
another Law in my Members, Warring against the Law of my Mind.

Secondly, This Spiritual principle in us, is that which is properly the Image
of God, and the resemblance of his Nature; betwixt which and the Divine Spirit,
there is a mavelous Harmony and Agreement; For as the Carnal Mind is at
Enmity with God, Romans 8. 7. So betwixt the spiritual Mind and him, there is a
wonderful Concord and Friendship; he Cooperates and concurs with it, in all its
virtuous Endeavors and Undertakings, And the Spirit it self bears witness
with our Spirit, as it is v. 16. That we are the Children of God. From whence
it comes to pass, that the that the same Effects are attributed to the Spirit
of God, and to our Spirit as their Cause, because there is a Concurrence of
both these for their Production; and because the utmost perfection of Holiness
is scarce attainable in a single Instance, while we carry these fleshly
Tabernacles about us, and much less in the whole course and tenor of our
Lives, without the assistance of the Divine Spirit.

These are the two advantages, which may be taken from the consideration of
that strife or contention betwixt the two principles, which is described by St.
Paul, which what Service they are like to do to the Predestinarian Cause we
have already seen; but it is now further to be considered, that the very
supposition of a Mind or inward Man, or immaterial principle of Action, for all
these are one; is at the same time, an assertion of humane Freedom, and a
shaking off those Clogs and Fetters which the Calvinistical Fatality would put
upon us. For when things come to be examined to the Bottom, it will be found
that an immaterial Nature, and a free Agent are the same.

Extension is the common attribute of all Substance whatsoever, it being
impossible to have any conception of any thing which is not somewhere: or to
have any notion of Place (The School distinction betwixt Locus and Ubi, being a
very idle, unintelligible Distinction,) which is not extended by real Parts,
and such as are at least by Cogitation separable from one another.

It being therefore so clear, that no Man can possibly conceive otherwise, but
that all Substance is extended, it follows in the next place, either that there
is but one sort of Substance, or that there are several sorts of Extension.

If the first be granted, the consequence of this will be.

First, That matter must be selfmoved, (for that there is such a Substance as
Matter will not come into dispute.)

And Secondly, That all Matter has a power of moving it self, because what
ever is of the essence of Matter, must belong in common to all Matter
whatsoever.

And Thirdly, That all Matter may be moved with an equal celerity and degree of
Motion, because the Essences of things are indivisible, and therefore if Motion
be of the Essence of Matter, considered barely as such, and be not owing to
some other principle from without; it must belong equally to all Matter
whatsoever.

And therefore in the Fourth place, the reason why all Matter is not equally
moved, must be, that it is endued with a power of exerting or suspending its
Activity, either pro arbitrio for no reason at all, or by the measures of
Prudence, for the good of the World.

But if it be absurd, ridiculous, and contrary to experience, to attribute so
much Understanding, Will, or Power to every Stick and Clod, to every seemingly
stupid and insensible Block, if the communication of Motion from one body to
another be a manifest proof, that those numerical degrees of Motion are not
essential to either Body, and consequently not to Matter in the general
considered, then we must look still further abroad for some other Substance,
wherein this Power of self-activity shall reside, which Substance because it is
not Matter, must be immaterial; neither must we be content to say only that
selfactivity is an attribute belonging to some immaterial Substance, but that
it flows immediately from the very essence and constitution of it; because if
you take away this, you will then have nothing left but passive or passible
Extension, which is the Idea of Matter.

It is plain then, and will be plainer from what I shall say in an Appendix to
these Discourses, that there are two sorts of Substance, and by consequence two
sorts of Extension, a passive, and an active Extension in the World.

The First of which has no manner of activity or motion, but what is
communicated to it from without.

The Second has a power of selfactivity, or selfmotion within its self, which
it can impress upon the matter about it, and which it can either exert or
suspend as it pleases, or as it shall see cause.

For that Being, whatever it is, which cannot suspend its motion is passive in
it, and consequently is moved from without, and that which cannot exert it from
it self, has no power of selfactivity from within; but that which can do
either of these when ever it pleases, as it has been proved, that it can be no
other then an immateriall, so it must be granted to be a free Agent; and
therefore to deny that there is such a thing as freedom of Will, or liberty of
Action in Men, is in effect to assert, that they are as very Clods, as the Dirt
they tread on; and that they are not partakers of an immaterial Nature.

The Ancients were so sensible of the Truth of what I have here asserted, that
matter implies Necessity, and mind self-activity, and by consequence Freedom.
That Plutarch in his de placitis Philosophorum lays it down as the General
sense of the Philosophers of the earliest Times, (...). That is, it is
impossible that matter should be the only principle from whence all things
proceed, but we must also add to this an active, or intellectual principle,
which shall be the cause of Order, Beauty, and diversity in the matter. For
this reason it was that the Sadduces who denied the existence of any immaterial
Principle, subjected the Government of all humane Actions, to a resistless
Necessity and Fate; but the Pharisees who looked upon themselves, as made up of
two distinct and contrary Natures, or as consisting of an active and a passive
Principle, an immaterial Soul, whose vigor was blunted, and its activity
diluted by the intimate union of a material, gross and earthly Body, did with
better reason assert, that there was a mixture of Freedom and Necessity, in
humane Life, as Josephus and Abraham Zacuth have reported.

And that the Soul and Body are the two principles of Liberty on the one hand,
and Fatality on the other, is likewise acknowledged by Lactantius in that
Chapter which I have already cited in these words. Tu quidem non peccas, quia
liber es ab hoc corpore, non concupiscis, quia immortali nihil est necessarium.

Lastly, This blending or mixture of Necessity and Freedom, is likewise
acknowledged by Pythagoras, or whoever was the Author of those truly Golden
Verses that go under his Name, for Porphyry and Jamblichus, do both of them
assure us, that he left no Writing behind him; and besides the want of the
Pythagorick Dorisme does sufficiently discover, that it is a Poem of a much
later Composure.

(...)
(...)
For a small fault, do not thy Friend forgo,
But curb thine Anger, ere it lawless grow,
For Fate with Freedom is together joined. --
But it is still further admirable to observe, how exactly St. Paul jumps in
his sentiments of Things, with the opinion of these ancient Philosophers: For
he also makes the Flesh, or the union of the Soul with matter, to be the cause
of all those inordinate desires, whereby it is assaulted, though otherwise when
she is retired within her self, and disintangled by cool and serious
Meditation, from this bodily Encumbrance, all her natural tendencies are to
Goodness, or which is all one to the enjoyment of perfect Happiness and Rest.
It is and must always be the nature of every cogitant Being, to be carried
forth, with a perpetual desire of being Happy, which blessed End being only
attainable by the measures of right Reason and Prudence, it can be nothing but
Ignorance and Blindness, or want of due heed and attention, or Lastly, the
disquiet and disorder of our Passions, all which are owing to the matter which
we carry about us, and are in their several degrees, so many approaches toward
an absolute and uncontrollable Necessity, which can be the cause of any Sin, or
folly of which we are at any time guilty.

So St. Paul, Romans 7. 14. The Law is Spiritual, but I am carnal sold under Sin.
And v. 18. For I know that in me, that is, in my Flesh dwells no good thing.
And v. 20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but Sin
that dwells in me. And v. 23. But I see another Law in my Members, warring
against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the law of Sin,
which is in my Members. In which and other places already mentioned, and now
needless to be again repeated, he very truly and wisely asserts the mind or
inward man to be a principle of Freedom, whose nature and Business it is to
determine its self according to what is most suitable to its true Interest, of
which when it is not violently carried away by the importunity of passion, and
sensual pleasure, it is a proper and impartial Judge, but being united to a
Body which is the seed and source of every evil desire and Inclination, it is
by their perpetual solicitation diverted from its proper course, and imposed
upon by false appearances of profit, interest or pleasure, so as it cannot so
easily discern what is for its true advantage, and before it has sufficiently
considered of things, proceeds to action, which is so far sinful, as it might
have been avoided by care and circumspection, and so far more or less an
approach to absolute Necessity, as it is more or less influenced by the tumult
and disorder of the material or necessary principle in us.

So that in every virtuous action, there is an instance given of absolute and
untainted Freedom, because in these the Mind considers wholly and indifferently
of the true worth and value of things, and determines concerning them, with an
equal and unprejudiced Judgment, and proceeds all the way upon steady
principles, of Truth and Reason: But in all Vice there is a mixture of Freedom
and Necessity together. Of Necessity because all Sin is owing to the
predominance of the necessary or material cause, and yet of Freedom, because if
that predominance cannot possibly be overcome, by our utmost diligence, or
circumspection or power, this perfectly destroys the nature of Sin, and makes
us only passive in what we do.

This is the meaning of those other places already cited, v. 15. That which I
do, I allow not: For what I would, that do I not, but what I hate that do I.
And v. 19. The good that I would I do not, but the evil which I would not that
I do: That is, the Will of Man properly so called, is a principle of action,
steared and directed by the Understanding, and so is naturally carried forth to
nothing but what is reasonable and fit to be done; and therefore every wicked,
or which is all one, unreasonable desire is a violence done to the natural bent
and tendency of the humane Will, and is the effect of that union, which there
is betwixt the necessary principle and the free, by which it comes to pass that
the latter of these, if it be not perfectly overcome, yet being perpetually and
strongly solicited, it is morally impossible for it to keep so strictly upon
its Guard, as not sometimes to be imposed upon, and still the more it yields,
the more weak and infirm it grows, and the less able to make any tolerable
resistance for the future: Besides that it cannot be that considerations of
Virtue should be warm upon our Minds at the same time, when temptations of Lust
and Pleasure from without, have a powerful influence upon them, for these two
are inconsistent together, and do as the Logicians are used to say by
contraries, expel one another out of the same Subject.

Now then, says St. Paul, v. 17, and 20. It is no more I that do it but Sin
that dwells in me. No more I, that is, it is not the pure intellectual nature
in me, which is truly and properly my self, and which has no tendency but to
reasonable Courses, but Sin that dwells in me, that is, it is the animal or
brutish nature, resulting from the union of the Soul with Matter, which by
perpetual importunity and solicitation does by degrees overpower the guards of
Reason, and amounts almost to a necessity of doing evil.

But here it is to be taken notice, before we pass any further, that this
Pronoun ( I) in this Chapter, is used by St. Paul, in a threefold acceptance.

First, It signifies the whole Person, consisting both of Soul and Body, of a
purely immaterial, and of an animal or fleshly Nature, v. 15, 16. For that
which I do, I allow not, For what I would that do I not, but what I hate that
do I: If then I do that which I allow not, I consent unto the Law that it is
good, and v. 19, For the good that I would I do not, but the evil which I would
not, that I do.

Secondly, It is taken for the pure intellectual and abstracted Nature, v. 20,
etc. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but Sin that
dwells in me.

And then Thirdly and Lastly, It is taken otherwhile only for the animal or
fleshly Life, v. 18. For I know that in me, that is, in my Flesh dwells no
good thing: For to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is
good I find not.

It is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me, (...): Sin is (...),
or (...), by which word the nature of it is very aptly signified, and it is a
very fit exposition of v. 19. The good that I would, I do not, but the evil
which I would not, that I do. For the Will, as I have said, is naturally
directed toward Happiness, which can only be obtained by reasonable and
virtuous Courses, so that all Sin has something of involuntary in it, because
it is naturally productive of nothing but mischief and inconvenience to us, and
by consequence is a missing of that Mark, to which our Wills are intentionally
directed, which is exactly the sense of (...). So the Etymologist whose words I
will set down, because they contain a very pat Interpretation, of this place of
St. Paul, (...).

And again, (...) from whence it is plain, that in the very word (...) there is
something of involuntary denoted, and that it does very properly shadow cut
unto us, that mixture of Necessity and Freedom, which there is to be found in
every sinful action, and what if (...) and (...) in the Greek, should all of
them be thought to owe their derivation to the Verb hamar Ligavit, or Manipulos
fecit in the Hebrew Language, from whence homer Manipulus, which was a Pledge,
or Earnest-penny, or an acknowledgment that the rest of the harvest was equally
due to him, to whom the Homer it self was consecrated and offered up; but this
is a small Criticisme, and indeed an improbable one into the bargain, which I
do not stand upon.

A third cause which I shall assign of the great prevalence and growth of
Calvinistical Doctrines, is this; that notwithstanding when matters are
examined to the bottom, they are destructive of piety and holy living, yet to
the careless and unthinking view of many of Mr. Calvin's Disciples and
Adherents, they have an appearance of an extraordinary sanctity, by vilifying a
man's self at such a prodigious rate, and by magnifying the Grace of God,
without which I acknowledge we can do nothing as we ought, to so unreasonable a
degree, as includes in it the utter ruin and destruction of all the powers and
faculties of the mind of man, which nature will not permit, and therefore God
does not and cannot possibly be supposed to require.

A fourth reason which I believe to have been a motive to Mr. Calvin to
propagate this Doctrine, and I am sure in the nature of things it was not only
a possible, but a very probable reason, is, that in the Church of Rome there
were such things as Pardons and Indulgences to be had upon occasion, which gave
an Artificial ease to the consciences of men, when the reflection upon the past
wickedness and follies of their life, would either have driven them into
perfect despair, or at least made them very uneasy and troublesome to
themselves; and the finding out a cheap expedient, an expedient grounded in the
very nature of things, and consequently such as might be had for nothing, such
as was not exposed to the envy of the Papal Indulgencies and Dispensations,
could not choose but be very serviceable to the Inventor of it, and must needs
draw abundance of Fishes into his Net: for men do very easily excuse themselves
for what is past, when they consider they could not help it, and then being
listed into such a Party, where all take themselves to be of the Elect, added
to this other comfortable consideration, that the Elect cannot possibly fall
away from Grace; This makes them look not only without remorse, but with
satisfaction and pleasure upon the enormities of their past life, they will
repeat them and chew them with a Gusto, as I have seen many of this sort of
People do, as being the unavoidable consequences of the beastly, and as I may
call with a great deal of reason, the unnatural state of nature. But now they
tell you their pardon is sealed, and they are sure it is impossible for them to
miscarry, which is Milk and Honey without Money and without Price, a
Calvinistical Dispensation at once more cheap and more effectual then any his
Holiness can afford at Rome, which was thought for many years to have been the
only staple of that profitable Trade; for it is profitable to the cause of
Calvinism, and to the interest of a separation that might be justified upon
other grounds; though it be more effectually promoted by this, and though the
Pope indeed in point of ready money, have perhaps the start of the Doctors of
Geneva.

Which brings me to the fifth thing, and that is, that this Doctrine of
Election on the one hand, and of absolute rejection and reprobation on the
other, is apt to fill men with insolence and pride, with an high opinion of
themselves, and with a contempt and hatred of others; and so is at once a
natural cause of separation, and of an obstinate and inveterate continuance in
it. Whether the grounds of such separation be reasonable or no, which, as it
did confirm and strengthen the separation from the Church of Rome, (a thing
that was otherwise necessary to be done without fancying any such eternal
decrees to make themselves proud, and to breed an hatred and contempt of those
from whom they separate for justifyable reasons) so I reckon likewise that it
is the great Pillar of the Schism from our Church at this day, which as it
pretends to greater purity, so it proceeds upon an opinion that the Separatists
for it are the Elect of God, while we from being peaceable and sincerely honest
without terms of art, ^or being good Subjects without any reserve, and for
being good Christians without censuring all as Reprobates, that differ from us,
are sometimes pityed, and at other times despised as unregenerate Wretches,
being yet in our sins and in the state of nature, that is, in such a state in
which there is no salvation, and in which there is no other prospect but of
Eternal death, and a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation to devour the Adversaries. This, if it be examined, will be found
to be the general Ear-mark and Characteristique of the Separation; and I am of
opinion, that there cannot be a better service done to the Church or to
Mankind, then by exposing such pernicious doctrines, so injurious to God, and
so destructive to the peace and quiet of the world, to that disgrace and infamy
which they deserve.

But sixthly and lastly, the last thing which I shall mention, as having given
occasion and encouragement* to so dangerous a doctrine, is the overheated zeal
of St. Austine, St. Jerome and others of that age against Pelagius, who though
it neither can nor must be denied, that he was much to blame, that he
attributed too much to the Powers of Nature, and too little to the helps and
Assistances of Grace, yet it is equally certain that those who opposed him both
in that age and afterward, went too far into the other extreme; it must
likewise be acknowledged to the credit of our Country, in which he had his
birth, that he was a very wise, as well as virtuous person, and that for the
clearness of his reason, he had incomparably the advantage of all his
adversaries put together; and upon supposition that his last concessions were
not extorted from him by the violence of his opposers, but by the evidence of
truth, and by a more serious enquiry into the sense of Scripture, and into the
nature of things, (for our belief of these divine assistances is founded in
both:) I should make no very great scruple to affirm, that he was a tolerably
Orthodox Divine. And thus much shall suffice to have written upon this weighty
Subject concerning Freedom and Necessity, and concerning their several bounds,
borderings, and interfering mixtures, together with the genuine causes and
effects of the one and of the other.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS of the Two SERMONS.
THat those places wherein God is said to have hardened the heart of Pharaoh
are to be understood, in their naked and Grammatical sense, that is, that God
did really harden the heart of Pharaoh as the Scripture affirms him to have
done. Page 1, 2 A short and true survey of the behavior of the Egyptians
toward the children of Israel from their first entrance into the Land of
Egypt, till their departure out of it, and the drowning of the Egyptians in
the Red Sea from p. 2 to 7 From whence a true account is given of the reason
why God hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and it is likewise shown that this
hardening is not to ^e looked upon under the notion of a sin but of a
punishment for former sins. from p. 7. to 10 God cannot with justice condemn a
man to everlasting torments, merely because be did not or could not understand
his duty. p. 10, 11 Part of the ninth Chapter to the Romans relating to this
matter explained, and the true extent of Gods dominion over his Creatures
assigned. from p. 11 to 22 The hardening of obstinate and inveterate sinners is
so far from being any injustice, that it seems absolutely necessary to the due
administration of the divine justice in the government of the world. from p. 22
to 25 There is nothing in it for which a Sinner can justly expostulate with
God, as having suffered any wrong, because it is a thing perfectly of his own
choosing. from p. 25 to 27 It is the same thing in effect with the taking away
Sinners by untimely deaths before they have made their peace with God by
repentance, which no man denies, but God may justly do. p. 27, 28 In what sense
God may be said to be the cause of obduration or hardness in a Sinner. p. 28,
29 A Parallel of the Story of Nebuchadnezzar, with that of Pharaoh. from p. 30
to 35 The same was the case of the Builders of Babel, and in what sense their
Language may be said to have been confounded. p. 35, 36, 37 The same notion
confirmed from Deuteronomy. 28. p. 37 To the same cause must we refer all those divine
or Panick terrors infused into the minds of men by a supernatural way, by which
the Philistines, the Midianites, the Ammonites, Moabites, inhabitants of
Mountseir, Canaanites, etc. were destroyed. from p. 37 to 47 This is the
meaning of that Phrase the trembling of God, that is, a Panick terror seizing
upon the hearts of men by the immediate judgment of God, proved by the
circumstances of the place it self, and by Analogy of other interpretations, in
a short digression upon that subject. from p. 41 to 47 It is all one, when God
has absolutely decreed to destroy a People, by what means soever he b^ing that
destruction to pass. from p. 47 to 49 The Phoenomenon of Obduration farther
exemplified in other instances of Sihon, Saul, David, Rehoboam, Ahab, the Sons
of Eli, and the whole Nation of the Egyptians, and the justice of it showed
particularly in all the Cases proposed. from p. 49 to 67 An occasional
digression concerning the inviolable sanctity of the Persons, and the
unaccountable authority of Kings. from 56 to 63 The Objections of Episcopius
and Curcelleus, against the premises proposed, and reducible to three beads.
First, that they whom God is said to have hardened are also said to have
hardened themselves. p. 68. To which objection it is answered p. 69. that these
two are by no means incompossible or inconsistent with each other. p. 69, 70 An
enquiry whether the divine induration were of it self sufficient to necessitate
the Egyptian King, to do what he did without the concurrence of the will of
Pharaoh, and the difficulties attending each part of the Dilemma. p. 70, 71
First answer to the enquiry, that Pharaoh would have been necessitated to do
what he did by the divine induration without the concurrence of his own will;
but yet notwithstanding this does not excuse him from sin, for two reasons;
first, because the formality of sin consists in the choice of the mind;
secondly, because freedom and necessity being both of them determined the same
way, are not inconsistent together. from p. 71 to 74 The second Answer to the
Dilemma proposed, that Pharaohs hardening of his own heart may be understood
only of the outward appearance, because it seemed so to the standers by, and
this confirmed by the authority of Kimchi, Grotius and Josephus. from p. 74 to
77 Other Places produced by Curcelleus to prove that the hardening of Pharaoh's
heart, was wholly and entirely owing to himself, considered, from p. 77 to 79 A
second objection or elusion of this Hypothesis of the divine obduration framed
from those words, Exodus 8. 15. But when Pharaoh saw there was respite. p. 79,
80, 81 The inconsistency of Episcopius with himself and the insufficiency of
his solution demonstrated. from p. 81 to 83 What Episcopius attributes to the
intermission of Judgments that Curcelleus attributes to the lightness of them.
p. 83 The manifest unskilfulness and downright absurdity of the Curcellean
expedient, together with a reflection upon the power of prejudice, and a
further confirmation of the doctrine of Obduration. from p. 83 to 87 The last
Objection taken from Gods veracity considered, and proved, that in some cases
it is not inconsistent with the divine nature and perfections, to deceive, nay,
that it is so far from it, that the contrary is confessedly manifest by
experience. from p. 87 to 95 It is naturally impossible for God to be the
Author of Sin, together with the vanity of all scruples and objections that are
founded upon that supposition. Every action of a wicked and unreclaimable man
being under the sentence of impenitence and final obduration* is the effect of
many necessities combined together. Page 90, 91 The Conclusion, consisting of
four very short observations tending further to demonstrate the truth,
innocence, and usefulness of this Doctrine.
THE CONTENTS TO THE Apologetical Vindication*
THe Authors Apology for publishing his two Sermons. Page 1 A Summary account
given of the subject of the two Sermons, viz. that it was an attempt to
vindicate the literal and proper sense of Scripture in those Places where God
is said to have hardened, blinded or deceived men, against two sorts of
misinterpretations, one of which will not allow any of these texts to be meant
of any more then a Divine permission, and the other is so bold as to expound
them of a causeless or arbitrary obduration. p. 2 The defect and inconvenience
of the first way of interpretation and the impiety of the second demonstrated.
from p. 2 to 5 The usefulness and necessity of some expedient betwixt these two
extremes for the vindication of the honor of God, the credit of Religion, and
the Authority of the Scriptures. p. 5, 6 The expedient proposed, as contained
in the Discourse entitled the Middle way, etc. viz. that all these places are
to be understood in their first and most proper sense, of a positive act of the
divine will, whereby he hardens and blinds obstinate and inveterate Sinners by
way of punishment for their past offenses, and make them public Examples to
the world. p. 6, 7, 8 An appeal to experience, whether some men do not seem to
be hardened and blinded by a divine infatuation. p. 8 The Author submits it to
the judgment of his Reader, whether that Hypothesis which he has laid down be
not very well fitted to salve the Phenomenon which he pretends to explain by
it. p. 9, 10 The case of Pharaoh considered, with an Appeal to the Reader,
whether the seeming inconsistency betwixt those places where God is said to
have hardened Pharaoh's heart, and where he is said to have hardened his own
heart, has not been very fairly removed by the Author in his Discourse of the
Middle way. p. 9 The concurrence of Josephus in his sentiments with him largely
demonstrated, from p. 9 to 18 Josephus is still more express in the Case of
Rehoboam. p. 18, 19, 20 Curcelleus and Episcopius when sifted to the bottom,
confess every whit as much, as the Author of the Middle way has asserted,
proved undeniably from their own Writings* from p. 20 to 26 The Authors opinion
confirmed by two plain citations out of Dr. Hammond to the same purpose;
together with his deserved gratulation of himself, for having jumped so exactly
in his sentiments of things, with so famous and renowned a Champion of the
Church of England, p. 26, 27, 28 But yet Doctor Hammond is more cautious then
needs must, or then is consistent with his own concessions, together with a
further Vindication of the Doctrine of Obduration, both as to it is Justice with
respect to God, and as to its usefulness with respect to men. from p. 28 to 32
Two reason^ which have made many learned and pious persons, cautious of
admiting this doctrine of obduration. First reason l^st God should be the
Author of sin, a thing in its own nature impossible and absurd, as is largely
demonstrated. from p. 32 to 39 The second reason founded upon a too nice and
scrupul^us detestation of Calvinistical Doctrines, in answer to which it is
shown that this Doctrine of Obduration is so far from favoring the
Calvinistical pretenses, that it perfectly overthrows them. p. 39 Four
instances made use of in the Discourse called the Middle way, which the Author
thinks it necessary for the more complete satisfaction of all scruples, more
particularly to insist upon. viz. 1st. Of Nebuchadnezzar; 2d of Ahab; 3d of
Absalom; 4th of Judas Iscariot. The mistake of St. Jerome in understanding
some* part of the Story of Nebuchadnezzar relating to his transformation in a
literal sense. from p. 40 to 43 A true representation of the whole Story of
Nebuchadnezzar further illustrating and confirming the Hypoth^sis of the
Author, together with a clear and solid exposition of the 4th Chapter of the
Prophet Daniel, wherein it is contained. from p. 43 to 53 Some practical
Remarks or Observations from the Story of Nebuchadnezzar, showing that Kings
are accountable to none but God, and that their Persons are in all cases
inviolable and sacred, notwithstanding that it may so happen in some certain
cases, such as those particularly, which the History of Nebuchadnezzar will
furnish us withal, that we may and ought to refuse to execute their Commands,
or give them that sort of obedience which is called Active, but that in all
cases whatsoever, Passive obedience, or non-resistance to the Person of the
King, whatsoever we suffer by it, is of absolute necessity. And lastly, that we
are always to obey as far as we can, and that if we have refused at any time to
give an active obedience, upon account of the sinfulness or detestable iniquity
of the terms enjoined, yet as soon as those terms shall be changed into such as
are more tolerable, we are under the same Obligation as before. from p. 53 to
60 The Author excuses his prolixity upon the first instance of Nebuchadnezzar,
and promises to contract himself in those which follow, but sit fides penes
Authorem. The case of Ahab considered more particularly. from p. 60 to 82 The
Vision of Micaiah the son of Imlah was not a real but imaginary thing, but yet
it signifies thus much at least, that God himself did really and positively
concur to the deception of Ahab. from p. 60 to 63 Which is still further
confirmed by reflecting upon such other Iconismes to be found in Scripture; as
in the vision of St. Stephen, Acts. 7. 55, 56; and the description of the day
of Judgment. Matthew. 25. 31, 32. etc. from p. 63 to 66 That it was a blessed
Spirit that deceived Ahab's Prophets, and, by consequence, himself. p. 56. 67
An objection against this from the construction of the Parable of Job,
answered, and the same thing still further confirmed that a blessed Spirit may
be and has been actually employed by God, to harden and deceive. from p. 67 to
71 But yet it is not denied but that God does sometimes actually employ evil
and degenerate Spirits upon his errands, which is further evinced from the form
or construction of the Parable of Job, and from the extraordinary nature of
those works, which are ascribed to Satan in that Sacred Volume. from p. 71 to
74 The Author's opinion of Miracles, that real and true Miracles have been
wrought by false Prophets, false Christ's and false Apostles, with an
explanation of the (...), which we translate not altogether so properly, lying
wonders. 2 These. 2. 9. from p. 74 to 77 In miracles three things to be
considered; 1st. their causes; 2d. their effects; 3d their tendency, or design;
and that without considering all these together, we cannot safe^y assent to any
doctrine which is or is pretended to be built upon them. from p. 76 to 80 That
God does not only endue false Prophets with a power of Miracles, but also
sometimes with a persuasion that they speak the truth, the better to harden and
deceive the world. p. 80, 81 1 Pet. 5. 8. Explained. p. 81, 82 The Case of
Absalom considered, and proved that we may as well or rather better suppose God
to have enflamed the lustful disposition of Absalom, then the Tyrannical one of
Nebuchadnezzar, because Adultery is only a private Injustice, but Tyranny, a
public Rapine, and an epidemical plague. p. 82, 83 That the Wives of David
whom Absalom enjoyed were not legitimae Uxores, but Concubinae. p. 83, 84,
Several other considerations touched upon, to prove that this fact of Absolom's
in the sight, and presence of the people, and with their approbation, could be
no other than a Divine or supernatural obduation on all hands. p. 85, 86 The
same thing further confirmed from the circumstances of the story, p. 86 87 From
the express denunciation of God himself. p. 87. and from the reasonableness of
the thing, and its sutableness to the General Hypothesis of Obduration. p. 87,
88 It is most probable from the consideration of the Divine Goodness, that all
those who were spectators of this horrid scene, were not irresistibly consigned
over to a state of Impenitence and Obduration. p. 88, 89. But yet that this is
very far from being and encouragement to any to continue in a course of sin p.
89, 90 All the instances of duty are some way or other reduceable to interest,
and the justice of Gods hardening and blinding obstinate and inveterate Sinners
from thence asserted. p. 90* 91, 92 That the loathsomeness and uncleanness of
Adultery, is no argument why God may not concur to it in cases of this nature,
by a positive Act of his will. p 92 93 That the same Argument may prevail upon
a squeamish fancy, to deny the Divine extension, without which, notwithstanding
his existence cannot be proved, from p. 93 to 97. The case of Judas Iscariot,
in which the Author refuses to engage himself in the controversy of future
contingencies, only affirms two things, 1. That it was beforehand designed by
God, that one whose name should be Judas should betray his Master. 2. That in
the fullness of time Judas Iscarot was necessitated to betray him. p. 974 Both
of these assertions largely proved. from p. 97 to 121 David's numbering the
people, and Peter's denying his Master, both of them instances of divine
Obduration, proved the first, from p. 101 to 105* the second from p. 105 to
112. The case of Judas resumed, and its agreeableness to the Authors Hypothesis
further explained. from p. 112 to 114 Judas whence called Iscariot, with a
discovery of the mistakes of several Learned men about that matter, and some
further testimony given to the truth and Authority of the scripture. from p.
114 to 121 Having insisted largely upon the particular cases that have been
mentioned above, the Author proceeds to a General observation, that what God
may justly do to one man, that he may also do in the same circumstances to an
whole Nation, or to all Mankind, which is but an aggregate of single men. p.
121 Which is applied to the Egyptians. p. 121, 122. And to the Jews. from p.
122, to 125 Four reasons assigned of the prejudice the Jews had conceived
against the person of Christ, which were in part the causes of their blindness,
and by degrees of their obduration. from p. 125 to 130 The insufficiency of
those reasons to justify or excuse the Jewish prejudices, together with the
plain demonstration which his Birth, his Miracles, and his Doctrine compared
with the time of his coming into the world, the Sacrifices and ceremonies that
were Typical of him, and the prophecies that had been uttered and revealed
concerning him, did afford to the undeniable assurance of that weighty truth,
that he was indeed the very Christ, and the Messiah that was to come, and that
he was to be, not a Triumphant, but, a suffering person. from p. 130 to 135 But
yet the fatality was not yet so strong, but that it might have been overcome,
had not the Jews provoked God by new impieties to inflict a farther degree of
obduration. p. 135 Nothing less than such an obduration can give an account of
that execrable derision of Christ upon the Cross, when in the bitter Agonies of
his body and soul, he called out with a loud and mournful Voice, Eli, Eli,
lamasabachthani, saying, he calls for Elias. p. 136 Other instances to prove
that if could be nothing less than a judicial hardening with which the minds of
the Jews of that Age were generally possessed. from p. 136 to 139 But yet
notwithstanding, after all this the Jews are not perfectly given over all this
while, but on the contrary the Apostles in pursuance of their Masters
Instructions, did make the first offers of Salvation to the Jews, by whom
though it is true, they were scornfully rejected, yet this is only to be
understood generally speaking, for there were some on whom the light of the
Gospel did shine as brightly as in the Gentile world, and in who in fruitful
influences of the Sun of Righteousness, did produce an acknowledgment of the
cause from whence they proceeded, by Faith, Repentance and obedience to the
Gospel; and lastly of those that were hardened or infatuated by a positive act
of the Divine will, yet all, were not in an irreversible or irrecoverable
estate, as is manifest from several passages of St. Paul in his Epistle to the
Romans, and particularly in those Chapters, viz. 9, 10, 11. which are thought
to give such ample testimony, but without any ground or color of reason, to
the Calvinistical reprobation. from p. 139 to 144. From this account of God's
dealing with the Jews as it is stated in the Gospel, and in the Epistle to the
Romans, the Author raises the Four following observations. First that the
design of the 9th, 10th, and 11th, to the Romans, is only to give an account of
the rejection of the Jews, and the reasons upon which it depended. p. 145
Secondly, that one reason of their rejection was owing to themselves, which is
so far from favoring the doctrine of reprobation that it perfectly destroys
it. p. 145, 146. Thirdly, that the Jews notwithstanding their blindness, and
the hardness of their hearts, had all this while a zeal for God, and out of
that very principle Persecuted Christianity; from whence the Author inferrs
that zeal is not always according to knowledge, that there may be zeal where
there is not truth, and that the zeal or heat of a Party is by no means a
certain and conclusive argument that they are in the right. From p. 146, to 148
Fourthly, the Author thinks it very reasonable to believe, that the judgment of
hardness and blindness, which was inflicted upon the Jews, was after the
Crucifixion still greater, more strong, more universal, more nigh to
irreversible in some, and in others more certainly and irrecoverably
irreversible than it was before. from p. 148 to 154 But after all he thinks it
very unreasonable to believe that any one Jew is, or ever was so hardly dealt
with, that he never was under any the least possibility of Salvation, but was
concluded under an insensible and irrecoverable hardness or blindness from the
day of his Birth to that of his Death. p. 154, 155 But yet this hinders not,
but God may justly withdraw the more special and peculiar assistances of his
Grace, which he is not obliged to vouchsafe to any, and much more to those that
have abused them, as well from the Posterity of those that have so abused them,
as from the Criminals themselves, and he may take the advantage of their proper
sins, which it is at his pleasure to punish when ever he will, much sooner then
otherwise he would have done; as on the contrary, for the sake of pious and
obedient Parents be does often deferr and protract the punishment of their
disobedient posterity, giving them farther time and more opportunities, greater
assistances and more powerful convictions, that they may Repent, or to render
them the more in excusable if they do not, and that this is the true meaning of
his Visiting the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, to the Third and
Fourth Generation, and his showing mercy unto Thousands of them that love Him
and keep his Commandments. Exodus 20, 5, 6. from p. 155, to 158 Or else this
place of Exodus and others of the same import, may be understood of those
effects or acts of the Divine Will, which are despotical and arbitrary, and
which as it is lawful at any time, that is, not inconsistent with the justice
and goodness of his nature, for God to inflict upon any person, and without any
occasion extrinsique to the positive determination of his own mind that it
should be so, so he may the sooner exert them, as a Testimony of his
displeasure, for the disobedience of those of whom we are descended; as on the
contrary, for the sake of their obedience, he may and does suspend even those
acts of his despotical power, which it is at all times lawful for him to exert.
p. 158 There are some things which God may do by virtue of his despotical power
as he is supreme Lord, and others which he may do as an exercise of his
justice, or which belong to him as he is the great Judge or Justiciary of the
World. p. 158 To the first head there are two things belonging, first the
substracting all but so much necessary Grace, as without which it is impossible
either to withstand Temptations, or to repent so effectually for having yielded
to them, as is necessary for the attainment of Eternal happiness, or for the
avoiding of Eternal torment. Secondly, the inflicting all those Calamities,
whether in body, mind or fortune, which are not less eligible than nonentity
it self, and both of those as they may be inflicted for no reason at all, but
only the arbitrary determination of the divine will, so much more when there is
a reason for it, though that reason be not founded in our selves, but our
Parents, or Progenitors, of whom we are descended, in which case
notwithstanding, these inflictions are arbitrary with respect to us, yet they
are not so with respect to those of whom we are immediately born, or at a
farther distance, mediately descended, by the intervention one or more of
Generations betwixt our selves and those who are the cause of our calamity. p.
158. 159. 160 The despotical or arbitrary power of God asserted from the case
of the man that was born blind. Joh. 9, 2, p. 160 to 161 This sovereignty or
absolute Dominion of God over his creatures in that sense and latitude which
has been already explained, is acknowledged and humbly submitted to by Job. c.
1. v. 20, 21, 22. and c. 2. v. 10, 11 from p. 161, to 163 Nay it extends
further then the instance of Job will go, for that will go no further than to
loss of Estate, and Children accompanied with extremity of bodily pains, but
the case of Abraham interceeding in behalf of Sodom, Genesis 18. 23, 25. proves by
an unquestionable example in the sacred story, besides the reason of the thing,
which has been already considered, that this despotical or arbitrary power of
God extends as far as to life it self. from 163, to 166 The involving of good
men in the callamities which are inflicted for the sake of the wicked, is an
exercise of this power p. 166, 167 God cannot in justice condemn an innocent
creature to everlasting Torments, proved from the reason of the thing, and from
the expostulation of Abraham. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right,
Genesis 18. 25. and of Saint Paul. Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid.
Romans 9. 14. from p. 168, to 171 Upon occasion of the last mentioned place in
the Epistle to the Romans, the Author considers the rejection of Esau and the
preferring of Jacob who was the younger before him, as well, because this
instance is Connected by St. Paul with the last cited Text out of the 9th to
the Romans, and because it is made use of by the Patrons of the Praedestinarian
doctrine to assert the detestable cause of reprobation. p. 171, 172 Proved
largely that Jacob and Esau were Typical persons, and that the preferring the
one before the other, notwithstanding his Birthright, was not perfectly
arbitrary but depended upon Typycal reasons, that Jacob was the Evangelical and
Esau the legal administration, as is made undeniably manifest from several
places of Scripture never till now sufficiently understood, and from the
signification of their names in Hebrew, and from several Hieroglyphical or
symbolical circumstances to be meet with in their story, and belonging to their
persons. from p. 172 to 186 An Anacephalaeosis or recapitulation of what has
been said from the consideration of the Divine Justice, setting forth from the
premises, that there are some things which God cannot lawfully do, that is,
with consistence to himself and to his nature, and to those declarations which
he has made of himself in the Scripture, and that if there be any thing at all
to which his power does not extend, it must be the Condemning of necessary
Agents to Eternal Torments. p. 186, 187 A review of what has been said
concerning Jacob and Esau with this addition, that though the difference put
between them, which depended upon Typical reasons, were never so Arbitrary yet,
the Type excluded, it concerned only temporal blessings, which is nothing at
all to absolute reprobation. p. 187, 188 It is observed from the premises, that
those Chapters to the Romans which are brought to countenance the Calvanistical
doctrines, afford the strongest arguments against them. p. 188. It is so far
from being true, that the far greatest part of mankind are by an arbitrary act
of the Divine will condemned to Eternal Torments, that the Calvinistical
Doctrine it self, by which this monstrous dogma is asserted and Supposed, being
examined to the bottom, is inconsistent which the true notion of Damnation, and
with the acknowledgement of Calvin himself concerning it. p. 188, 189 Calvin
asserts, that there is need of an irresistible grace to hinder the worst of men
from being worse than he is, or the best from being as bad as the most
prostigate Villain that ever yet appeared upon the Earth. A Doctrine which let
it be never so monstrous, yet it is no more than what Calvin upon his
^rinciples is bound to assert as being the necessary and unavoidable
consequence of them. from 189 to 192 Neither is Calvinism only inconsistent
with it self as to the business of Damnation, but if the same Principles be
^dmitted for true, there can be no such thing as Salvation neither, as is
proved by representing the notion of that state which is called by that name:
so that after all the haughty Calvinistical pretenses, as if it were the only
true, and the only pure Religion, which they will needs establish in the world,
they do in reality overthrow all Religion, which is founded in a supposition of
liberty in this life, and in a belief of rewards and punishments to be
dispensed in the other. p. 192, 193 There is a very plain and close connection
betwixt the liberty of humane actions and the rewards and punishments of a
future state. from p. 193 to 195 But on the conrary, necessity is inconsistent
with the very nature and notion of punishment or reward. p. 195 All punishment
is either for amendment or example, but upon supposition of necessity there can
he no such thing as amendment in the Party Offended, neither can his punishment
be of any use or influence upon others. p. 195, 196 Another occasional
reflection upon the pains of the damned in the life to come proving, upon
supposition of necessity* that either they are not or they are unjust, the very
top of injustice, cruelty and oppression. p. 196, 197 The notion of necessity
inconsistent with the notions of guilt, repentance, and shame. from p. 197 to
200 And with the nature of Temptation, which unavoidably supposes freedom.
from p. 200, to 202. Necessity overthrows the nature and design of all
Religious duties, and is absoluely inconsistent with them. from p. 203 to 210
The main reason why the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is so much, and so
deservedly decried, is because it includes in it so flat a repugnancy to our
senses, because it is so full of absurdityes that a man can not be said
properly to believe it, it having no ground of credibility in it, but yet as
absurd and foolish as this Doctrine is, recko^'d by the Calvinists themselves,
the Calvinistical Doctrines are every whit a^ constant and perpetual a
contradiction to the actions and the Possions of humane life, to the universal
acknowledgments and unanimous attestation of all mankind, not excepting the
Calvinists themselves as the Doctrine of Transustantibation is or can be. from
p. 210 to 215 The case of indifferent things, about which so much stir has
been made, supposes Freedom on both sides, or else it is a controversy about
nothing. p. 214, 215 Another very just exception against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is that it overthrows the whole Fabric of the Christian
Religion, by destroying the Foundation upon which it stands, and that it is the
Testimony of those sensible Miracles by which it is confirmed, whereas
Transubstantiation supposes our senses to be deceived in their proper objects,
when they are duly circumstanced to take a right cognizance of them. Which if
it be admitted for true, we can not tell whither any such Miracles were ever
wrought or no, there being the same possibility of our senses being deceived in
one case as in another. p. 215, 216 And the same is likewise true of the
Doctrine of Reprobation, if it be admitted for true in the Calvinistical sense
for there is no question but God does reprobate obstinate and impenitent
sinners, the whole Economy of the Gospel is overthrown, all the duties
recommended in it are either destroyed or ^^erted, the design of Christ's coming
into the world is frustrate, and so is that of his passion and his
intercession. p. 216, 217 When St. John exhorts us to mutual love after the
example of God, 1. Joh. 4 8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is
love, it ought to have been considered, if the Calvinistical Doctrine be true,
that denominatio sumitur a part potiori; and therefore if we consider how
small the proportion of the elect is in comparison of those that are
arbitrarily doomed to Eternal Torments, it would have been a truer proposition,
and a more Legitimate inserence, He that hates not, knows not God, for God
is hatred, and more to the same purpose. from p. 217, to 221 It is by no means
in this case sufficient to say, that the reprobation of so great a number of
mankind, is owing to the Sin of Adam, who acted freely in what he did, for it
is impossible that a free action in him should be the true and proper cause of
a necessary nature in us. p. 221 Since therefore God did at least for see the
fall of Adam, and upon supposition of that fall, did reprobate so great a
proportion of Mankind, by concluding them under an irresistible pravity, it is
the same thing as if he had condemned them antecedently to the fall of Adam,
that is, without any respest or regard to it from all Eternity, or if he had
condemned the (...) the same state though Adam had not fallen at all, because a
simple decree, and a decree founded upon a condition that will certainly come
to pass, are to all intents and purposes the same. p. 222 But Mr. Calvin
confesses plainly, that God did plainly preordain the fall of Adam, and
therefore the former considerations return with greater force, if God so hated
us, and if he be the best and the more noble pattern for our imitation, then
ought we also to hate our selves and one another. from p. 222 to 224 The horrid
Blasphemy of this doctrine, and its inconsistence with the word of God, which
is the rule and measure of our Christian Faith aggravated from several
considerations. from p. 224 to 228 Three ways by which Christ may be said to
have redeemed us. p. 228 First he Redeems us from the Bondage of sin, or from
the Dominion of it in our hearts, and from the gloomy night of ignorance which
hovered over the Jewish and the Heathen world, by his example, his Gospel and
his Spirit, but where there is no liberty there can be no sin, where there can
be no endeavor or imi^ation, which suppose a freedom and a power of not
imitating and not endeavoring, there can be no example; to them that have it
not in their power to obey, the Gospel is in vain proposed, and the influences
of the spirit where they are irresistible, as Calvin ever supposes them to be,
cannot properly be said to redeem us in any measure from sin, but only to drive
us out of one necessity into another. p. 228, 229 Secondly Christ redeems us by
his satisfaction, but where there is no sin there needsno satisfaction neither
indeed in propriety of so speech can there be any, and where there is no
Freedom there can be no sin, so that after all the Calvinistical bitterness
against the Socinian Haeriticks, for so I call them and so I think them to be,
they themselves deny the satisfaction every whit as much, and with more
detestable circumstances than the Socinians themselves do. from p. 229 to 232
The third way of redemption is by the intercession of Christ, which though in
the Orthodox Creed, that is, in the Creed of those that believe rightly
concerning the nature of the humane soul and the nature of its Will, it be very
good ^^^ useful and intelligible sense, yet admit the Calvinistical Doctrine to
be true, and nothing is more useless, and impertinent; nay, nothing can
possibly be thought of more contemptibly ridiculous than that is. p. 232, 233
Again if we consider Christ as exercising the Office of supreme Judge, as he
will do at the last day, it is manifest that there can be nothing which can in
propriety of speech be called a judgment, where there is no difference made
betwixt the moral good or evil of things, and it is as certain, that in the
Calvinistical necessity which destroys the very nature of Morality and
Religion, no such difference can possibly be supposed; so that a judgment in
this case would be every whit as ridiculous at the last day, as an intercession
before it. p. 234, 235 And as nothing is more inconsistent with the whole
current of the Scriptures than the Doctrine of Reprobation, so neither is there
any thing so destructive of that meekness and humility which it was one of the
main designs of the Gospel to encourage and promote, nothing that is so
naturally productive of insolence and Pride, of a fastidious contempt and scorn
of one man toward another, nothing so exactly fitted to make Parties and
Divisions among men, and to continue and propagate those Divisions when they
are made, to the great prejudice of the public peace, and the perpetual
disturbance of the world. from 235 to 237 Six accounts to be given of the rise
and progress of the Doctrine of absolute reprobation. p. 237 First account to
be taken from a too inconsiderate interpretation of those places, wherein
Justification is ascribed wholly to faith, in opposition to the works of the
Law of Moses, or to that justifycation which pretends to be obtained by a
perfect obedience to the Laws of nature or an absolute and entire conformity in
all parts of our lives to the duties and obligations of natural Religion. p.
237, 238 Two reasons why justication could not be obtained by the Law of Moses,
the one drawn from the nature of the law it self, which was but a shadow of a
more perfect dispensation, and the other from the defectiveness and
imperfection of that obedience which was given it. p. 239 But neither was the
law of Nature, by reason of humane Frailty, which renders it morally impossible
for us to walk up to the utmost perfection of that Law, sufficient of it self
in order to this end. p. 240 A sin being committed, there are but five ways
possibly to be thought of by which justification, that is, the Remission of
that punishment which is due to it, may be or may possibly be fancied to be
obtained, the three first of which, viz. past innocence, present repentance,
and future obedience, are shown to be naturally insufficient in order to this
end. from p. 241 to 244 The fourth possible expedient is that of a gratuitous
remission on Gods part, and the fifth a proxenetical or vicarious expiation in
our stead. p. 244, 245 Three reasons especially why the later of these was
pitched upon as the most proper method of Justifying Offenders. from p. 245, to
247. to which a fourth possible consideration is subjoyn^d. p. 247 But though
this vicarious expiration by the death of his Son was the greatest Testimony
that God could possibly give us of his love to mankind, yet this will but serve
to aggrevate our disobedience, if we shall neglect so great Salvation. p. 248,
249 A more particular application of the premises to the nature of
Justification, wherein is shown, that though Repentance and obedience be
required as conditions on our part, yet this hinders not but that our
Justification is merely and solely the effect of Grace, and that we be
justified by faith only, by which the merits and satisfaction of Christ are
applied to every true believer, with some fresh remarks of the inconsistence of
the Calvinistical doctrine to the general strain and tenor of the Gospel. from
p. 249, to 257 The conclusion of this whole matter concerning justification,
with an appeal to the Reader whether the account that has been given, be not
such as ought to satisfy every unprejudiced and impartial person. from p. 257
to 259 The second account of the rise and progress of Calvinistical Doctrines
taken from those places of St. Paul, wherein he describes the lucta or
contention between the two Principles of the flesh and spirit, with a
description of those two Principles, what they are, and wherein the nature and
notion of Virtue and Vice do consist. from p. 259, to 261. The Description of
these two Principles, together with an enumeration of the genuine productions
and effects of both in the words of St. Paul. from p. 261 to 264 From the
respective predominancy of these two principles, either the one or the other in
every man, so he is denominated in Scripture either natural or spiritual, in
Greek (...) and (...). from p. 264 to 266 This notion of (...) seems to be
borrowed from the school of Plato. p. 266 A comparison betwixt the several
Hypostases or personalities of the Platonic Triad, with so many distinct
resemblances of them in the humane nature. from p. 226 to 268 Two reasons why
the notion of the word (...) or natural in the N. T. seems to be borrowed from
the Platonic School, from p. 268, to 272 However it is certain that in the
Language of the N. T. (...) and (...) are the same in opposition to (...) and
(...), by which the purely cogitant, intellectual, and abstracted nature is
denoted. from p. 272 to 276 The natural body and the spiritual body, what they
signify in that place of St. Paul, 1. Cor. 15. v. 44. (...) p. 275, 276 Two
possible advantages to be made of that contention which there is betwixt the
two Principles of the flesh and spirit, as that contention is described by
Saint Paul. p. 276, 277. First advantage, that St. Paul seems to speak in such
a manner of the spiritual principle, as if it were perpetually overcome by the
carnal, and were utterly unable to bring any thing to effect of it self, as
appears by the places there subjoyned. Romans 7. v. 14, 15, 17, 18, 23. p. 277.
This difficulty capable of a fourfold solution. First that even in profane
Authors there are expressions to be met with, that speak every whit as fully,
or rather more of the necessity of humane nature, by which notwithstanding not
a natural necessity, but only a moral is to be understood, and that moral
necessity is to be understood, not of any one action, but of the whole series
and course of a man's life taken together, with instances of such expressions
out of Euripides, Lactantius, and Seneca. from p. 278, to 280 That the Stoics
and Epicureans notwithstanding their Principles supposed nothing but matter in
the world, yet by the evidence of sense and experience, which gives perpetual
attestation to it in the inwardconsciousness and feeling of every man, they
were forced to admit the liberty of the will, as the Stoics sometimes do, and
the Epicureans pretended to explain it by material causes; and at other times
being convinced, that such causes were altogether insufficient for the
explaining such Phenomenon, they had recourse to an immaterial nature, both in
God and men's all which is largely proved out of Seneca and Manilius. from p.
282 to 297 The true notion of the word Aeternus, that it signifyes nothing but
the Aetherial matter, proved out of several passages of Seneca, Pacatus,
Mamertinus, and from the ancient Glossaries. from p. 214 to 290 How the word
Aeternus comes to denote an infinite duration. p. 287 That Decartez who was as
very a Materialist as the Stoics or Epicureans, did acknowledge the liberty of
the^ will. p. 297, 298 An Appeal to the Reader concerning the infinite folly
and madness of obstinately denying the liberty of the humane will,
notwithstanding we do perpetually feel it. p. 298, 299 Second answer to the
first advantage taken from the consideration of the contention between the two
principles, as that contention is described by St. Paul, viz. that if the words
of St. Paul produced p. 277. be to be understood of an absolute Fatalty, this
does not only destroy the necessity but the nature of obedience. p. 300 Third
answer, that by these means God is represented as the most cruel being that can
possibly be conceived, and that he begins the Tragedy of Damnation in this
life, that he may perfect it in the other. p. 300, 301. Fourthly and Lastly, it
is manifest from the words of St. Paul himself, that we have some degree of
strength and ability of our own, though it be not sufficient to produce a
perfect and entire obedience, and though it be morally impossible for it to
bear us harmless through all the parts of our lives. p. 301, 302 It is so far
from being true what the Calvinistical Doctors are used to maintain, that in
the nature of man considered abstractedly from the assistances of Divine Grace,
there is nothing to be found but an irresistible propensity to all manner of
evil, that on the contrary St. Paul himself supposes, that there are very
strong desires and tendencies to goodness implanted in us by nature, and it is
manifest by experience, that the first beginnings of Sin are accompanied with a
sensible regret and pain, and that it requires a considerable time and practice
upon himself, for a man to extinguish the natural tenderness of his mind and
will, so far as to be completely wicked without remorse or shame. from p. 303
to 305 Besides the natural congruiti^s which are planted in our minds, betwixt
virtuous actions and a reflecting Nature, all the instances of Virtue and
Religion whether they relate to our selves, to our Neigbour, or to God, are
founded upon such plain and such undoubted principles of reason, that it is
rather a Miracle that Men are so bad as they are, then that they are no worse,
which Mr. Calvin makes to be the effect of a perpetual Miracle, by ascribing it
whol^y to an irresistible Grace, overpowreing the ungovernable impurities of
our Nature largely represented. from p. 305 to 320 But for all this the Author
does not pretend that the Grace of God is useless, or that it is not of
absolute necessity, in order to the right conduct and governance of humane
Life: and for the more full understanding of the case, and the avoiding the two
equally dangerous extremes of Calvin and Pelagius, he lays down in Seven
particulars what his opinion is concerning the operations of the Holy Spirit
upon the minds of Men. p. 320 First, there is no instance of our duty which may
not in some sort and degree be performed by our selves. p. 320 Secondly, there
is a common Grace or Spirit diffused over all the World, which exerts it self
according to the several capacities and fitnesses of things and persons. from
320, to 322 Thirdly there is a more peculiar Grace and influence of the Holy
Spirit, Watching over the Church, then over the rest of Mankind. p. 320, 321
Fourthly, even the particular instances of our duty, in their uttermost
perfection, are owing to a concurrence of the Spirit of God. from p. 323, to
332 But yet this hinders not, but that the whole action in such cases may in
some sense be ascribed to our selves, as is largely represented upon several
accounts. p. 325, 326, 327, 329, 330, 331 That after all it must be confessed,
that our justification is wholly owing, not to our selves, but to the Grace of
God and the Righteousness of Christ, applied to us by Faith and Repentance; and
this whether we consider our actions singly by themselves, or whether we
reflect upon the whole course of our lives. p. 331, 332 ^or what has been said
of single Actions in the fourth particular, that without the Grace of God they
will want their utmost perfection, integrity and consummation, the same is much
more true in the fifth place of the whole course of our lives, that this can
much less be managed as it ought to be without the conduct and assistance of
the Spirit of God. from p. 332 to 336 Sixthly, though God afford to all
sufficient Grace, and to the Church more than to the rest of the World, yet he
dispenses it sometimes in a more plentiful proportion, as a proprietor may do
by Arbitrary measures, for no reason at all but what is found^d in his own will
and pleasure. p. 336, 337 Seventhly and lastly, a Historical or notional Faith
in Christ is obtainable by the use of ordinary mean^, reading, and study, and
an impa^tial inquiry into the truth of things* (...) a practical influential
and saving Faith cannot be obtained without the Grace of God, as is farther
exemplisyed in the different case of Peter from that of the Centurion, and the
generality of the Jewish Nation. from p. 377 to 341 The Tenth, Twelfth and
Thirteenth Articles of the Church of England explained, and proved, that they
are no such friends to Calvinistical Doctrines, as the Calvinists would make
the world believe. from 343 to 351 But if the Articles of the Church should
happen to interfere, as they do not, with the Scriptures, we are excused by the
Twentieth of those Articles themselves, from acquiescing in their Authorities;
neither has the Church any power, if we believe that Article, to expound any
place of Scripture after such a manner, as to make it repugnant to another;
both of which things happen in the Calvinistical Doctrines, that they are
repugnant to some Scriptures, and they expound some Scriptures after such a
manner, as to make them perfectly inconsistent with others. from p. 251 to 253
The main inconvenience of the Doctrine of Reprobation is, that if it were
admitted to be the constant sense and tenor of the Scriptures themselves, yet
this instead of doing any Service to that Doctrine, would but destroy the
authority of the Scriptures themselves, as well as the veracity of God, and the
nature of all Morality and Religion. from p. 353 to 359 The Articles of our
Church acknowledge, that even General Councils may err, much more would it have
been p^ssible for a rational Synod to do so though our Church had asserted, as
it does not, the Doctrine of Reprobation. To which is added a recapitulation of
what has been said upon occasion of the Articles of the Church of England. p.
355, 356 But yet the Author does not after all deny, but there may be such a
thing as an irresistible Grace, nay he proves it both from the reason of the
thing, and from very many instances to be met with up and down both in the old
Testament and the new, though those instances were peculiar to those miraculons
Ages in which they happened, and have nothing to do with our times, wherein
those miraculous effusions of the Holy Spirit are unquestionably ceased. from
p. 356 to 368 The second advantage to be made from the consideration of the
Lucta or contention betwixt the Flesh and Spirit, is that the spiritual
principle mentioned by S. Paul may be pretended to be no part of the humane
nature, but only a supernatural influence of Divine Grace. p. 368 To which the
answer is twofold; first more directly, that St. Paul does manifes^^y assert
two opposite Principles in the nature of man considered by it self, and
secondly more remotely and consequentially, but no less pertinently and truly
then the other, that there is such an harmony and agreement betwixt the Divine
Spirit, and the spiritual or immaterial and abstracted principle in man, that
the same eff^cts are attributed to both because they are both of them causes of
a like nature, and because they do both usually concur to the production of
the same effect. p. 369 370 To all which it is to be added, that the very
notion of a mind or inward Man, or immaterial Principle of Action, includes in
it an assertion of Freedom likewise, an immaterial and a free agent being
terms convertible, and to all intents and purposes exactly the same, and so
are a necessary and a material agent. from 370 to 374 This notion confirmed
from the testimony of Plutarch showing that it was the opinion of all the
Ancient Philosophers, and from the Doctrine of the Sadduces and Pharisees, from
a citation of Lactantius, and a precept of Pythagoras in the Golden Verses, and
lastly from a further survey of several passages in the writings of St. Paul,
wherein the same truth is frequently inculcated, and very strongly asserted.
from p. 374 to 385 The remaining causes of the rise and ^rogress of the
Doctrine of Reprobation are very briefly* mentioned. from p. 385 to 391
The End of the Contents.
CITATIONS ENGLISHED.
P. 293. An minus est, etc.

IS the blessed Evidence that Heaven affords
Of things to come in shining Starry words;
Less then Beasts Entrails, or the noise of Birds?
For God himself does not his Face conceal,
But his bright Head and Body does reveal,
By rouling on in an Eternal round.
That men know him, and that having found
His constant presence and Majestic way,
They may his Laws with awful fear obey.
P. 294. Hoc opus, etc.

THis immense Body of the Massy frame,
And all the Members that compose the same,
A Divine Soul inspires, and through each part,
God with sage Counsel and well tempered Art,
Dispences Peace and friendship to the rest;
They help each other when they are oppressed:
And in the midst of strange variety,
The whole mass loves it self, and all the parts agree.
P. 294, 295. Innumerabiles quaestiones sunt, etc.

THere are many things which all Men grant to be, and yet we know not what they
are; that we have a Mind or Soul, by which we are incited and stirred up to
some actions, and restrained from others, all men will confess, but what that
Mind or Soul is which is our Governor and Guide, is every whit as difficult to
explain, as where it is; one will tell you it is a certain breath or blast,
another a certain harmony or proportion, another that it is the power or energy
of the Divine Substance, and a part of it; some will have it be nothing else
but a certain aerial, volatile and subtle matter, some say it is an incorporeal
or immaterial power, (that is the power or virtue of something which is not
matter) and others will have it be nothing but the temper of the Blood, or a
certain degree of heat which is sensible and vital. No wonder therefore if the
mind be so much to seek concerning other things, when as yet it is so great a
stranger to it self.

P. 296. Quis enim non videt, etc.

WHo sees not that this corporeal or material world is Governed by an
incorporeal or immaterial nature? and that the whole mass of which the great
body of the universe is composed by the same power and virtue of the Divinity,
by which it was made, is also animated and enlivened? is so ordered, that the
parts of it are useful and serviceable to each other? and the whole is
preserved in the same state and condition for so many Ages? Since therefore it
is so plain, that the sensible or material world, has need of some foraign
assistance to preserve it, it cannot be doubted, being so imperfect and
insufficient as it is, but that it also stood in need of being created.

P. 322. Ita dico, Lucili, etc.

SO I say, Lucilius, there is a Divine Spirit dwelling within us, that is a
perpetual observer, and a faithful remembrancer to us of all our actions, and
as we treat this Spirit kindly or unkindly, so we shall be sure to be treated
in like manner by it. There is no good man without God.

P. 334. (...).

BEfore you act consider what you do,
And be so wise, and to your self so true,
As to look back each Night upon the day,
And let no sleep your stolen sense betray,
Till you have first cast up your daily Score,
And reckoned with your self for all before;
What duty have I missed, what evil done?
P 341, 342. Clarus ob obscuram, etc.

Admired for hard words by the silly crowd,
But no wise Man his just applause allowed,
For fools by noises and by sounds are led:
By mystery and Cant and such like trade,
Let it be true or false* it is all a case,
All goes for truth that rumbles with a Grace.
P. 376. Tu quidem non peccas.

YOu offend not, because you are free from the body; you have no passions,
because nothing is necessary to an immortal nature.

The Passages above cited were therefore put into English, as well because they
were so large that they would break the sense too much in the opinion of the
English Reader, who could not understand them; as because those especially of
Seneca and Manilius contained so full an account of the ancient Doctrine of the
Epecureans and Stoics, concerning the Soul of man, and the Nature of God, as
those of Euripides, Lactantius, and Pythagoras, did likewise serve to confirm
the Doctrine of St. Paul, which is so strongly backed by Nature and experience,
concerning the Two principles or natures, the one of them free and active, the
other passive or necessary in Man: But now that the English Reader may be no
where at a stand, it is thought fit for his more ample satisfaction to
Translate the other Passages likewise, which are to be met with in the
Apologetical Vindication, before those already Translated: and first for that
of Ovid*

P. 53. Recens tellus, etc.

HEaven was but new delivered of the Earth,
Teeming with Seeds of her Etherial Birth,
When thou blessed Son of Japhet wise and bold,
Did with spring Water mix the fruitful mold,
And with hidden art form the enlivened Clods,
Into the shape of the all ruling Gods,
And when to Beasts thou gave a downward look,
Biddest Man stand up and read the Herald Book
Of Heaven where he his pedigree might view,
And aspire thither whence he downward flew.
P. 44. Valet Ina summis, etc.

GOd can turn all things upside down,
Debase the Peer, exalt the Clown,
And give obscurity renown.
P. 93. (...). etc.

Think when he got you what your Father did,
That thing alone may serve to quell your pride.
P. 96. (...), etc.

-- Full of God
Is every Path, and every Road,
The Market, the Exchange, the Sea, the shore,
He fills them all, and is himself still more.
P. 115. Sicut Grex totus, etc.

As the whole Flock, that in the fields do keep,
Catches the rot from one infected Sheep;
As Hogs their Swine Pox, and their Measle spread,
And Grapes in Grapes do mutual moldings breed.
P. 139. Quos perdere, etc.

Whom Heaven destroys it first infatuates*

P. 184. Horrida Membra, etc.

Arms spik'd with bristles, Members shag'd with hair,
Do a rapacious and fierce mind declare.
P. 204 (...), etc.

If fate will drive you, go along with fate,
Not vex your self, and to no purpose fret,
For Fate will drive you, because Fate is Fate.
P. 205. Duc me Parens, etc.

Lead me dread Sire, Lord of the Milky way,
Whether thou please, I Will readily obey;
Or against my will I Will sighing run the course;
For we must do it, if not by choice, by force.
P. 206. Jurent licet and Samothracum, etc.

Let the poor Man swear by the Gods all round,
From supreme Jove to the Gods under ground,
Yet no Man credit to his Oath will give,
Who contemnes Thunder with the Gods good leave.
For no worse plague than Poverty can be,
He that has that may despise destiny.
P. 206. Eadem necessitas Deos alligat, etc.

THe same necessity ties both Gods* and Men, Divine and Humane things are alike
subject to, and equally carried down by a torrent of Fate, impossible to be
stemmed: as he that made and governed all things, he wot those laws of fate,
by which himself is obliged; he commanded but once, but he obeys for ever.

P. 278. (...), etc.

I see what mischiefs my designs attend,
But too strong Passion does weak reason bend.
P. 279. (...), etc.

I hear you, and I grant it is true you say,
But Lust calls loudly, and I must obey.
Ib. Volo equidem, etc.

I Do what I can to live exactly as a wise man should do, but I am forced now
and then to step aside, for I am at best but Flesh and Blood, and these throw
me violently whether I will or no, sometimes upon the coast of Lust, and
sometimes upon that of anger; I grieve for my friends death, though I cannot
recall him, and I fear mine own, though I cannot prevent it. I am carried this
way and that way as the giddy Whirlwind* of my Passions drive me* and I offend
rather out of mere necessity, than out of deliberate choice or inclination. I
feel my self tripping, and yet I have not power to fix my foot, but am forced
to yield to the frailty of my Nature, which it is impossible for me always to
withstand.

P. 210. Quid est hoc, Lucili, etc.

TEll me my Lucilius if thou can, what is it that makes us look one way, while
we row another? that hurryes us back into the Port again, when we were almost
got to the end of our Voyage? what is it that boiles and works within our
Minds, and puts our thoughts into a dangerous ferment, that will not suffer
them to be consistent to themselves, or fixed with a wise and steady purpose of
mind upon any object or end? we waver in our counsels and designs; we pursue
nothing frankly, nothing entirely, nothing constantly. What other account can
possibly be given of such inconstancy as this, but that it is the effect of
folly, lust, and passion, which are not pleased with any thing for a
substantial reason, and therefore cannot be pleased with any thing long?

P. 282. Illud simul cogitemus, etc. i. e.

YOu ought to consider with your self, Lucilius, that if this universe, which
is as frail and mortal as your self, be yet notwithstanding sustained and
upheld by the Providence of God, that so we also, if we would imitate as we
ought to do that care and circumspection of the supreme being, might prolong
the time of our continuance among Men, if we would but deny our selves the
destructive enjoyment of those bodily pleasures, which are the cause to so many
of untimely Death.

P. 283. Imbecilli fluid que, etc.

WE and all things here below are weak and infirm, and but of short
continuance, let us therefore fix our meditations on things above, let us
contemplate the first Ideas and exemplars of all things formed and swimming in
the Aetherial matter, and God in the midst of them, casting about, and
considering with himself how to preserve those things by providence and care,
which of themselves neither are nor can be of an immortal nature, because the
fluid matter of which they are composed, is subject to perpetual flux and
dissipation; but God by wisdom supplies the inabilities of nature, for all
things above continue as they are, not because the Aetherial substances are not
liable to change, but because they are defended from it by the care and
goodness of Go^d. He is the great artificer of the world, the maker and
preserver of all things, who supplies what is wanting in the powers of matter,
by a virtue and sufficiency derived from himself.

P. 284. Corpusculum hoc, etc.

THis body of ours is but the Gaol and Prison of the Mind, it is this that is
tossed and tumbled to and fro, upon this it is that torments are i^flicted,
this alone that is subject to diseases, but the Mind is sacred and inviolable,
because composed of an Aetherial substance, which is so swift and so subtle,
that no manner of hold can be fastened upon it.

P. 284, 285. Mobilis and inquieta men's.

THe mind of Man is moveable and unquiet, it never stands still, but naturally
streams it self abroad, and shoots it self immediately to an infinite distance:
wherever there is any real or imaginary object, for its contemplation* it
wanders and is impatient, and glad of any thing that has the appearance of
new. Which you cannot wonder at if you consider the nature of the Soul, for it
does not consist of gross and earthy parts, but it descends from above out of
the Heavenly matter, and this is the nature of the Heavenly bodies, that they
are always in motion, wherefore the Soul, as being made of the Aetherial
matter, is like that Matter nimble in its motions, and is moved in it self, and
carried forth to things at the greatest distance from it, by a swift and
restless agitation, etc.

P. 285. Nunc me put as, etc. i. e.

YOu think I warrant you, that I am speaking of the Stoics, who are of opinion
that the soul of a Man who is pressed or squeezed to death, cannot pass through
all together, but is dispersed and scattered, as the rest of the fluid matter,
for want of free passage to come away together: but you are widely mistaken in
your opinion of me, and so are the Stoiques in their sentiments of the Soul;
for as flame cannot be oppressed, as it cannot be hurt or cut in sunder by any
blow or blast, but it returns again with greater force, and winds it self about
that which endeavors to restrain and curb it; so it is with the mind, which is
every whit as subtle and piercing as the flame, it cannot be pend up in any
place, how narrow soever, nor stifled and imprisoned within the body, but it
breaks through all obstacles by means of its subtle and Aetherial nature, and
as the Thunder and Lightning, when they are most fatal, either to man or beast
yet they pass off without leaving a discernable wound, so it is with the soul,
which is more subtle then fire, it passes through the body by the most
invissible pores.

P. 285, 286. Nihil est quod non expugnet, etc.

THere is nothing so difficult, which diligence and resolution will not
conquer: the bended arms of massy Oaks may be straightened, and crooked Timber
yields to the force of heat, and stretching out it self at length, complyes
against nature with the convenience of men. How much more easily is the soul
susceptible of any form or shape, a substance more soft and flexible, then any
liquid or fluid body whatsoever? For what else is the mind, but a concretion of
subtle or Aetherial matter disposed after a certain manner? and we see by
experience, that by how much the air or Ether is more thin and subtle then
any other body, so much the more easily does it yield and give way.

P. 286. Cum tempus advenerit, etc.

WHen the fatal time shall come, when the world about to be born again shall
die, then shall the Elements make War together, and Stars fall foul on one
another, and all the matter of the universe being set on fire, their order and
proportion which we now behold shall be turned into confusion, and all things
that are shall burn and blaze together in one universal flame, and we the happy
Souls, inhabitants of the clear and spotless Ether, when God shall dissolve
the fabric of the World, which by his power and wisdom he has built, shall
be dissolved and dissipated, as well as other concretions, and as a small
accession to the general ruin, shall return into our first principles again.

P. 289. Gaudent profecto, etc.

IT is natural for Heavenly Bodies to be in perpetual motion, and it is by a
constant and restless agitation that the Aetherial matter preserves it self
from being gross and heavy, by sticking together as the terrestrial particles
are wont to do.

Ib. Quicquid immortale est, etc.

WHatsoever is immortal, never is at a stay, and it is by perpetual motion that
the Aetherial matter is preserved.

P. 291. I nunc and animum, etc.

GO to now, and believe it if you can, that the mind of Man which consists of
the same sort of volatile and fluid substance, of which the Heavenly Bodies are
composed, is loath to change its condition, and to leave this body; when yet
the nature of God himself, who is every way surrounded and clothed, as with a
garment, by the Aetherial Matter, does either preserve it self, or at least
render its being more pleasant and delightful, by the swift motion, and
perpetual change of the parts of that subtle Matter among each other. --

P. 292. Jam nusquam, etc.

NAture exposed to our inquiries lies,
And God himself is viewed by mortal eyes;
For how can he that well known substance hide,
Of which a part does in our selves reside?
For who can doubt but God in us does dwell,
God that rules all things, and does all things fill?
Or that our Souls from Heaven do downward fly,
And ascend thither, when their bodies die?
P. 293. Quid mirum, etc.

CAn it seem strange that Men the world should know,
If the World live in them, and through them flow?
If each Man God in little do comprise,
Of the same substance, but of smaller size?
For who can doubt but that from Heaven we come? --
Scriptores qua veteris, qua sequioris aevi, in utroque opere laudati notatique.
A
AMbrosius. Anazagoras. Aratus. Articuli Ecclesiae Anglicanae circa Religionis
credenda constituti. Augustinus.
B
Basilius. Beverovicius. Beza. Biblia 2d veritatem. Hebraicam. Exversione
(...). Symmachi. Vulgata, Junii, and Tremellii ex Hebraeo Latinae facta. Bezae
M. S. Evangeliorum in Archivis Academiae Cantabrigiensis asservatus.
Alexandrium exemplar (...). Eorum M. S. a Grotio laudatus. Scholiastes Graecus
Romanae editionis (...). Paraphrastae Chaldaei.
C
Calvinus. Camero Caninius. Cartesius. Cleanthes. Cucelleus.
D
Drusius.
E
Episcopius. Etymologus. Euripides.
G
Grotius. Glossae veteres.
H
D. Hamond. Heraclitus. ^ (...) Hesychius. Hieronymus. Mr. Hobbs. Horatius.
I
Jamblichus. Josephus. Juvenalis.
K
R. D. Kimchi.
L
Lactantius. D. Lightfoot. Lucretius.
M
Mamertinus. Manilius.
O
Ovidius.
P
Pacatus. Palaephatus. Palladas. Paulinus. Pelagius. Philo Judaeus. Phocylides
sive quisquis est scriptor carminum aureorum, que sub Pythastorae nomine
circumferunter. Plato. Plutarchus. Porphyrius. Scriptor quaest. and respon. ad
calcem Justini.
S
Salmasius. Seneca. Suidas.
T
Theophylactus. D. Tillotson. Thucydides.
V
Virgilius. Voetius.
Z
Zacharias Chrysopolitanus. Abrah. Zancth.
Places of Scripture Cited, Vindicated or explained in the APOLOGETICAL
VINDICATION.
Genesis iii, 15. -- ix, 34. -- xvi, 12. -- xviii, 23, 25. -- xxv, 22, 23, 30. --
xxvii 4, 40. -- xxviii, 9. *c. xxxiii-c. xxxv, 9, 10. Exodus xiv, 2, 4. -- xx,
5, 6. -- xxxiv. 14. Levit. xviii, 18. Deuteronomy. iv, 24. -- v, 9. -- vi, 15. 1 Samuel
xvi, 14. 2 Samuel xii, 8, 11, 12. -- xvi, 22. xxiv, 1, 4, 10. 1 Kings. iv, 33. --
vii, 24, 25. -- xxii, 19, 20. 2 Kings. ix, 11. 1 Chronicles. xxi, 1. 2 Chronicles. iv, 3.
Job i. 1, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 20, 21, 22. -- ii. 1, 2, 7, 9, 10. Psalm. lxix. 27
-- cxxx, 3. -- cxxxix. 7, 8. Prove. xvi. 4. Esaias x. 21, 22. -- xlix. 6, lxiii.
1, 2, 3. Dan. 4. explained throughout. c. ix. 26, 27. Hosea. xi, 1. Nahum. i.
2. Matthew. ii. 15. -- viii. 27, 36, 37. -- x. 4, 5, 6. -- xi. 25. -- xxiv. 24.
-- xxv. 31, 32, 37, 38, 39, 46. xxvi. 6, 8, 31 ad 37, 41, 47, 69 ad 74, 75.
Mark. iii. 18. -- vi. 3 xiv. 3. John. i. 18. -- iii. 16, 17. -- vi. 71 -- ix.
2. -- xii 4, 5, 6. -- xiii. 2, 26, 27. -- xviii. 10. Acts. i. 13. -- ii. 13 ad
18. -- vii. 55, 56. -- xiii. 45, 46, 47. -- xxiii. 8. xxvi. 24, 25. Romans i. 20.
-- ii. 14, 15. iv. 15. -- vii. ad v. 14. ad fin. cap. -- viii. 7, 9, 13, 14 16,
26, 32. -- ix. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 27, 32. -- x. 1, 2, 3. xi. 6,
14, 20, 25. -- xii. 1, 2. 1 Cor. ii. 14, 15. -- ix. 20. 13. -- xv. 44. -- xvii.
1, 2. Gal. i. 8, 11, 16. -- iii. 24. -- iv. 22, ad 27. -- v. 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23. vi. 1. Ephesians. ii. 4, 5, 8, 9. 2 Thessalonians. -- ii. 9. Hebr. ix. 22. --
xii. 14. James. iii. 15. -- v. 16. 1 Pet. v. 8. 1 John iii. 4. -- iv. 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 19, 20, 21. Jude. verse 19.
Places of Scripture Cited, Vindicated or explained in Two SERMONS.
GEnesis -- vi. 2. -- xi. 7. -- xxx. 8. Exodus -- i. 9, 10, 11, 14, 17. -- ii.
11, 12, 15, 23, 24. -- iv. 19, 21. -- v. 2. -- vii. 13, 22. -- viii. 15, ii.
32, 34. -- ix. 35. 16, 34. -- xiii. 15. Leviticus. xxvi. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Deuteronomy. -- ii. 30. -- xxviii. 15, 28, 29. Judge. vii. 22. 1 Samuel ii. a. 12
ad 25, 34. -- iv. 11. xiii. 14. -- xiv. 2, 6, 12, 15, 20. -- xv. 11, 23 -- xvi.
14. -- xxiv. 6, 10. -- xxvi. 12. 2 Samuel. i. 13, 14, 15, 16. -- v. 2, xxiiii.
1, 9. 1 Kings. xi. 11, 12. -- xii. 15, 24. -- xiii. 8, 9, 14, 19. -- xvi. 16,
20, 30. -- c. xx. c. xxi. 2 Chronicles. xx. 22, 23. Psalm. iii. 4, 5, 6. -- xci, 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. -- cv. 15, 25. Isa. vi. 10. Dan. iv. 27, 29, 30, 31, 34, 35, 36,
37. Matthew. xii. 32. xiii. 12. Mark iv. 12. Romans i. 24, 25, 26, 28. -- ix. 17,
18, 20, 22. 1 Cor. xi. 30. 1 These. v. 9. 2 These. ii. 11, 12. Hebr. vi. 4, 5, 6.
Jam. i. 13, 14. 1 John v. 16. Rev. xxii. 2.
NOTES UPON THE APOLOGETICAL VINDICATION.
P. 2. WHile some are so nice, that they will not allow in any of these
Phenomenon, any more than a Divine permission, etc. This is the general way of
all but the Calvinistical Divines.

Ib. And others are so ^ardy, as to ascribe all to the arbitrary will of God,
etc. This is the method of Calvin and his followers. See his institutions, L.
1. c. 18. whose lemma or Title is, Impiorum operibus quomodo utatur Deus.

P. 167. In the Apologue or parabolical Narrative of the sufferings of Job,
etc. I call it an Apologue or Parabolical Narrative, because the whole story,
as it is laid down in the Book that goes under that name, is not a real thing,
but a parable, according to the usage of Antiquity in the Eastern Countries, to
instruct the world by Parables and Symbols, which was not quite disused in our
Saviors time; the thing in short is this.

Job is the character of a person eminent for his power and wealth, as well as
virtue: he lost the first of these, and was reduced to very uneasy
circumstances in his Fortune, and he was likewise, as the story represents,
robbed of his Children, and afflicted with sore pains and diseases in his Body;
all which he suffered with an unshaken constancy, and was the greatest example
of trust and confidence in the goodness of God and submission to his will, that
either those times or any other have afforded: But it is manifest, if we
respect the truth of things, that to make up the character of a perfect Man in
the worst circumstances, that possibly can befall him, all things are described
in a very improbable extremity. I say nothing of Satan's appearing among the
Sons of God, which I have spoken to already in the discourse it self; but his
Corn and Cattle being all destroyed, his Children killed, his Houses being
beaten down by Tempests, blowing at the same time from all quarters of the
Heaven, and all points of the Compass; are plain arguments that it is a studied
description of Calamity, that so the patience of Job may appear the more
conspicuous, and the character of the perfect Man more perfect, and the
considerations, with which Job comforts and supports himself, in the midst of
such extreme circumstances, are but a representation of the natural remedies
which a Wise Man and a Philosopher ought to apply to himself, when oppressed by
the iniquity of an adverse fortune.

To make the scene more Tragical, and to give him an occasion of insisting upon
those pious, and Philosophical considerations, which are the best supports of a
wise Man in distress, his Wife and his Comforters are introduced, and at the
end of each calamity there is still one Messenger left to come and tell the
News, as the construction of the parable did require; because without this, the
story could not have been told, and the same I presume, may be said of some of
the Apocryphal Books, particularly those of Judith and Susanna, that they are
not so much the description of real events, as parabolical descriptions; the
first of the power and danger of love and the second of the indecency a
grayhair'd lust. For Judith is Jehudith, and signifies any Jewess in general,
without respect to any particular Woman, and Holoernes by an M. (a very light
and easy mutation) is Alouph Arami, or the Astyrian Captain, or General, as he
is expressly called by the Writer of that Book, '(...) And for Susanna, it is
manifest by its Etymology, which is from Shushan, signifying joy and
satisfaction, that it may denote any handsome Woman in the world, and lastly to
return to Job, from whom we have wandered. What is the signification of his
name? the Masoreth points it Ijob, which is Vox nihili, which signifies just
nothing at all, but I make no scruple boldly to pronounce, that the true
pronunciation is Ajoub. For Ajoub from Ajab is, Adversari, inimicitiaprosequi
inimica voluntate. and in affectu aliquem esse. The Devil in this parable is
called Satan, which is as much as Ojeb in Pohel, a very usual name in Scripture
for an enemy, and Ajoub in the other participle is he that is the object of
this hatred, and thus Satan and Ajoub are relata; and this may be sufficient to
silence the controversy who this Job was, and when he lived, for from all this
I am inclinable to believe, that he was not a real but Parabolical or fictious
person, or at least that this was not his proper name, but only given him from
the circumstances of his life, and the calamities with which he encountered.

P. 98. That he might answer the like event of Joseph, etc. or rather of the
Children of Israel, who were delivered out of Egypt, and of them it is
immediately that the Prophet there speaks.

P. 169. The first of which is taken from the testimony of Scripture, the other
from the nature of God, etc. This later topic I have not insisted upon with
that accuracy of method, which might have been expected, and which I my self
did without question intend, when I made the Division; but yet I have not
neglected it neither, see. from p. 310. to 319. and in the Preface from p. 14.
to 16. and I have likewise insisted upon it, in my discourse of the laws of
nature, from p. 45 to 55.

P. 188. I will now add, that if what Mr. Calvin himself, etc. the citatien at
large is this.

L. 3. c. 25. De resurrectione ultima. S. 12. referred to p. 108. His words are
these.

Poro quia divinae in reprobos ultionis gravitatem nulla descriptio aequare
potest, per res corporeas eorum tormenta and cruciatus nobis figurantur
nempeper tenebras, fletum, and s^ridorem dentium, ignem inextinguibilem, vermem
sine fine cor arrodentem. Talibus enim loquendi modis certum est Spiritum
sanctum voluisse sensus omnes horrore conturbare: vt quum dicitur praeparatam
esse ab aeterno gehennam profundam, nutrimenta eius effe ignem and ligna multa:
flatum Domini, ceu torrentem sulphuris, eam succendere. Quibus ut nos adjuvari
oportet ad concipiendam ut cunque impiorum miseram sortem: ita nos in eo
potissimum defigere cogitationem oportet, quam sit ca^amitosum alienari ab omni
Dei societate. Neque id modo: sed majestatem Dei ita sentire tibi adversam, ut
effugere nequeas quin ab ipsa urgearis. Nam primum ejus indignatio instar ignis
est violentissimi, cujus attactu omnia devorentur and absorbeantur. Deinde illi
ad exercendum indicium sic serviunt omnes creaturae, ut coelum, terram, mare,
animalia, and quicquid est, velut dira indignatione adversum se inflammata, and
in perniciem suam armata sensuri sint: quibus iram suam ita Dominus palam
faciet. Quare non vulgar aliquid pronunciavit Apostolus, quum dicit infideles
daturos poenas interitu aeternas a facie Domini, and a Gloria virtutis ejus. Et
quoties metum corporeis figuris incutiunt Prophetae, quamvis nihil pro
tarditate nostra hyperbolicum afferant, praeludia tamen admiscent futuri
judicii in sole and luna totoque mundi opificio. Quare nullam requiem inveniunt
infoelices conscientiae, quin diro turbine vexe^tur ac dissipentur, quin ab
infesto Deo se discerni sentiant' and confixae mortiferis aculeis lancinentur
quin ad Dei fulmen expavescant, and conterantur onere manus ejus: ut abyssos
and voragines quaslibet subire levius sit, quam in ill^s terroribus stare ad
momentum, quale hoc and quantum est, aeterna and nusquam desitura illius
obsidione urgeri: i. e.

Moreover because no description is sufficient to express the heaviness of the
wrath of God upon the reprobate, therefore the torments and calamities that are
inflicted upon them, are shadowed out by coreporal representations, such as
darkness, and weeping, and gnashing of Teeth, and unquenchable fire, and a Worm
perpetually gnawing upon the heart: For by such ways of expression as these,
it is certain that the Holy Ghost designed to affect all our senses with
horror, as when it is said, Isa. 30, 33. That Tophet is ordained of old, he
has made it deep and large, the Pile thereof is fire and much Wood, the Breath
of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone does kindle it. By which mode of
expression, as we ought to represent to our selves in the best manner we can,
the miserable and deplorable condition of the damned, so ought we most
especially to reflect upon this, how wretched and calamitous a thing it is to
be banished for ever from the prescence of God, and not only so, but also to
feel the avenging Majesty of God so set and bent against you, that it is
impossible for you to turn your self any way, but you shall still be pressed and
prosecuted by it. For first the wrath of God is like a consuming fire, by which
all things are devoured and swallowed up, and then in the next place you are to
consider that when God goes forth to judgment, he can make all the Creatures
attend him to execute his Vengeance, so that the reprobate shall feel the
Heaven, Earth, and Seas, and all the Creatures in them, whom God upon this
occasion shall make use of as his Instruments to demonstrate the fierceness of
his anger, all of them as it were inflamed with indignation against them, and
armed for their destruction, wherefore it is no slight sentence which the*
Apostle has pronounced against them that know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. That
they shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. And as often as the Prophets endeavor
to move our passions by corporal terrors, though considering the slowness of
humane nature to be moved to that which is good, they cannot be thought to have
any thing excessive or Hyperbolical in them, so often do they usher in the
judgments to come with terrifying prodigies in the Sun and Moon, and in the
whole course of Nature. Wherefore this is the meaning of all those terrible
representations of the judgment to come, that the souls and consciences of the
Damned find no rest, but are always vexed, and as it were scattered and
confounded by a direful tempest, they feel themselves torn and mangled by an
angry God, and wounded all over by deadly darts sticking in them, they are
afraid of his Thunder, and they are broken in pieces under his heavy hand. So
that it would be better to be plunged into the deepest pit, or to ly suffocated
under the most unfathomable depth, then to endure those terrors of God and of
conscience for one moment of time; and how much more intolerable than must it
needs be to be besieged and oppressed by the same terrors for ever? So that this
is at least Argumentum ad Hominem, against Mr. Calvin, for he grants that the
torments of Hell as they are described in Scripture, under corporeal and
sensible representations, are indeed nothing else, but the anguish and torments
of a guilty-conscience: and I say, that necessity and and guilt are
inconsistent with each other, and that if they continue in the other world, to
have the same opinion concerning the nature and necessity of all humane actions
which they have in this, it will be impossible there should be any such thing
as Damnation, because th^re can be ^o such thing as guilt. But that I may not
be charged with stretching Mr. Calvin's words, beyond what they will naturally
bear, though no Man without predjuce can put any other sense upon them then I
have done, yet thus much is confessed on all sides that this is one part of the
punishment of the Damned, that they are perpetually stung by the painful
reflections of a Guilty mind: nay, this must be confessed to be a main
ingredient in that eternal Calamity, and this is that which all interpreters
make to be the meaning of those Passages of Scripture, where Hell is described
by the Prophet, as the Worm that never d^es, and by our Savior himself, by
Weeping and Wailing, and gnashing of Teeth. So that it is on all sides
abundantly clear and manifest, that the Calvinistical reprobation is utterly
inconsistent with the nature and notion of that miserable state.

P. 189. There is a perpetual need of an irresistible Grace, to hinder the
worst of men from being worse than he is. -- And P. 190. It is certain that all
necessary agents do and must always act to the uttermost of their respective
strengths and* powers. -- These two things shall be made good against Mr.
Calvin, in his own words, in the Citations that fol^o^, Instit. l. 2. c. 1. s.
8. Speaking of Original sin, he says, -- Haec perversitas nunquam in nobis
cessat, sed novos assidue fructus parit: Ea scilicet, quae ante descripsimus,
opera carnis; viz. (Adulteria, scortationes, furta, odia, caedes, contentiones)
non secus atque incensa* fornax flammam and scintillas efflat, aut scaturigo
aquam sine fine egerit. Quare qui peccatum originale definierunt carentiam
justitiae originalis, quam inesse nobis oportebat, quanquam id totum
complectuntur quod in re est, non tamen satis significanter vim atque energiam
ipsius expresserunt. Non enim natura nostra boni tantum inops and vacua est:
Sed malorum omnium adeo fertilis and ferax, ut otiosa esse non possit. Qui
dixerunt esse concupiscentiam, non nimis alieno verbo usi sunt, si modo
adderetur (quod minime conceditur a plerisque) quicquid in homine est, ab
intellectu ad voluntatem, ab anima ad carnem usque, hac concupiscentia
inquinatum refertumque esse Aut, ut brevius absolvatur, totum hominem non aliud
exseipso esse quam concupiscentiam.

That is, this perversity or depravation of the will in Man is never idle, but
is perpetually fruitful with new effects of it self, such as those that have
been already described (Adulteryes, Fornications, enmities, Murders and
intemperance.) And it breaks out as naturally and as violently into such works
as these, as a red hot Furnace belches out Flames and sparks, or a Spring
continually gushes with an endless ebullition of Water. Wherefore they that
have defined original sin to be the want of that original Righteousness, which
^^ght to have been in us, though they do in effect comprehend the whole matter,
yet they have not expressed it so aptly and significantly as they should have
done; for the nature of Man is not only void of every thing that is good, but
also so fruitful and ripely pregnant with all manner of evil, that it cannot
sit still without doing or designing some mischief or other, though it would
never so fain.

They that say original sin is concupiscence, have described it by a word which
is not far from the business; if they would but add further, what some will be
by no means be induced to allow, that whatsoever is in Man, whether you
consider his understanding or his will, his Soul or his Body, or all of those
together, is all of it polluted and laden with this concupiscence, or to sum up
the whole within a shorter compass, that the whole Man all over is n^thing else
but concupiscence and lust. -- And again in the same book, c. 2. s. 26. Homo
vero, nec id quod vere sibi bonum sit, pro naturae suae immortalis excellentia,
ratione diligit, ut id studio persequatur; nec rationem adhibet in contelium,
nec mensium intendit: sed sine ratione, sine consilio, naturae inclinationem
instar pecudis sequitur. That is, man by his own reason or understanding cannot
choose that, or apply himself to a prosecution after it, which is best for
himself, and suitable to the excellence of his immortal nature: He does not
call reason into his Counsels, neither does he bend his Mind to consider of
any thing, but utterly destitute of reason, and of Council, he follows the
instincts of nature, like a Beast. -- and a little after in the same place, --
Nihil ad probandam arbitrii libertatem facit natural omnibus been habendi
desiderium, no^ magis scilicet quam in metallis and lapidibus, ad essentiae
suae perfectionem inclinans affectio, that is, the desire of happiness, which
is natural to all men, does not prove the liberty of the will, any more than it
proves the same in stones or metalls, which tend by degrees, by a certain
affection or affectation of nature, which love to be perfect in all it is
several productions, from their first Principles, to their just consistence,
and to the utmost perfection of themselves.

Ib. c. 3. s. 13. Speaking of the good lives of some among the Heathens
themselves, he says, Omnibus saeculis extiterunt aliqui, qui natura duce ad
virtutem tota vita intenti essent: then a little after adds, -- Exempla igitur
ista monere nos videntur, ne hominis naturam in totum vitiosam pureims: quod
ejus instinctu quidam non modo eximiis fac ac moribus excelluerunt, sed
perpetuo tenore vitae honestissime se geserunt. Sed hic succurrere nobis debet,
inter illam naturae corruptionem esse nonnullum Gratiae Dei locum, non quae
illam purget, sed intus cohibeat. Nam si singulorum animos laxis habiens
Dominus in libidines quaslibet exultare p^rmit teret, nemo haud dubie esset,
qui non reipsa fidem faceret verissime in se competere omnia mala quibus
universam naturam damnat Paulus. Quid enim? Tene eorum numero eximas, quorum
pedes ad sanguine^ effundendum veloces, manus rapinis and homicidiis foedatae,
guttura sepulchris patentibus similia, linguae fraudulentae, venenata labia,
opera inutilia, iniqua, putrida, let halia: quorum animus sine Deo, quorum
intima pravitates, quorum oculi ad insidias, animi ad insultandum elati, omnes
denique parts ad infinita flagitia ^oncinnatae? Si omnibus ejusmodi portentis
obnoxia est un^quaeque anima (quemadmodum audacter pronuntiat Apostolus)
videmus certe quid futurum sit, si Dominus humanam libidinem pro sua
inclinatione vagari sinat. Nulla est rabiosa bellua, quae tam praecipianter
feratur; nullum est quamlibet rapidum ac violentum flu men, cujus adeo
impetuosa sit exundatio. In electis suis morbos istos curat Dominus, eo quem
mox exponemus modo: in aliis injecto fraeno duntaxat coercet, tantum ne
ebulliant, quatenus exped re providet ad conservandam rerum universitate^. Hinc
alii pudore, alii legum metu retinentur, ne in multa foeditatis genera
prorumpan^, utcunque suam magna expart^ impuritate^ non dissimulent: alii, quia
honestam vivendi ratione^ conducere ducant, ad eam utcunque aspira^t. Alii
supra vulgarem sortem emergunt, quo sua majestate alios contineant in Officio.
Ita sua providentia Deus naturae perversitatem refraenat, ne in actum erumpat;
sed non purgat intus.

That is, there have been some in all Ages, who by the conduct of nature, have
followed Virtue all their lives long: and these examples may be thought by some
to infer, as if the nature of Man were not wholly corrupt and depraved; since
by the natural instinct there have been so many who have not only done many
good and worthy actions, but have persisted in a steady course of Virtue, from
one end of their lives to the other. But here it is to be considered, in the
midst of all this natural pravity, there is still room left for the Grace of
God, I do not mean a purging and cleansing, but only a preventing and
restraining Grace: for if God should let the Minds of all Men loose, every one
to pursue every Man his own hearts desire, there is no doubt but that every Man
would give an experiment in himself of all those evils, with which Saint Paul
has charged humane Nature. For what? how can you pretend to exempt your self
from the number of those whose feet are swift to shed blood, whose hands are
foul with rapine, and besmeared with slaughter, whose Throats are an open
Sepulcher, tongues full of deceit, and Lips tainted with Poison, whose works
are unprofitable, unjust, rotten and deadly, whose Mind is without God, whose
inward parts are very wickedness, whose eyes are watchful for Treachery and
mischief, whose Minds are puffed up with insolence and Pride, and all whose
Members are made and fitted as it were, or set on purpose to commit infinite
Villainies, and crimes without number, end, or measure? and if every Soul be
naturally addicted to all these monstrous impieties, as the Apostle makes no
bones to pronounce it is, then we may know for certain what the consequence
would be, if God should let all Men loose to follow their own inclinations.
There is no savage beast that would be so precipitant, ungovernable and
outrageous, no river how swift and violent soever, that can overflow it is
Banks, with a more rapid and impetuous stream. In the elect God has a way of
curing these malignities, which I shall explain hereafter, but in the reprobate
he only curbs and bridles their appetites, and takes care that they may not
break out, so far forth as he sees it necessary to keep the world in some
tolerable order and quiet, which would be otherwise broken in pieces, by
interfering appetites and destructive inclinations. Hence it is so, that some
are kept in aw by an inward sense of shame, and others by a principle of fear,
that they dare not actually break forth into many sorts of wickedness, though
notwithstanding, they cannot altogether hide the impurity of their nature;
there are others that have an opinion that virtue is for their interest, and
upon that principle they aspire after it, after a sort, and as well as they
can: and it is so ordered in others, that they shall emerge above the common
dregs of the people, that by their authority they may keep them in order. Thus
God by his providence bridles and restrains the perversity of nature, that it
may not break out into act, but he does not purge it and refine it by his Grace
within.

S. 5. ib. He has these words.

Quia peccati servitute vincta detinetur Voluntas, ad bonum commovere te non
potest, nedum applicare: that is, because the will is kept bound under the
slavery of sin, she cannot so much as make the least attempt at any thing that
is good, and much less fix and fasten her self upon it.

And a little after in the same Section, he produces a very lame distinction of
St. Austin, to make our actions wholly voluntary, although they be wholly
necessary at the same time: his words are these, De natua and Great. and alibi.
Non dubitat (Augustinus) in hunc modum loqui de necessaria peccati servi^ute.
-- Haec igitur distinctionis summa observetur, hominem ut vitiatus est ex
lapsu, volentem quidem peccare, non invitum, nec coactum: Affectione animi
propensissima, non violenta coactione; qua tamen est naturae pravitate, non
posse nisi ad malum moveri and agi. That is, St. Austin makes no scruple to
speak after this manner, concerning the necessary servitude of sin. The true
pinch of the controversy lies here; Mankind, as they are now in their
degenerate and lapsed estate, do commit sin willingly, not by any external
force or coaction; with a most prone and ready propension of mind, not by any
violent compulsion; but such is the pravity of their nature, that they cannot
of themselves be moved or incited toany thing, but to what is evil. -- But now
I thought notwithstanding this dictinction, that necessity, whether it proceed
from outward causes, or whether it be bound up inwardly in the nature of the
thing, had been equally necessary in both cases, and I see not how either sort
of these necessities, where they are so absolute and uncontrollable, as Mr.
Calvin supposes them to be, can be consistent with Guilt. So that here is
^ignum patella operculum, a fine distinction finely brought a bed.

These Citations are I think, of themselves, abundantly sufficient to show what
opinion Mr. Calvin had, of the necessity of humane actions, and the pravity of
humane nature; and upon comparing these examples, with what I have laid to his
charge in the Apologetical Vindication, I appeal to the most partial and
prejudiced of his Disciples, whether I have misrepresented him or no, or
whether indeed it was possible for me to set him forth in worse colors, than
those in which he has thought fit to Paint, or to express it in words more
proper to the occasion, to daub and to besmear himself: but because I have
further charged him p. 222. with predestinating the fall of Adam himself, by an
express decree, as well as all those miseries and calamities that were
Hypothetically consequent upon it, therefore I will here add some other very
full Citations, for the clearing of this point, by which his former notions of
the necessity and pravity of humane nature will be still further inculcated and
confirmed.

Instit. l. 3. c. 23. s. 24.

Rursum excipiunt, nonne ad eam, quae nunc pro damnationis causa obtenditur,
corruptionem Dei ordinatione praedestinati ante fuerunt? quum ergo in sua
corruptione pereunt, nihil aliud quam poenas luunt calamitatis, in quam ipsius
praedestinatione lapsus est Adam, ac posteros suos praecipites secum traxit.
Annon itaque injustus qui creaturis suis tam crudeliter illud it? fateor sane,
in hanc, qua nunc illigati sunt, conditionis miseriam, Dei voluntate decidisse
Filios Adam, atque id est quod principio dicebam, redeundum tandem semper esse
ad solum Divinae voluntatis arbitrium, cujus causa sit in ipso abscondita. Sed
non protinus sequitur huic obtrectationi Deum subjacere, etc. That is, our
adversaries do further object after this manner, were not Mankind predestined
by the ordinance and appointment of God to that corruption, which is now
pleaded against them as the cause of their Damnation, since they perish in and
for their corruption; what is this, but to be punished for that calamity into
which Adam fell by his express decree, and drew his posterity headlong after
him? is he not therefore unjust, that marks and plays upon his Creatures at so
cruel a rate. To which I answer, that I* confess indeed that the Sons of Adam
have fallen into this miserable estate, by the will and appointment of God, and
this is that which I said at first, that when we have done all, we must at last
resolve it into the sole and only determination of the Divine will, whose cause
is unaccountable, and hid within himself: but it does not presently follow for
all this, that God is at all obnoxious to the imputation of injustice etc.

But I confess I see not how it can be avoided, and if Mr. Calvin or any of his
Disciples, can show me any humane means, according to his principles, how we
shall bring him off, then I will turn Calvinist the next moment, and recant
every thing publicly, whatever I have said or written, against so reasonable
and so innocent a Doctrine.

Ib. S. 6. Sic ergo prophanae linguae obganniunt, Cur ea vitio Deus imputaret
hominibus, quorum necessitatem sua praedestinatione imposuit? Quid enim
facerent? an cum decretis ejus luctarentur? An frustra id facturi sint, quum
omnia facere non possint. Non ergo jure ob ea puniuntur, quorum praecipua in
Dei praedestinatione causa est. Hic abstinebo a def^nsione ad quam fere
scriptores Scholastici recurrunt, non impedire Dei praescientiam quominus homo
peccator reputetur: Quandoquidem illius mala, non sua Deus praevideat. Non enim
hic subsisteret cavillatio, sed potius urgeret, Deum tamen malis quae
praeviderit potuisse occurrere, si voluisset, quum non fecerit, destinato
consilio creasse hominem in eum finem, ut se in terra ita gereret. Quod si Dei
providentia in hanc conditionem Homo creatus est, ut post ea faceret quaecunque
facit, non esse illi crimini verte^dum quod nec effugere posset, and Dei
voluntate suscipiat. Ergo videamus quomodo rite nodus expediri debeat. Primum
omnium constare inter omnes debet quod ait Solomon. Deum omnia propter
semetipsum condidisse, impium quoque ad diem malum. Ecce quum rerum omnium
dispositio in manu Dei sit, quum penes ipsum resideat salutis ac mortis
arbitrium consilio nutuque suo ita ordinat, ut inter homines nascantur, ab
utero certae morti devoti, qui suo exitio ipsius nomen glorificent. Siquis
causetur, nullam eis inferri necessitatem ex Dei providentia, sed potius ea
condition ab ipso esse creatos, quoniam futuram eorum pravitatem praeviderit:
neque nihil dicit, neque totum. Solent quidem interdum hac solutione uti
veteres, sed quasi dubitanter. Scholastici vero in ea quiescunt, ac si nihil
contra opponi posset. Equidem praescientiam solam nullam infer necessitatem
creaturis libentur concessero, tametsi non omnes assentiantur, sunt enim qui
ipsam quoque causam rerum esse volunt. Verum mihi acutius ac prudentius videtur
perspexisse Valla, homo alioqui in sacris non admodum exercitatus, qui
supervacuam esse hanc contentionem ostendit: quon am and vita and mors Divinae
magis voluntatis quam praescientiae sint actiones. Si hominum eventa
praevideret Deus duntaxat, non etiam suo arbitrio disponeret ac ordinaret, tum
non abs re agitaretur quaestio, ecquid ad eorum necessitatem valeat ipsius
praevidentia. Sed quum non alia ratione quae futura sunt praevideat, nisi qui
ita ut fierent decrevit: Frustra de praescientia lis movetur, ubi constat
ordinatione potius and nutu omnia evenire.

That is, Thus therefore the Tongues of wicked and profane persons are used to
mutter, why should God impute that as a sin to men, which he has put them
under a necessity of doing by his decree? In answer to which exception, I shall
not make use of that Weapon with which the Schoolmen are used to defend
themselves, that the foreknowledge of God hinders not, but a Man may be guilty
of sin, since God does not foresee or consider it as any evil in himself, but
only as a defect or pravity or corruption in his Creatures. For the objection
would not be-satisfied thus, but would proceed further to urge in its own
behalf, that God might have hindered those evils which he foresaw, if he had so
pleased; which since he did not do, it is the same thing as if he had Created
Man on set purpose, that he should behave himself as he does upon the Earth.
But if by the providence of God it comes to pass, that Man is Created in such a
condition, that he is under a necessity of doing whatsoever he does, we must
not charge that as a fault upon Men, which they cannot avoid, and which the
will of God, which cannot be resisted, obliges them to do. Let us try
therefore some other way to untie this puzling knot. And first of all I say,
that we ought all to subscribe to that saying of Solomon, That God has made
all things for himself, and the Wicked for the day of evil. Therefore the case
is this, that since the disposal of all things is in the hand of God, and since
he is originally and unaccountably invested with the power of Life and Death,
he orders the matter so, by the eternal counsel and purpose of his will, that
there shall be born some Men into the world, that shall be devoted to eternal
ruin from their Mothers Womb, that so they may Glorify his Name by their
Destruction. If any shall say, that the providence or foresight of God does not
put a Man of it self under any fatality or necessity of acting, but only that
God created Man in that condition he is in, because he foresaw the future
pravity of which he would be guilty, he speaks indeed something to the purpose,
but yet very short of the whole matter, the ancients indeed are wont sometimes
to make use of this solution, but they do it with something of doubt and
hesitation; but the Scoolmen do so wholly rely upon an acquiesce in this, as if
there were not the least color of objection to be brought against it. For my
part I am clearly of opinion, that the Divine knowledge does not conclude the
Creatures under any kind of fate or necessity at all, notwithstanding that
there are some who will not grant thus much, but will needs have prescience it
self to be a Cause. But to my thinking, Valla, although otherwise a person not
very well seen in Theological Studies, has determined this matter with greater
prudence and judgment, than either the Ancient Fathers or the Schoolmen have
done, and he tells us that all this contention is a controversy about nothing,
for that Life and Death are rather the effects of the Divine will then fore
knowledge; if God only forsaw what Man would do, and did not also ordain and
appoint it by a positive decree, then indeed it would be to some purpose, to
argue pro and contra upon this question, whether the foreknowledge of God be
capable of necessitating the Actions of Men; but since he does no otherwise
foresee what shall come to pass, but only because he has appointed and decreed
it within himself, it is to no purpose to talk of his knowledge, when it is so
plain, that all things are ordered by his Will.

Ib. Sect. 7. Disertis verbis hoc extare negant, decretum fuisse a Deo ut sua
defectione periret Adam. Quasi vero idem ille Deus, quem Scriptura praedicat
facere quaecunque vult, ambiguo fine condiderit nobilissimam ex suis creaturis.
Liberi arbitrii fuisse dicunt, ut fortunaem ipse sibi fingerit. Deum vero nihil
destinasse, nisi ut pro merito eum tractaret. Tam frigidum commentum si
recipitur, ubi erit illa Dei omnipotentia, qua secundum ar^anum consilium, quod
aliunde non pendet, omnia moderatur? Atqui praedestinatio, velint nolint, in
posterisse profert. Neque enim facta est naturaliter ut a salute exciderunt
omnes, unius parentis culpa. Quid eos prohibet fateri de uno homine quod
invitide toto humano genere concedunt? Quid emim tergiversando luderent operam?
Cunctos mortales in unius hominis persona morti aeternae mancipatos fuisse
Scriptura clamat. Hoc quum naturae adscribi nequeat, ab admirabili Dei consilio
profectum esse minime obscurum est. Bonos istos justitiae Dei patronos
perplex^s haerere in festuca, altas vero trabes super are nimis absurdum est.
Iterum quaero, unde factum est ut tot gentes un^ cum liberis ^orum infantibus
aeternae morti involueret lapsus Adae absque remedio, nisi quia Deo ita visum
est? Hic obmutescere oportet tam dicaces alioqui linguas. Decretum quidem
horribile, fateor: inficiari tamen nemo poterit quin praesciverit Deus quem
exitum esset habiturus homo, antequam ipsum conderet, and ideo praesciverit
quia decreto suo sic ordinaret. In praescientiam Dei siquis hic invehatur,
temere and inconsulto impinget. Quid enim, quaeso, est cur reus agatur
caelestis index, quia non ignoraverit quod futurum erat? In praedestinationem
competit siquid est vel justae vel speciosae querimoniae. Nec absurdum videri
debet quod dico, Deu^ non modo primi hominis caesum, and in ^o posterorum
ruinam praevidisse, sed arbitrio quoque suo dispensasse. Vt enim ad ejus
sapientiam pertinet omnium quae futura sunt esse praescium, sic ad potentiam
omnia manu sua regere ac moderari.

That is, our Adversaries deny that it is any where affirmed in Scripture in
express words, that God has before hand decreed, that Adam should perish by
his disobedience, as if the same God, whom the Scripture sets forth, as doing
whatsoever he pleases both in Heaven and Earth, had made the noblest of his
Creatures without decreeing and determinately fixing before hand what he
intended to do with him at the last, they tell us that Adam was at first endued
with freedom of will, that he might carve out his fortune for himself, and
that God had decreed nothing, but only that he would deal with him according to
his desert, and according to his good use or abuse of his freedom. But if we
content our selves with so cold and jejune an expedient as this, what will
become of that omnipotence of God, whereby he governes all things according to
the secret council of his will, which has no dependence upon any thing without
it self, and after all the Divine predestination will exert and show it self in
the posterity of Adam, whether they will or no. For it did not come to pass by
virtue of any natural cause, that all Men should perish for the fault of one,
why therefore are they so loath to affirm or believe the same thing concerning
one Man, which they are forced to pronounce of all the rest of Mankind? or why
should they lose their labor by boggling and startling to no purpose? The
Scripture cry^s aloud, that all Men were Doomed to eternal Death in the person
of one, which cannot be ascribed to nature; it follows plainly, that it can be
imputed only to the wonderful and hiden Counsel of God. It is ridiculous for
those doubty Patrons of Divine Justice, to stop at a fescue lying on the
ground, and yet make nothing to vault over a lofty beam. Again, I demand of
those men, how comes it to pass that so many Nations together with their Infant
Children should by the fall of Adam be involved in the sentence of eternal
Death, but only that it seemed good to God to have it so? Here they are utterly
confounded and put to silence and are forced to hold their Tongues, though they
are used to be loud enough at other times. An horrible decree I must confess,
but yet no one can deny, but God did certainly know what would become of Man
before he made him, and he foreknew no otherwise, but only that he had decreed
before hand what end he should have. If any Man here shall inveigh against the
foreknowledge of God, it will be very rashly and unadvisedly done, for why
should the Heavenly Judge be blamed for the exactness of his knowledge, and
merely because he was not ignorant of any thing that was to come? if there be
any just reason of complaint at all, it must be taken not from his knowledge,
but his will. Neither let it seem absurd which I affirm, that God did not only
foresee the fall of ou^ first Parent, and in that fall, the ruin of his
posterity, but that he did also predetermine, and preordaine it. For as it
belongs to the Divine wisdom to foresee all things that are to come, so it
appertains to his attribute of power to govern and manage all things by himself
according to his pleasure.

Hic ad distinctionem voluntatis and permissionis recurritur, secundum quam
obtinere volunt, permittente mod^ non autem volente Dei perire impios. Sed cur
permittere dicemus nisi quia ita vult? Quanquam nec ipsum quidem per se
probabile est, sola Dei permissione nulla ordinatione hominem sibi accersisse
interitum. Quasi vero non constituerit Deus qua condition praecipuam
excreaturis suis esse vellet. Non dubitabo igitur cum Angustino simpliciter
fateri, voluntatem Dei esse rerum necessitatem, atque id necessario futurum
esse quod ille voluerit: quemadmodum ^a vere futura sunt quae praeviderit. Nunc
vero si pro sua and impiorum excusatione, vel Pelagiani, vel Manichaei, vel
Anabaptistae, vel Epicurei (nam cum istis quatuor sectis nobis in hoc augumento
negotium est) necessitatem qua ex Dei praedestinatione constringuntur,
objiciant: nihil afferunt ad causam idoneum. Si enim praedestinatio nihil aliud
est quam divinae justitiae, occultae, quidem, sed inculpatae, dispensatio: quia
non indignos fuisse certum est qui in eam sortem praedestinarentur, justissimum
quoque esse interitum quem ex praedestionatione sabeunt, ^que certum est. Ad
hoc: Sic ex Dei praedestinatione pendet eorum perditio, ut causa and materia in
ipsis reperiatur. Lapsus est* enim primus bomo, quia dominus ita expedire
censuerit, nos latet. Certum tamen est non aliter censuisse, nisi quia videbat
nominis sui gloriam inde merito illustrari. Vbi mentionem gloriae Dei audis,
illic justitiam cogita. Justum enim esse oport^t quod laudem meretur. Cadit
igitur Homo, Dei providentia sic ordinante: Sed suo viti^ padit. Pronuntiaverat
p^ulo ante Dominus, omnia quae fecerat esse valde bona. Vnde ergo illa homini
pravit^^, ut a Dei suo deficiat? N^ ex creatione esse putaretur, elogio suo
approbaverat Deus, quod profectum erat a seipso. Propri^ ergo maliti^, quam
acceperat a Domino p^^rm naturam corrupit, sua ruina totam posteritatem in
exitium secum attraxit. Quare in corrupts potius humani generis natura
evidentem damnationis causam, quae nobis propinquior est, contemplimur, quam
absconditam ac ^enitus ^ncompraehensibilem inquiramus in Dei praedestinatione.
Neque immensae Dei Sapientiae submittere hucusque ingenium pigeat, ut in multis
ejus arcanis succumbat. Eorum exim quaescire nec datur nec fas est, docta est
ignorantia: scientiae appetentia insani^ species.

That is. Here there are some that are used to betake themselves to a
dictinction betwixt the positive and the negative will of God, or betwixt his
decree and his permission, by virtue of which distinction, they think to gain
this point, that wicked Men perish, not because God ordains or appoints
that they should, but only because he does not hinder it, or because he stands
by and permits it to be done; but how can we say that he permits it, unless it
be because he wills it also; or that he is not willing it should come to pass,
for nothing can resist his will. But neither is it so probable in it self, that
men perish by the Divine permission, and not by his appointment, as if God had
not beforehand determined with himself, what should be the fate of the noblest
of his Creatures. Wherefore I will not doubt to affirm plainly with St.
Austine, that the will of God is that necessity by which all things come to
pass, and that whatsoever he wills, must of necessity be, as that will truly
and certainly fall out, whatsoever it is that he foresees. But now if either
the Pelagians, the Manichees, the Anabaptists, or the Epicureans, (for we have
to do in this argument with these four sorts of men) if all or any of these
shall in defense and justification of themselves, plead that necessity in which
they are bound up and fettered by the eternal decrees, so that they cannot act
or move otherwise then they do, though they would never so fain, this will by
no means serve their turn. For if nothing else be meant by Predestination, but
only that it is the dispensation or distribution of the Divine justice, which
proceeds upon hidden, but yet without question upon very good and worthy
grounds, from hence it follows, because the reprobate were not worthy to
perish, that it is just they should. Add to this, that their Destruction
depends in such manner upon Predestination, as that all this while the cause
and matter of their ruin is in themselves. For the first Man fell, because God
saw it good, that he should fall, but why he thought it good we cannot tell,
only thus much we Certum tamen est non know, that he would not aliter
censuisse, nisi, etc. have decreed the fall of our first Parent, but only that
he saw his Glory would be deservedly illustrated by it. And when you hear
mention of the Glory of God, then think of his justice. For that must at least
be just, which deserves praise and commendation. Wherefore though the fall of
Man was ordained by the providence of God, yet he fell by occasion of his own
corruption. God when he made all things gave them this character, that they
were exceeding good, that it might not be thought the corruption of any nature
was a thing of Gods making, Therefore it is plain, that Man by his own pravity
corrupted that nature which he had received pure and untainted from the hands
of God, and drew posterity after him into the common ruin. Wherefore let us
rather betake our selves to that clear and apparent cause of Damnation, which
is to be found in the corruption of humane nature: a cause that is more near
and present to us, then to seek for it in the hidden and incomprehensible
predestination of God; and let it not be thought a thing unreasonable for an
humane understanding, which is finite, to acknowledge that there are some
effects of the Divine Wisdom, which it cannot fathom, and into which it ought
not with a too nice and sollicitous curiosity to pry; for it is a piece of
Learning, or at least of ingenuity, to confess our selves ignorant of those
things which cannot be known, or into which is not lawful for us to inquire;
and a too great desire of knowledge in cases of this Nature is in effect
nothing better than a sort of madness. -- In which Citation of Mr. Calvin, it
is admirable to observe what artificial shuffling and cutting he has used, and
how he has endeavored to oppress the truth, under a load of words, that
either have no sense, or a sense repugnant to and inconsistent with their
Neighbors: for first he seems to make the Divine permission and appointment to
be exactly the same, then he takes them in sunder, and will not allow the
former to be sufficient; he grants the predestination to be of it self
sufficient to produce the predetermined effect, and yet to avoid the
inconvenience of the objection made by the Pelagians and others, he has
recourse to the corruption of our natures, which he imputes to our selves. But
now either Adam corrupted his nature voluntarily, or he did not; if he did,
then he was a free and voluntary agent, which Mr. Calvin denies, as may be seen
in what has been already cited out of him; if he did not, then he acted
necessarily, and it is all one whether the necessity were a necessity of
Nature, or a superinduced necessity from without; it is equally a necessity in
both cases, but let it fare how it will with Adam, all the Calvinistical tribe
is agreed in this, that we that are his posterity are always concluded under an
irresistible fate, and so the Pelagian and Epicurean objection returns with a
force as irresistible as that fate, by which humane Nature is pretended to be
acted. Again, I do not understand how God is Glorified in the Damnation of
necessary agents, but I understand very well that it is the greatest reflection
that either wit or folly in combination, with malice, and profaneness, can throw
upon his justice. And I grant as well as he, that the Divine Nature is infinite
and incomprehensible, but what is this to affirming those things which we know
to be false concerning it, and which being once received into our Creed, will
in their just and unavoidable consequence destroy all morality and all Religion?

To conclude, is it not a fine argument, it is unreasonable to think that God
had not determined with himself what he would do with the noblest of his
Creatures, that therefore he would condemn so vast a proportion of them to
eternal torments? a Man would think he might have found a better fate for the
noblest of his Creatures. --

There is but one thing more, and I have done with Mr. Calvin, till I come to
sum up the Evidence, which I shall do immediately in the conclusion of this
work, and that is, that where I speak of the spiritual and Heavenly Principle,
I make the one to be as much, and as really a part of our selves as the other,
from P. 368, to 370. But Mr. Calvin says, l. 2. c. 2. s. 27. Spiritus non a
natura est sed a regeneratione; which I acknowledge in some proportion to be
true: but take it of the whole thing, and it is false. See what I have said in
the place referred to.

P. 206. And I shall prove immediately that the Calvinists, etc. But it seems I
forgot my self, and did not prove it, neither indeed does it need any elaborate
proof: for if God be not bound by his own decrees, then he may alter and change
them from time to time, and so the elect and the reprobate are words that may
change their object every moment, though they retain still the same lawless and
arbitrary signification. And at that rate it will be true against Mr. Calvin,
Fideles possunt excidere de gratia; and it will be but small comfort for a Man
to be sure he is a favorite of Heaven to day, when he knows not but that to
morrow he may fall into disgrace by the cross purposes of a changeable and
fickle being.

P. 273. For though (...) in propriety of Speech, etc. Since the Writing of
this, I am of opinion that (...) in the place subjoined, does signify a
corporeal substance, or what we are used to call a Ghost or Apparition,
clothed with an aerial and subtle Body; and I think I have sufficiently
proved it in some other Papers concerning the Resurrection; but it matters not
much in this place: whether it signify simply an immaterial nature, or the
presence and union of it to a subtle and rarefied Body, which is more fit for
intellectual and abstracted operations.

EPILOGUS.
ANd now I have done with what I did not design when first I entered upon the
point of obduration, with raking the Dunghill of Calvinistical Doctrines, an
Employment which the nose of Hercules would have refused, though he had the
patience to cleanse the Augean Stable: for certainly such a medley of impieties
were never seen to walk abroad with a pretense of Religion since the days of
Moloc and Jupiter Latiaris, and since the Obscenities of the Bacchanalii have
ceast to be reckoned among Religious Duties. For this is a Religion that
justifies the worst of actions, and gives successful wickedness the upper hand
of virtue; and if a Plot be disappointed, or a Rebellion happily defeated, this
is only a sign that the under fates, by which a particular conspirator and his
accomplices are acted, are overpowered by the prevailing strength of the great
governing Fate by which the world is managed, but still add Fate to Faete, and
there remains Fate, there is no harm done all this while; for where there is
necessity there is no Law, and where there is no Law there is no Transgression.
It is a Religion, as I have proved, that denies the existence of an immaterial
nature, and by consequence the hope for which so many confessors have endured
the most exquisite torments, and so many Martyrs have dyed, it is a Religion as
impudent as its Professors: it is not only disobedient and refractory against
Government, for what so stubborn, so inflexible as Fate? but, which is still
more sacred, pardon me, the Majesty of the best of Kings, it gives the ly to
the experience of Ages, and by the new knack of an Ignoramus Jury, accuses
common sense of Perjury and Subornation; it is a Religion, which if it be not
downwright Athiesm, an hopeful thing to be called by that name, and he that
denies the existence of immateral nature does in effect deny the existence of a
God, yet it is at least idolatrous, by paying its Devotions to an object as
distant from, and as opposite and contrary to the nature of God, as the top of
Heaven is distant from the Center of the Earth, or as the two Souls are removed
from each other. It is a Religion that burlesques and ridicules the Gospel, and
puts far greater affronts upon the person, and the Sacrifice of Christ, than
ever. The Arians in the Primitive times, or the more gross and impudent their
fellow Materialists, the Socinian Libellers themselves have done. This Doctrine
alone, though there were nothing else to be considered, makes it a necessary
duty in the Government, to put the Laws in execution against the Dissenting
Party, among whom it almost universally prevails, and it is in vain to think to
oblige this sort of men, by tolleration or indulgence, for their Principles
tell them, they are not beholden to us, but to a restraining and irresistible
Grace, by which a Bridle is put into the Jaws of the wicked, by which they are
chained up like Mastiffs, and Muzzled like Ferrets, that would otherwise devour
them and tear them in pieces, which being their principle it is no wonder to
find them so ungrateful as they are, after so many repeated Acts of a Grace
that would it self want pardon, were it not the Grace and mercy of a King.

ERRATA
Operarum, sive (...), sive (...), sic emendabit aequaes and ingenuus Lector,
ulriusque vitii in humanis memor, and ojus quod in ignorantia rerum, and ejus
quod circa remissionem animorum, fastidiumque operis in assiduum revoluti orbem
versatur.

IN Dedicat. prope finem, ejusdem. Preface to the Reader, p. 5. l. 18.
Scriptures themselves. 6. 5. also. 14. 23. well-being and. 16. 1, 2.
insufferable. 18. 4. irresistible. 21. 2. individual. 22. 12, 13. undertakings.
27. 4. excessively. 31. 3. featnesses. 37. 20. move.

Apologetical Vindication.
1. 7 conceived. 12. 4 (...). 19 (...). 15. 25 (...). 41. 27 into. 42. 12
Paloephatus. 45. 13 they. 55. ult. remained. 60 ult. corporeal. 72. 17
accruing. 108. 25 that he that had. 117. 21, 22 or rather the Cannite. 118. 26
(...). 129. 18 Jewish Masters. 148. 4 propagate. 165. 7 compliance. 203.
penult. contented. 204. 1 in consort. 206. 6 Samothracum. 15 necessitas deos
alligat. 17 cursus vehit, and dele alligat. 18 scripsit. 19 legendum puto, quia
liber ad manum non est -- semper paret, semel jussit -- Ea certe loci sententia
repraesentata est a nobis in versione nostra, quae est ad calcem operis in
gratiam Latin Graeceque nescientium adjecta: -- he commanded but once, but he
obeys for ever. 208. 21 but they tell us. 219. 4 liar. 223. 15 case. 224. 12
conversion. 241. 6 dele in. 261. 12 as on the. 270. 17 dele in. 272. 26 (...).
276 11 (...). 279. 2 (...). 284. 16 consolatio ad. 17 corpusculum. 285. 13, 14
diffugit. 286. 3 humore. 4 quodammodo se habens. 14 se suis. 287. 11 dele that.
292. 12 and Lucretius. 23 pars tua. 295. 11 tibi quisquam. 298. 12 infinity.
300. 5 all our actions. 312. 8 dele shall. 321. 21 (...). 334. penult. (...).
338. 16 expected. 342. 1 graves. 16 Graios. 5 inversis. 363. 16 insensible.
365. 24 expression. 379. 26 considers coolly. 384. 8 (...). 22, 23 (...) and
(...). 388. penult. from it. ult. for being.

I have not inserted the Errata of the Contents, because they not being paged
it is difficult to refer to them; therefore they being neither many nor
considerable, I refer the Reader to the sense, and to the place* to which the
several heads of the Contents belong.

In the Citations Englished, p. 206. l. 5. and he that made l. 6. he wrote.

In the Note upon p. 189, 190. in the Translation of the place produced out of
Mr. Calvin, for intemperance read contentions.

In the Translation of a place of Mr. Calvin taken from Instit. l. 3. c. 23.
sect. 24. -- l. 24. read mocks and plays.

There are some other faults both in the Latin and the English; but the Latin
may be corrected out of Mr. Calvin himself, where there is any doubt; and for
the English I refer you to the sense, which heedfully attended, will be every
whit as effectual, and a less troublesome guide than if I should point to the
particulars themselves when the leaves in which you must look for them are no^
paged. Farewell.


