AN ARGUMENT In DEFENSE of the MARRIAGE OF AN UNCLE WITH THE Daughter of his
Half-Brother By the FATHER's Side. By JOHN TVRNER, Hospitaller of St. Thomas
Southwark, and late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

(...).

LICENSED,

March 16. 1685/6. ROB. MIDGLEY.



LONDON, Printed by H. Hills Jun for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1686.

AN ARGUMENT In Defense of The Marriage of an Uncle WITH The Daughter of his
Half Brother by the Father's Side.
THIS Case in Consanguinity is exactly the same with that other in Affinity,
which was formerly, proposed to me, when I writ my Resolution of Three
Matrimonial Cases; in which having proved undeniably already, That Affinities
and Consanguinities are prohibited to the same Degrees, as well by the
Levitical as the Civil Law, the Resolution of that Case will of it self
determine this in Favor of the Marriage: but yet, for the more clear
Demonstration of the Truth, I will insist more particularly upon it.

There are two things in my former Resolution in which I have been very plain,
and I do still adhere to them both: The first is, That ex antecedenti I should
have been against a Marriage of this nature; the second, That after such a
Marriage is solemnized in the Face of the Church, and consummated by mutual
Enjoyment, there can be no Divorce, no Separation admitted. To the latter of
these I need add nothing further, but may acquiesce perfectly in what has been
already represented, which I think to be so full, and so pertinent to the
purpose in all its parts, that I should, and shall always look upon it, as one
of the hardest Cases I ever met with in my Life, if any Sentence of Divorce or
Separation should proceed against Parties in the Degree and Circumstance there
mentioned. But yet because nothing can be too sure in a matter of this moment,
I desire it may be further considered, That there is a known Maxim in the Civil
Law, Quod fieri non debet, factum valet: Which according to the needs of
Equity, and either public or sometimes private Convenience, branches it self
out into great variety of Cases. So Varro speaks of a Praetor, who did tria
verba fari, upon one of those Days which By the Roman Laws and Usages were dies
nefasti; and of a Magistrate who was vitio creatus, that is, in whose Election
to his Office some of those Ceremonies or Customs which the ancient Laws of
Rome required, or long Prescription had constantly put in practice, were
omitted. But yet, notwithstanding, if the Praetor did bolt out his do, dico,
addico before he was aware, or by a pretended Ignorance, in stead of a real
one; or if a Magistrate were chosen with some Irregularity, yet the dies fastus
stood good for all this, and so did any Legal Act which was done by the Praetor
upon it, on the one side; and so did the Magistrate, though viciously elected,
on the other. They are the Words of the aforesaid Varro. Contrarii horum
(fastorum) Varro l. 5. de L. L.
vocantur dies nefasti. Per quos dies nefas fari Praetorem: Do, Dico, Addico;
itaque non potest agi, necesse est aliquo eorum uti verbo, cum lege quid
peragitur. Quod si tum imprudens id verbum emisit, aut quem manumisit, ille
nihilominus est liber, sed vitio: ut Magistratus vitio creatus, nihilo secius
Magistratus. And yet it is to be considered here, That in the Case of a
Magistrate, not duly Elected, for want of some Ceremonies or Modalities that
ought to have been used; among the Romans, who were so strangely fond of having
every thing done rite, or, as they sometimes speak, recte atque ordine, and
more majorum, there was a very strong Current of rooted Superstition and
inveterate Prejudice against him; and in the other Instance of the Praetor,
though the Legal Acts he did upon such a day were firm and valid, yet himself
was liable to a severe Censure. If he did it really out of ignorance or
mistake, he was to expiate for himself by a Trepass Offering, as among the
Jews; but if out of malicious wickedness, and of set purpose, there was no
Expiation: For so the same Varro tells us in the Words immediately following
those I have last cited. Praetor qui tum fatus est, si imprudens fecit,
piaculari hostia facta piatur: si prudens dixit, Quintus Mucius abnegabat eum
expiari, and ut impium non posse dicebat. Where when Scaliger, in his Learned
Conjectanea upon the Place, would needs have ambigebat in stead of abnegabat;
though he seems to have found it so in the MS. which he made use of, yet was he
certainly mistaken, and his Copy was false. For first, There is a vast
difference betwixt these two Expressions, ambigere aliquem posse expiari, and
ambigere utrum aliquis possit expiari; and the latter of these is Latin, the
former is not. Secondly, This way of Reading will make the two Members of the
Sentence to fall out with one another; for it follows immediately, and ut
impium non posse dicebat; so that, it seems, he was at a great nonplus in the
former part of the Sentence, and yet was very positive in the latter. Thirdly,
If Scaliger had known who this Mucius was, and had compared this Place of Varro
with another of Macrobius, he would have been out of doubt himself, and would
not have supposed that Mucius was in any. For it was not C. or Cajus Mucius, as
one of Scaliger's Copies falsely represented it; but Quintus Mucius Scaevola,
who had as good reason as any Man to be positive in these Cases; and that he
was so in this it self, the Words of Macrobius are a sufficient Proof. They are
Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 16. Perhaps this was the same whom he calls Q. Mucium
jureconsultum, ib. l. 1. c. 3. For there was a jus Pontificium as well as a jus
civil, and among the Pontifices there is more than one Scaevola to be met with
in the Roman Story. See the same Macrob. ib. l. 2. c. 9. p, 295. Ed. Pontani.
v. and Live. 27. 8. and in Epit. lib. 86.
these. Affirmabant (not ambigebant) autem Sacerdotes pollui ferias, si,
indictis conceptisque, opus aliquod fieret. Praeterea regem sacrorum
Flaminesque non licebat videre feriis opus fieri, and ideo per praeconem
denunciabatur, ne quid tale ageretur; and praecepti negligens multabatur;
praeter multam vero affirmabatur (not ambigebatur) eum, qui talibus diebus
imprudens aliquid egisset, porco piaculum dare debere; prudentem expiare non
posse Scaevola Pontifex affirmabat. For this same Scaevola was but the Surname
of the Family, their Name it self was Mucius or Mutius; and how extremely
exactly these two places agree, let any man be judge that shall compare them
together: So that this may serve for one Instance of the great Caution and
Prudence of the Roman Law, in not rescinding certain Acts that had been already
past, the better to maintain the public order and quiet, notwithstanding they
were antecedently prohibited and unlawful, notwithstanding they thwarted their
Prejudices or their Customs, and that the Persons by whose Intervention and
Authority the said Acts had been passed, were severely punishable by the Roman
Law.

Such another Case as this, is that which is mentioned by Pompeius Festus under
the word Sacer; which he makes to signify such a Person as was devoted to
Destruction, and Excommunicate out of the Roman State, and denied all the
benefits and advantages of Life, yet he was not condemned to Death by any
public Sentence, so as to Die by the hands of the Executioner: but if any
private Person happened to Kill him, either by chance, or of set purpose, he
was acquitted by an express Provision of the Law from any Punishment,
notwithstanding he had done what the Law did not allow him. Homo sacer is est,
says Festus, quem populus V. Jo. Scal. in Conject. ad Fest. p. 163.
judicavit ob maleficium, neque fas est eum immolari; sed qui occidit,
parricidii non damnatur, nam lege Tribunicia prima cavetur; si quis eum qui eo
plebiscito sacer sit occiderit, parricida ne sit. And this is the Second
Instance.

But Thirdly. Livy l. 10. c. 9. Speaks at the same rate of the Valerian Law.
Valeria Lex, cum eum qui provocasset virgis caedi securique necari vetuisset,
si quis adversus ea fecisset, nihil ultra quam improbe factum V. Alb. Genesis de
Nupt. l. 4 c. 6. p. 403. and H. Grot. de j. B. and P. in not. ad l. 5. c. 5.
sect. 16.
adjecit, id (qui tum pudor hominum erat) visum credo vinculum satis validum
legis; nunc vix servo ita minetur quisquam. And this Law is expressly applied to
the Matrimonial affair by Albericus Gentilis, and by Hugo Grotius; and in the
same place out of Macrobius he calls those Laws by the name of imperfectae
leges, which forbid a certain Fact, but yet have assigned no Punishment to the
offender; for so Macrobius says toward the end of his Commentary, in somnium
Scipionis, inter leges illa imperfecta dicitur, in qua nulla deviantibus paena
sancitur; and he urges in the same place a rescript of the Emperor Marcus to
the same purpose. Eum haeredem, qui prohibet Funerari ab eo quem testator
eligit, non recte facere, poenam tamen in eum Statutam non esse. These passages
of Grotius are in the Notes upon his excellent Treatise de jure Belli and
Pacis, and the place he refers to is l. 2. c. 5. sect. 16. where he has these
remarkable Words, which come still closer to our purpose, concerning the
possible validity of unlawful Marriages, where the Law it self does not enjoin
a Divorce. Imo etiam si Lex humana conjugia inter certas personas contrahi
prohibeat, non ideo sequetur irritum fore matrimonium si reipsa contrahatur,
sunt enim diversa, prohibere and irritum quid facere, nam prohibitio vim suam
exerere potest per paenam vel expressam vel arbitrariam, (which is as much as
to say, that where the Law does neither assign a determinate Punishment, nor
leave it to the Discretion of him to whom the Cognizance of the Fact shall
appertain; in this case there is no Punishment to be inflicted, neither can any
legal Cognizance of the Fact be taken, and then he goes on) Et hoc genus leges
imperfectas vocat Vlpianus (which agrees exactly with what has been already
Cited out of Macrobius) quae fieri quid vetant sed factum non rescindunt;
qualis erat Lex Cincia quae supra certum modum donare vetabat, donatum non
rescindebat.

So also in the Case of Marrying without consent of Parents or Friends, it is
the positive determination of Paulus in the Digests. L. 23. tit. 2. de ritu
Nuptiaru^.
Nuptiae consistere non possunt nisi consentiant omnes, id est, qui coeunt,
quorumque in potestate sunt: and by Harmenopulus, and the Authors of the jus
Graeco-Romanum Published by Leunclavius, such Marriages without consent are
pronounced void: But yet the same Paulus in another place sings plainly to
another Tune, for in his Second Book of V. Omnino etiam B. Brisson. de jur.
Connub p. 75.
received Opinions, he says thus, non esse quidem Matrimonium contrahendum
absque voluntate parentum at contractum non solvi tamen: in this opinion he is
followed by Cujacius a man of great name in the Civil Law, notwithstanding that
Albericus Gentilis has in vain endeavored in this and other particulars to
Blast his Authority and Reputation: And this Testimony of Paulus is the more
remarkable, because he puts it down inter Sententias receptas among the
received Opinions of the Lawyers of his time, so that it was as good Law, and
as commonly recevied, as any in that Age wherein this Paulus lived, which was
before the Digests were compiled, for many of those Decisions are laid at his
Door as their Author; nay, both of these Determinations, however inconsistent
they may seem, are to be met with in the Digests of Justinian: All the question
is, how to bring him in this Case to a tolerable agreement with himself; and
this cannot otherwise be done, but by interpreting the former place of the
Solennia Nuptiarum, as some of the Civilians do; for the Marriage in this Case
could not be so Solemn or so Public, as when the Consent of Friends was first
obtained, and it is probable for the greater Secrecy, that many Nuptial Rites
were omitted. Or else Secondly, That if the Parents or Friends quorum in
potestate conjuges ante nuptias fuissent, should still persist in their
Aversion to the Match, as well after it was actually Consummated, as before,
for want of a Settlement on the one hand, or Dowry on the other, the Marriage
out of perfect necessity might be dissolved. But as for the latter Pandects of
the Grecian Empire they are not to be hearkened to, they being as scrupulous
in their Prohibitions as the Cannon Law it self, which was so very much that
Cujacius complained of it in these words, nimia in nuptiis coercendis Cuja. ad
Rub. de Consang.
coarctandisque posteriorum urbis Romae Pontificum severitas parum abesse
videtur a nuptiarum prohibitione perpetua.

It is an undeniable Argument that these two maxims of the same Paulus are some
way or other reconcilable to one another, not only that they are both owing to
the same Author, but that they were both confirmed by the Imperial Sanction,
which would otherwise by this means be flatly repugnant and contradictory to it
self; wherefore the plain truth of the Story, as I take it, is this, a Son
being Married without his Fathers consent, he would not contribute any thing
toward his Maintenance; and in the Case of a Daughter doing the same thing,
all manner of Portion or Dowry was denied: The reason of which being demanded
by the Plaintiff, the Defendant made Answer, quia sine consensu Parentum vel
eorum in quorum potestate sumus, Nuptiae consistere non possunt; which was so
far true, that, in this Case, the Parents or Friends of the contracting Parties
were not obliged to do any thing for them, that is, though the Parties were
lawful Man and Wife ex post facto, yet the proceeding was irregular, and the
Relations were not bound to take notice of it, as of a lawful Marriage. But yet
if it apeared that the Parent did wrongfully detain his Son or Daughter from
Marriage, his Consent might be forced, and he compelled to give a Dowry by two
several Rescripts of Severus and Antoninus, C. Tit. de ritu Nupt. l. 19. D. l.
23. Tit. 3. de jure dotium.
Et ubi non est Matrimonium, ibi neque dos intelligitur, says the Civil Law,
or in the words of Vlpian which come a little nigher to those of Paulus above
Cited. Dotis appellatio non refertur ad ea Matrimonia quae consistere non
possunt: neque enim dos sine Matrimonio esse potest: ubicunque igitur
Matrimonii nomen non est, nec dos est. And if a Woman had no Dower or Portion,
which the Parent was not obliged to bestow, if she Married without his consent
before the age of Five and Twenty; for after that she was sui juris and might
Marry Lawfully V. Brisson. ubi supra.
to whomsoever she pleased, it was looked upon to be so disgaceful and
ignominious, that it was rather esteemed Concubinage than Marriage; and so in
this sense also, we may perphas say with Paulus, that Nuptiae consistere non
possunt, nisi consentiant omnes, id est, qui coeunt, quorumque in potestate
sunt. So Plautus speaks in his Trinummus, in the person of Callicles. Flagitium
quidem hercle fiet, nisi dos dabitur Virgini: And a little after in the same
Comedy, in the person of Lesbonicus, who thus bespeaks Lysitiles that would
have Married his Sister without a Portion:

-- Nolo ego mihi te

Tam prospicere, qui meam egestatem leves: sed, ut inops, Infamis ne sim, ne
mihi hanc famam differant, me Germanam meam Sororem in Concubinatum tibi sine
dote Dedisse magis quam in Matrimonium, quis me improbior Perhibeatur esse?

Not that it was really Concubinage, for then no poor Roman could have been
lawfully Married, but that it had a sort of ignominious resemblance with it,
and was not unfrequently upbraided with that name.

Nay, as strict as the Canon Law it self is, C. ult 2^* q. 1.
yet Gratianus expressly affirms Marriages without consent after they are once
actually Solemnized to be valid. For so he distinguishes Conjugia into Legitima
and rata, Legitima and non rata, and non Legitima and rata, and under the last
of these Heads he puts down Marriages without consent, though this indeed,
whatever may be said of Gratianus his private Opinion, cannot possibly be
reconciled with many other express determinations of the Canon Law. The reason
given by Paulus, why Marriages though without consent, ought notwithstanding to
be valid, is taken from the public interest, which ought to be preferred
before the private displeasure of non-consenting Parents or Friends, to which
though Albericus Gentilis make answer, by applying to this Case a scrap of
Tully, Reip. expedit pios habere Filios erga Parents, yet considering the
number of such Marriages, which will unavoidably happen, it being impossible to
set a Bar to Concupiscence, where there is no notional prejudice against the
Contract, as in the Case of Incest, it highly concerns the Public that such
Marriages should be valid, because of the great disturbance that might happen
by rescinding them; and because it is morally impossible by this expedient to
prevent such Marriages for the future; for Love of all others is the most
violent and ungovernable Passion, and there is a great deal of reason in that
saying of Quintilian, Nunquam libertas tam necessaria quam in Matrimonio est,
nam quis amare alieno animo potest? Wherefore the Civil Law of Rome did never
make such Marriages ipso facto void, but only left it to the Parents or Friends
to consider with themselves, what was fit for them to do, and whether such
Marriages after they were Consummated should be Ratified and Confirmed or no.
And this in Parents or those that were Parentum loco, proceeded from the
absolute and unaccountable power, which by the old Laws and usages of Rome, all
Parents had over their Children, which extended as far as to the power of Life
and Death; and in the Case of Marriage, they could not only null and make void
a Marriage without consent, but which is still more, though Marriage were
actually Consummate by the consent of all Parties, yet it was still in the
power of the Parents to separate the Man and Wife as they pleased, as is
evident by several Testimonies of Antiquity Lib. 4. de nupt. c. 6. p. 411, 412.
produced by Albericus Gentilis out of Plautus, Cicero, and Terence, though it
is true he expound them chiefly not of the Roman but the Grecian Practice, and
this not without some appearance of Reason; but yet this power being manifestly
included within the greater power of Life and Death, I see no reason why we may
not apply these Testimonies to Rome as well as to Greece: But however it is
certain that the latter Laws of Rome looked upon this to be too great a power,
and a power, which perhaps experience had showed them, was too frequently
abused, and therefore took care that no Marriage which was Ratified by Solemn
Consent, should after that become void, upon every caprice or displeasure of
the Parents: and though all Marriages without consent were Illegal, yet by the
best Lawyers they were declared valid, because of the detriment that would
accrue to the public, as well as to private Persons by rescinding all Matches
of this nature. Ulpianus quidem certe, De jure Connub. p. 75.
says Brissonius, been concordantia matrimonia jure patriae potestatis turbari
non posse, patrique interdicto sibi filiam exhiberi desideranti persuadendum,
ne acerbe patriam exerceat potestatem scribit, imo vero de uxore exhibenda ac
ducenda patrem etiam qui in potestate eam habeat, a marito recte conveniri
posse, Hermogenianus auctor est, interdicto quoque succurri marito cujus uxor
invita a parentibus detinetur Impp. rescripsere, ex illo vero generali Ulpiani
axiomate, quo been concordantia matrimonia jure patriae potestatis non esse
turbanda definit, interpretationem meo quidem judicio accipit, quod Paulus in
lib. Sententiarum scribit, eorum qui in patris potestate sunt, sine voluntate
ejus matrimonia jure non contrahi, sed contracta non solvi. St. Ambrose in his
Epistle S. Ambrose (...).
to Sisynnius, commends him very much for not dissolving his Sons Marriage,
though it were without his consent; and he gives such a reason against a
Divorce, as may extend to many other Cases: Acquisisti Filiam, says he, sine
electionis periculo, si bonam duxit, tibi acquisivit gratiam, si erravit,
recipiendo meliores facies, refutando deteriores. And certainly there ought
great tenderness to be used in all the Cases of Matrimony Consummate, that two
that have an entire and hearty Love for each other, and for that reason cannot
brook a Divorce, may not be rendered desperate by a violent separation.
Albericus Gentilis himself confesses De Nupt. c. 7. ^. 419.
that it is cruelty for the Parent in this Case to insist too much upon his
right; but there can be no Cruelty without Injustice, and therefore that
Marriage which it is unjust to make void, must needs be valid in its own
nature. The same was likewise the Case of two that had been actually parted,
they could not come together again without their Parents consent, as appears by
this passage of Vlpianus, Nuptiae inter easdem L. tit. de ritu Nupt. l. 18.
personas nisi volentibus parentibus renovatae justae non habentur. But yet
notwithstanding if the Parties persisted in it, this Marriage must be valid for
the same reason with those in the former Case. There was also required the
Consensus eorum qui coeunt, as well as eorum in quorum potestate erant, the
Consent of the Parties as well as of the Parents. And this besides the Law
already produced, is the express determination of Terentius Clemens, non
cogitur filius familias Ib. l. 21.
uxorem ducere. But yet such a forced Match whenever it was Consummate was
valid, according to this of Celsus, Si patre cogente Ib. l. 22.
duxit uxorem, quam non duceret, si sui arbitrii esset, contraxit tamen
matrimonium, quod inter invitos non contrahitur, maluisse hoc videtur.

And to apply what has been here said to our present Case: If the Law be so
tender of the Band of Matrimony, where the Parties Contracting are guilty of a
wilful violation of one of the Prae-requisites in order to it, as there is no
Man or Woman that Marries without the Consent of Parents or Friends, but knows
very well in the first place, that he or she does really do it; and in the
second, that this ought by no means to be done; and that, besides that the Law
requires and expects, this Consent, they themselves in the same Circumstance
should take it very ill, to have their Children or nearest Relations committed
to their Charge, Marry without or contrary to their Advice and Counsel, how
much more tender and favorable ought it then to be to the Matrimonial Band,
where the Parties Contracting in a Degree not declared to be prohibited by the
Law it self, but only inferred by Proportion or by Parity of Reason, may very
well be supposed to be ignorant, that what they did, was any Sin against God,
or any Offense against the Law of the Land? If either of them be but ignorant,
it is sufficient; for the Party acting in simplicity and truth, ought not to
suffer for the Presumption of the other: and therefore the Marriage must remain
indissoluble and valid on both sides. And as to the particular Instance here
before us, when it is no where expressly prohibited by Act of Parliament,
certainly it must needs appear a very hard Case for two Parties to be violently
separated from each other, both of which, but especially the Woman, may very
well be supposed to have come together without any the least scruple or
misprision of Offense, and without having ever thought of, or in the least
suspected any of those pretended Consequences and Deductions which the
Adversaries of such Marriages would charge them withal: When yet the most
Learned of the Jews themselves, who spent their whole time in the Study of the
Levitical Law, and who have prohibited many other Degrees, besides what the
Code of Moses does expressly mention, who are scrupulous even to all the nicety
and fondness of Superstition it self, in the observance of the Mosaic
Sanctions, yet could never discern, nor have V. Seldom. Ux. Hebr. l. c. 1. 2.
and de Jur. Not. and Gent. juxta Discipl. Hebraeor. l. 5. c. 1. and Buxtorf.
Fill. de Sponsal and Divort. a p. 9. ad 37.
ever given us the least intimation of the Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece
being forbidden. For Maimonides and the Talmudists divide the Matrimonial
Prohibitions into Harajoth and Shenijoth, by the first understanding the
Prohibitions expressed, and by the second, such as are implied by Parity of
Reason, though they are not expressly set down; and they take no manner of
notice under the second of these Heads, for it was impossible they should do it
under the first, of the Marriage of the Uncle with his Brother or Sisters
Daughter. I do not stand much upon the Judgment of the Jews, either in their
Interpretations of the Text, or in their Inferences from it; but yet I say, it
is very hard, nay, it is almost palpably unjust and cruel, that a Divorce
should proceed by virtue of a pretended Violation of the Law Levitical, in a
Degree which neither the Act of Parliament has expressed, nor the Jews, the
wisest and the learnedest of them, he whom they call the Talmud and the
Chacham, did ever believe to be implied; but, on the contrary, they expressly
allowed, I do not say, dispensed with Marriages of this nature, and there are
several Instances of them to be V. Grot. de J. B. and P. l. 2. c. 5. sect. 14.
and in Annotatis ib.
met with in the Jewish Story: Certainly it must needs be a Consequence which
does not lie very plain; (and such cannot be supposed to come within the
Obligation of a Law) which so many celebrated Rabbis and diligent Inquirers
into the Meaning of the Law of Moses, could not after all their Search and
Industry discern.

Again, If in the opinion of Celsus above-recited, which Opinion was past into
a Law by the Sanction of Justinian, a Marriage which is forced upon the Parties
Contracting by Threats or Hardships from their Parents or Friends, shall yet
notwithstanding be valid, because of the great Inconveniences that follow from
an unnecessary untying or cutting asunder the Matrimonial Knot; how much more
ought Marriage to be Sacred, where the Contract is entered into by mutual
Inclination, the Marriage Solemnized by Law, Consummated by Enjoyment, made
every day more pleasing and delightful by a strict Friendship and inviolable
Union, by mutual Condescensions, Caresses, and Obligations, from whence the
Nuptial Rites receive a Confirmation of Nature, by an Harmony of Love and
Sympathy with and for one another, extrinfique to any thing of Covenant or
Bargain?

What has been said of Marriages without V. Alberic. Gentil. ex Cujacio l. 4.
de Nuptiis, c. 6. p. 41^.
Consent, which yet notwithstanding were valid by the Civil Law, the same was
likewise true of Clandestine Marriage, and Marriage of a Christian with an
Heathen or Pagan; both of which were forbidden by Imperial Rescripts, but yet
were valid notwithstanding de futuro, although ex antecedently prohibited and
unlawful.

But to come up still nearer to the Instance before us; Grotius has this
remarkable L. 2. c. 5. sect. 14. paragr. 4.
Passage in his Book de Jure Belli and Pacis: Sed sciendum est, non quod
vetitum est fieri lege divina, irritum quoque esse, nisi and hoc lex addiderit
aut significaverit. Canon Eiliberinus LX, si quis post obitum uxoris suoe
sororem ejus duxerit, and ipsa fuerit fidelis, per quinquennium eum a
communione abstinet: eo ipso ostendens manner vinculum matrimonii. Et ut jam
diximus, in Canononibus, qui Apostolici dicuntur, qui duas sorores duxerit aut
fratris filiam, tantum Clericus fieri prohibetur. From which Passage it is
plain in the Judgment of this Great Man, what has been already proved from
several express Testimonies out of the Civil Law, not only that that Fact
cannot be punished by any Legal Sentence, which is only implied obscurely to be
forbidden, but no where expressly declared to be so; but that even in case of a
simple Prohibition, without a certain Punishment or Forfeiture assigned, no
such Forfeiture can in this Case be incurred, nor any such Punishment
inflicted: Wherefore the Marriage of an Uncle to his Niece being no where
prohibited by any positive Levitical Decree, and much less having any
Punishment allotted to it, it cannot be punished by any Judicial Sentence; for
we must either say, That Divorce is no Punishment though with respect to the
Relation betwixt Man and Wife, it be certainly the heaviest of all other,
because it perfectly destroys and evacuates that Relation; or else, That a
Divorce betwixt Persons Married in this Degree, is absolutely and undoubtedly
unlawful, upon account of any such Relation.

Further, Though I readily grant the Prohibitions of Leviticus to proceed all
of them upon the Measures of Nature, yet though the Laws are Natural, the
Sanction of them is Positive, and no more: For God might have assigned other
Punishments if he had pleased, as Servitude, hard Labor, Ignominy, Fine,
Confiscation, Imprisonment, the loss of any Limb or Member, or any other
Punishment short of Life it self, without any manner of disparagement to his
Justice, or any violation of the Laws of Nature. Wherefore in so great variety
of possible Infliction, what Punishment can we assign as an Act of Obedience to
the Levitical Law, when that Law it self has not assigned any?

Adultery by the Law of Moses was punished with Death in both Parties; but by
ours it is not so: Which is a plain Argument, whatever may be said of unlawful
Marriages and unlawful Lusts, in which we are governed by the Levitical
Measures, yet, as to the Punishments consequent upon them, we have Measures of
our own; and therefore where no Punishment is expressly determined by our Law,
or at least expressly left to the Discretion of the Judge or Court, or of any
other Person or Persons to whom the Cognizance of the Matter shall appertain,
in this Case no Punishment can lawfully be inflicted: How then can we with
Justice proceed to a Divorce in case of such a Marriage, as to which the
Levitical Law is silent as well as ours?

So likewise in the Case of Buggery, or Bestiality, it was Death without Mercy
by the Law of Moses; and so it is by ours made Felony without Benefit of
Clergy: But this was not till the 25th. of H. 8. and Cap. 6.
if that or some other Statute of Provision had not been made, we must either
say that that Act of Parliament was altogether fruitless, or else that it would
not have been Capital to this Moment. Wherefore there being no Punishment
expressly assigned, or expressly left to the Judgment and Discretion of any
Ecclesiastical Judge by our Law, though it had been expressly prohibited, and
more than that expressly punishable by the Law of Moses, for a Man to Marry with
his Niece; yet notwithstanding, it could not have been so by ours.

And to show yet further that our Law does neither inflict any Punishment, nor
remove it, though the Case be never so plain, without an express Probibition in
that particular behalf, I will instance in two other things not yet mentioned;
the first, concerning the Infliction of Punishment; the second, concerning the
Removal of it. The first is of a Clerk convict of Felony or Murder, and after
Conviction breaking Prison. Concerning which, there is an Act in the 23 d. of
H. 8. the Preamble of which Cap. 11.
is in these Words. Where diverse Persons being convict of Murder or Felony,
having the Privilege of their Clergy, and delivered to the Ordinaries,
afterward wilfully break the Prisons of the Ordinaries, and escape their ways,
doing and committing great, horrible, and detestable Offenses: and as hitherto
for such wilful breaking of Prisons of Ordinaries by Clerks Convict, has not
been provided any great Penalty, whereby they should stand in dread of doing
the same; Be it therefore Enacted, etc. After which follows the Body of the
Act, by which such Breach of Prison for the future is made to be Felony without
Sanctuary or Benefit of Clergy. From which Words it is plain, for I do not
argue from the Act it self, it being only a Repeal of 4 H. 7. c. 13. by which
the Benefit of Clergy was allowed to Clergymen as often as they should offend,
That it is the sense of the King, and his Three Estates assembled in
Parliament, which is as much as to say, it is the Law of England, That no
greater Penalty can be inflicted for any Crime, than what the Law has expressly
determined; neither has any Man reason to dread any Punishment, but what the
Law has denounced against his Offense. From which general Rule I cannot
discern that there is any one Exception, unless it be in the Case of those
Punishments which are expressly left to Discretion by the Law, which I am sure
is not the Case of an Uncle Marrying with his Niece; and therefore whether the
thing be Naturally or Levitically Lawful or no, which I do not yet examine, it
is certain, that a Divorce, which cannot be denied to be a Punishment, cannot
legally ensue upon it.

The second thing is this; Because, generally speaking, it was a Rule in Law,
that he that killed another should at least incur the Forfeiture of his Goods
and Chattels, it was therefore doubted in Parliament, whether 24 H. 8. ^. 5.
he that killed a Thief in his own defense should not forfeit his Goods: And
this Doubt could not otherwise be determined, but by a definitive Sentence of
that August Assembly, ratified by the King, by which it was declared for the
future, That he should not incur any Damage or Prejudice thereby. Now a Man
would think this was a plain Case: Here was a Thief on the one hand, not only a
Criminal, but a Capital Offender; and on the other there is Self-defence, a
real and a necessary Duty, which the Laws of all Nations must needs be supposed
to be very favorable and propitious to. It is a plain Case that here could be
no Guilt, and therefore a Man would think no Punishment should accrue: But, it
seems, our Law was not of this mind; and there being a general Rule that all
sorts of Manslaughter should be punished with Forfeiture of Goods and Chattels,
this, though the plainest and the most reasonable Instance that can possibly be
thought of, could not by any means be exempted out of it, without a definitive
Declaration of the Legislative Power, by which all such Forseitures should
afterward be remitted. So that nothing can be more evident, than that the Law
of England, both in the Obligations which it lays, and in the Privileges and
Immunities it confers upon us, does not proceed by Innuendoes, Consequences,
and probable Intimations; but by express, positive, and particular Decrees: And
indeed if it should do otherwise, the Inconvenience would be infinite, and the
true Extent and Latitude of every Law uncertain.

The Law of Moses, in the Twentieth of Leviticus, has assigned no Punishment
but that of present death in case of any Incestuous or Prohibited Conjunction;
as will appear to any Man that shall look over that Chapter: there being no
imaginable color of doubt, unless it be ver. 17, 19, 20, 21. in the two first
of which it is said, he or they shall bear his or their iniquity; in the two
latter, they shall bear their iniquity, they shall die childless: The sense of
which is certainly the same with, they shall surely be put to death, and their
blood shall be upon them, in several other places of that Chapter; and by their
being childless is meant, that the Sentence of Death and Execution of it should
immediately pass upon them, without giving them time to propagate themselves by
their Issue. Now the Marriage of an Uncle to his Niece, if it be unlawful at
all, being no otherwise than consequentially so, because that of an Aunt with
her Nephew was forbidden, if it be the same Crime, it deserves the same
Punishment; and consequently, both Parties should be put to death: But if it be
not the same Crime, it is no Crime at all; for it is no otherwise inferred to
be a Crime, but by a pretended Parity of Reason. Wherefore since it must needs
appear extremely hard, and for that Reason unjust, to put a Man or Woman to
death for the sake of a Consequence which he or she might very well not
foresee, as none of the Jewish Rabbis appear to have done; and since there is
no other or lesser Punishment that can be inferred due by Parity of Reason, if
any such Parity indeed there be, it follows plainly, that the Levitical Law
has assigned no Punishment to this supposed Offense; wherefore the Law of
England proceeding upon the Levitical Measures, cannot possibly inflict any:
and therefore two Parties standing in this Relation, are thus far at least
Marriageable by the Law of England, that after they are once Married, they
cannot be Divorced.

I do not deny that there is a great deal of regard to be had to Parity of
Reason, where this Parity or Potiority of Reason and of Degree meet together;
as there is no question but it is Levitically unlawful for a Man to lie with
his own Daughter, or with his whole Sister, though neither of these are
expressly forbidden: but it is forbidden for him to do the same with his
Daughters Daughter, which is a Degree farther off; and with his Half-Sister,
who is but half so much a kin as the Whole-Sister; for the Whole Sister is
really the Half Sister and as much again; and therefore these things must be
Levitically unlawful, if there be any such thing as Reason or Obligation in the
World; and if nearness of Kin, which is by much greater and stronger in the
former Instances than in the latter, be, as it is positively declared to be,
the Rule and Measure of Levitical Prohibition, besides that the Practice of the
Jewish Church, and of all Nations, from the time of Moses, where any
Matrimonial Prohibitions have obtained, has constantly pronounced such
Marriages to be unlawful, and the Issue propagated from them, if any such there
should be, to be spurious and illegitimate; which is so far from being true in
our Case, that the latter Jews, at least as far off as Maimonides, and so much
further as the Talmudical Doctors, have concluded the Degree we are speaking of
to be Lawful; and I shall prove in the Sequel of this Discourse, that though
there be indeed a Parity of Degree between the Marriage of the Aunt with her
Nephew, and that of the Uncle with his Niece, yet there is by no means a Parity
of Reason.

It is likewise true, that the old Roman Laws did forbid the Marriage of the
Uncle to his Brother or Sisters Daughter; and so it did likewise the Marriage
of Cousin-Germans: and though the latter Jews have allowed both of these, yet I
conceive the latter to be plainly prohibited in the Law it self, and the
former, though it be no where expressly prohibited, yet, as I always thought,
and do think still, it ought to be amongst us. It was probably avoided by the
ancient Jews, for the Reason which St. Austin gives for the avoidance of
Marriage with Cousin-Germans. Factum etiam licitum S. Aug. de C. D. l. 15^ c.
16.
propter vicinitatem horrebatur illiciti, and quod fiebat cum consobrina pene
cum sorore fieri videbatur: And so here, Quod fiebat cum fratris vel sororis
filia pene cum amita vel matertera fieri videbatur. From the Practice of the
ancient Jews, as I have intimated Letter concerning the Marriage of
Cousin-Germans.
elsewhere, the Romans seem to me to have derived both of these, together with
all other their Matrimonial Prohibitions; but this, though it may be an
Argument ex antecedenti to weigh upon the Consciences of the Parties
Contracting, when they stand in this Relation to each other, for a dissolution
of such Contract or Matrimonial Agreement, by mutual and alternative Consent;
and though a Casuist being consulted, may make use of it, if he pleases, as a
Topique of Dissuasion, to hinder any such Marriage, if it may be done: yet a
Contract being once made, it cannot otherwise be dissolved, upon any such
indemonstrable Supposition; and a Marriage being once Consummated in pursuance
of the aforesaid Contract, this is no sufficient ground for a Judge or Court
Ecclesiastical to proceed to Sentence of Divorce upon, especially considering,
that though there were such a customary Bar among the ancient Jews, which they
did not usually violate or transgress, yet this does not in the least appear to
have depended upon the Obligation of any Law, but only upon a Resemblance,
though not amounting to a Parity of Cases, and upon Modestinus his Reason, upon
which it is a matter not of Obligation, but Prudence, whether we will proceed
or no, semper in conjunctionibus non D^t^t. De Rita Nuptiarum. l. 42.
solum quid liceat considerandum est, sed and quid honestum sit; and in all
such Cases, though a Marriage ought not to have been entered into, yet it cannot
with any face of Justice be dissolved, because it is supposed beforehand to be
at least barely Lawful.

And now we are speaking of the Marriage of Cousin-Germans, which I have proved
already in my Papers upon that Subject to be Levitically prohibited and
unlawful; and yet notwithstanding I am clearly of opinion, as I always was,
that all such Marriages already Consummate, ought in all Reason and Conscience
to be good and valid; and I suppose there is no Lawyer that is not of my mind:
Is it not a very hard Case, if an Uncle and Niece Marrying should be Divorced
violently, without either of their Consents, though neither the Law of Moses,
nor of England, have any where so much as mentioned their Case, and much less
expressly prohibited and forbidden it; when yet notwithstanding Cousin-Germans,
who are expressly condemned in all ordinary Cases by the Dispensation granted to
the Daughters of Zelophehad, shall Marry as they please, without the least
Disturbance, and without incurring any danger of Separation? On the other side,
if all the Cousin-Germans now in being, who are engaged in Matrimony to one
another, should by the severity of the Law Ecclesiastical be Divorced, what a
present Disturbance and Confusion would it make? And how would it reflect upon
the Descendents of such Parents, who are much more numerous than the other? And
how then can it be equitable to dissolve those Marriages against which there
lies no manner of Legal Proof, when those that are so plainly excepted in the
Levitical Law, unless in the Case there specified to the contrary, which does
not belong either to our Age or Nation, shall not only be spared and pardoned
for what is past, but without control allowed and practiced for the future?

I know it will be said, notwithstanding the Case of the Daughters of
Zelophehad, That such Marriages are not prohibited in those Chapters of
Leviticus where the Degrees prohibited are set down. But first, I say, This is
by no means a fair Objection; for it is sufficient if it be any where
forbidden, and there is no question but the thirty sixth of Numbers is a
Chapter of every whit as good Authority, as the eighteenth and twentieth of
Leviticus; and unless it can be proved, that they any where contradict, they
cannot possibly derogate from one another.

Secondly, If we consider that these and suchlike Enormities were the declared
Reasons of the Destruction of the Amorites, and other Nations, which shows
Incestuous Marriages, for some Reason or other, to have been very displeasing
to Almighty God; therefore out of a just tenderness to displease his Divine
Majesty, and provoke his just Wrath and Indignation against us, we ought to
explain all these Prohibitions in the utmost Latitude which the Words will
bear; that Interpretation which is certainly the safest, being in this Case
also certainly the best. Therefore I would ask any Man, when it is said, Levit.
18. 9. The nakedness of thy Sister, the Daughter of thy Father, or Daughter of
thy Mother, whether she be born at home or born abroad, even their nakedness
thou shall not uncover; Whether the Sister born abroad may not very rationally
be interpreted of a Cousin-German? For the Hebrew Idiom is used to call all by
the name of Brethren and Sisters, that are of the same Blood and Kindred with
each other, as Abraham said to Lot his Brothers Son, Chi Achim anachnou, For we
be Brethren; so the Romans called them Fratres patrueles, consobrini, amitini;
and St. Austin says, Fratres appellantur and S. Aug. ubi supra. V. etiam Paul.
Dia. l. 12. Append. ad Eutropium
paene Germani sunt; and Aurelius Victor says of Theodosius Major, That he did
tantum pudori and continentiae tribuere, ut consobrinarum conjugia vetuerit,
tanquam sororum: And Deucalion says to Pyrrha his Wife and Cousin-German in
Ovid,

O soror, O conjux, O faemina sola superstes,
Cui commune mihi genus and patruelis origo.
And then for the Expression of born abroad, nothing can suit more naturally
than that does to a Cousin-German, who is born abroad, that is, in another
House and Family, and is not descended of the same immediate Father or Mother.
I am not ignorant that there are other Interpretations, which I confess wnat
not their show of probability; and that this which I have laid down, being
carried as far as it will go, will prove more largely than I intend it should,
that is, it will extend to a Prohibition of the Uncle with relation to his
Niece, according to that of Abraham to his Nephew Lot, We be Brethren: For if a
Nephew be a Brother, a Niece is a Sister, and a Sister born abroad. But here I
desire it may be considered, first, That by a Sister born abroad it is most
probable some one thing is understood, not two or three several Relations under
one, which would make the Signification of this Law to be very confused,
uncertain, and obscure; therefore without some other apparent Reason to induce
us to it, besides what we meet with in the Law it self, we are not to interpret
any Law in this manner. Secondly, Though the Word Sister may be extended
farther, yet it most properly signifies one that is born of the same Parents,
one or both; and for the same reason, with analogy to the most strict and
proper acceptance, a Sister born abroad will signify rather a Relation in
plano than in declivi, an equal and collateral, rather than an unequal and
descending; so that this Interpretation which I have pitched upon, is, without
any manner of prejudice or partiality, plainly preferreable before the other To
this purpose it is remarkable, that the Codex Graeco-Romanus, calls
Cousin-Germans all along by the name of (...), that is, (...). Brethren born
abroad.
.

If any Man shall still further demand, What Punishment is allotted to the
Violation of this Law against the Marriage of Cousin-Germans; it being
unreasonable, as will be sure to be pretended, to make a Law without a Sanction
to enforce Obedience to it? To this I answer, first, That this in Humane Laws
is very certain, that when no temporal Damage or Inconvenience is proposed to
Disobedience, the Law it self is a nullity, because a Man is still in the same
condition, whether he obeys or no; or, it may be, he may get more by
Disobedience against the Law, than by Compliance with it: But in Divine Laws
the case is otherwise; for these, though no Punishment be expressly annexed to
the Violation of them, yet besides an Obligation of the highest Gratitude which
is laid upon us to him to whom we owe our Being and our Preservation, together
with all the Comforts and Enjoyments of Life; besides that he makes no Law, but
what, without any Interest or Emolument accruing to himself, who is infinitely
Happy and Blessed in his own Nature, is purely levelled at the Good of his
Creatures, and at the Happiness of those to whom such Laws are prescribed;
besides all this, his Right of Punishment does not therefore cease, because he
has not expressly denounced what the particular Punishment shall be, in case of
the breach of this or that Prohibition; but, on the contrary, if we obstinately
and wilfully resist what we believe to be his declared Mind and Will, though it
be not enforced by any particular Sanction, we give him a Right of Justice,
besides that of his Absolute Sovereignty over us, to punish us to what degree
and in what manner he pleases; and we have the Terrors of Omnipotence before
our Eyes, which are enough to terrify the most daring Sinner, whenever he lays
them seriously and attentively before him.

Secondly, There is a plain Instance of a Levitical Prohibition to which there
is no Sanction annexed; Levit. 18. 18. Neither shall thou take a Wife to her
Sister to vex her, to uncover her nakedness, besides the other, in her
lifetime; as will appear by comparing this Chapter with the twentieth, where
this Crime and its Punishment are not so much as mentioned. The Jews interpret
V. Seldenum and Buxtorfium ubi supra.
this Place of two real and proper Sisters, in the most strict acceptance of
that Word; that is, Sisters by the same common Parent, either one or both; and
they agree unanimously, that though it be not lawful to be Married to two
Sisters together, yet that one after the other, there was no doubt but it might
very safely and lawfully be done, because the Reason of the Law is added, to
vex her in her lifetime. But in this I am by no means of the same Opinion with
the Rabbis, there being so strict a Parity of Reason against it. For the Wives
Sister is, as exactly as any thing can be, the very same Relation with the
Husbands Brother; which being so severely prohibited in all Cases, but where
the Propagating the Family, and the keeping the Inheritance in the same House
and Line is concerned, it is impossible to conceive otherwise, where nearness
of Kin is the declared Reason and Measure of these Prohibitions, but where
there is exactly the same nearness of Kin, there must also be exactly the same
Obligation, upon the Conscience of him or her that shall reflect upon it, at
least, though the Breach of that Obligation which is not set down disertis
verbis in the Law, may not possibly be attended with any Legal Effects. The
Canon of the Council of Eliberis, already mentioned out of Grotius, did not
certainly understand this Place as the Jews appear to have done, because it
expressly prohibits the Marriage of two Sisters, though one after the Decease of
the other, upon the same Reason I have mentioned; for I do not perceive that
there can be any other: But yet those Fathers of the Eliberine Synod did not
proceed to a Divorce upon this occasion, but only banished the Husband so
offending from the Communion of the Church for the space of five years after
his Conviction of any such Offense; and the Apostolical Canon referred to by
the same Grotius, which is the Nineteenth in Number, and, as I take it, comes
within the compass of those that have the Reputation of Genuine among Learned
Men, and to be sure was a Canon of great Antiquity in the Church, though it
forbids the Thing, yet is nothing so severe in the Punishment of it; for it
only debars the Offender from being of the Clergy, because such ought to give
the greatest Examples of Continence and Sobriety, but yet plainly intimating at
the same time, that it would be highly commendable and Praiseworthy in others,
not to engage themselves in Marriages of this nature. And from these two Canons
compared together, or indeed from either of them considered by it self, we may
make these three observations.

First, We have very great and sacred Authority to persuade us that a Divorce
was never practiced in the Ancient Christian Church, upon parity of reason,
although that parity were never so plain, as I have shown it in this Case to be
so very exact that nothing can be more.

Secondly, That a consideration was always had to the infirmity of Women, who
generally speaking, cannot be supposed to understand the niceties of Law so
well as their Husbands may do, or might have done, and therefore in these two
Canons, the Church did not think it reasonable to inflict any Censure upon them.

Thirdly, But there was also another reason of this severity, which I have
insisted more largely upon in other Papers.
That notwithstanding the severity of the Canon Law against Bigamy, in the
Clergy especially, which seems to have been founded upon a mistaken
Interpretation of this place of Leviticus, they taking Sister in this place for
any woman in general, as indeed it ought to be taken, though not so as to make
this inference from it, yet this was not first denied to Clergymen themselves;
much less were they utterly debarred from Marriage, only they were forbidden to
Marry two Sisters one after the other.

But, I confess, I do, and have of a long time understood this place as a
Prohibition of Polygamy. The word Sister according to the Hebrew Idiom being
coextended to all of the Female Sex among the Jews; because the latitude of
obligation in any Law whatsoever, where there are not other particular and
express restraints laid upon it, is to be taken from the extent of the reason
upon which that obligation is founded, which in this place is, to vex her in
her life time. Now if Competition, Jealousy, and Emulation, will cause
Vexation and Strife among persons at never so great a distance, as well as
among Sisters, then Sister in this place is of necessity to be expounded in a
greater Latitude, then in its first and primary signification; but yet
Polygamy, notwithstanding this, was sometimes practiced without control among
the Jews, as indeed, there being no express punishment assigned or left to the
discretion of a Consistory or Court of Judicature, this Law was a nullity in it
self, only being, as it was a Divine Prohibition, the Person offending wilfully
against it, was left, without the Cognizance of humane Laws to the Divine
Justice on the one hand, or Mercy upon his Repentance on the other. And that
which gave occasion, by giving some glance of encouragement to the breach of
this Law, was that it had no Sanction annexed; for not only an humane Law
without a Sanction is a Nullity; but they might also reasonably conclude, that
that Law which had no Sanction annexed, though it would be the greater act of
Obedience to comply with it; yet that God would not be so heavily offended with
its breach, as with those against which he had expressly denounced excision and
certain Death; for that there seemed to be as much difference betwixt the
heinousness of these two Crimes, as there is betwixt Life and Death themselves;
wherefore they might perhaps please themselves with an Opinion in this Case,
that a Sin or a Trespass Offering would make Atonement for them, and set all
things right. However, this is certain, though Polygamy were expressly forbidden
in this place; yet there being no punishment annexed to the Law it self, the
Jews looked upon it, rather as a matter of Prudence than Obligation, and that
whenever strife might be avoided by the good temper of two or more Women in the
same House, there Polygamy was next kin to lawful, and where no punishment of
Divine institution was annexed, there they would not presume to establish one of
their own, and therefore no Divorce by any public Sentence, unless the parties
had a mind to separate from each other, was ever allowed upon the account of
Polygamy, so tender were they of a Divorce, even in a Case that interfered with
an express provision of the Divine Law, and perhaps the true reason why God
annexed no punishment to the violation of this Law, was because Polygamy where
it produces strife, is sufficiently punished by it self, which none of the other
Prohibitions are, any otherwise than by the inward stings of a relenting
Conscience, which the offender before hand may very well be supposed to have
lost, let them be violated never so often. Neither was the Christian Law less
tender of a Divorce, in the Case of Polygamy with respect to such parties, as
had engaged in it, before they became Disciples and Coverts to Christianity,
then the Jewish was, though, after our having once embraced that holy
Profession, it is not only unlawful, ex antecedenti, See my resolution of three
Matrimonial Cases toward the latter end.
but a Divorce ought to ensue at least, besides what other punishment the Civil
Laws think reasonable to inflict, after such Polygamy is actually engaged in,
not only because of the general design of Christianity, which aims much more
earnestly at all the highest instances of Charity and good will, than the
Jewish dispensation did, and therefore the state of Polygamy which is a natural
occasion of strife, from which no man can be perfectly secure, can never be a
lawful Christian State, but also because the Union of the Husband to one Wife,
as one and the same Flesh, is declared to be a Symbol of the inseparable Union
of Christ and his Church, and of the entire and incommunicable Love of the one
to the other: And on the other hand Polygamy, by the rule of contraries, is a
Symbol of Polytheisme, or of the Worship of many and False Gods, which is the
most directly opposite to Christianity that any thing can possibly be conceived
to be. Wherefore if the Law of Moses, and if the Christian Dispensation it self
were so extremely tender of a Divorce in this Case, notwithstanding it was a
plain disobedience to an express Divine Prohibition, how much more tender ought
it to be in this Case, where there is not only no punishment assigned, but also
no express Prohibition to be found, and where the breach of Charity, the honor
of Christianity, and the incommunicable respect and Service due to the true and
only God, are the two first of them not so much, and the latter not at all
concerned.

But Thirdly, I say, the Marriage of Cousin-Germans is expressly threatened even
with Capital Punishment, Levit. 20. 17. in these words, If a man shall take his
sister, his fathers daughter or his mothers daughter, and see her nakedness,
and she see his nakedness, it is a wicked thing; and they shall be cut off in
the sight of their people, which place is manifestly parallel to Chap. 18. 9.
where I have shown the word Sister to be taken in this latitude, at least by a
possible interpretation, which I have said, and shown good reason for it, is in
these Cases the safest, and consequently the best. Besides, that Aeschylus in
his (...), as I have elsewhere observed, refers manifestly to the story of the
Daughters of Zelophehad, and the whole Play is little or nothing else but a
continued harangue, and a perpetual, uninterrupted Declamation against the
Incestuous Foulness of the Marriage of Cousin-Germans: And Theodosius the
First, who punished this sort of Marriage with Burning, Proscription and the
declared illegitimacy of the offspring derived from it, did without question
take his Copy from more Ancient times, and probably at the long run from the
Jews, among whom the parties so offending were to be cut off in the sight of
their people; for that general expression is indifferent in it self, whether it
be determined to Burning or to any thing else, and this was expressly the
Punishment of Incontinence with a Wife and her Mother, Ver. 14. of that
Chapter. If therefore those Marriages shall be dispensed with, which were so
plainly Prohibited by the Law of Moses, with what Face can we Divorce those
which are not any where Prohibited at all, or so much as any where taken notice
of or named?

If it be still further demanded, how can it appear rational to any man to
suppose that the Law of Moses should be so extremely severe against the
Marriage of the Aunt and Nephew, as to punish it with present Death, Lev. 19.
20. and yet so very gentle and favorable to that of an Uncle with his Niece, as
to take no Cognizance, no notice of it, much less to punish it with any thing
of rigor, notwithstanding there be so exact a parity of degree in both these
Cases, the one being only as it were the reverse of the other?

By this Paragraph I desire I may be understood, as to what I have said above
concerning the same nearness of Kin, in the Case of a man Marrying two Sisters,
or a woman two Brothers one after the other; for it is plain, that there is not
only a parity of degree but of reason also, otherwise I con-confess, if either
of these had failed, my argument there would have been very inconclusive.
To this I answer, in the first place, what I have already affirmed, and shall
more largely demonstrate by and by, that though there be indeed a parity of
Degree, yet there is not a parity of Reason; for the former of these may very
well be without the latter, though the latter cannot be without the former:
There cannot be a parity of Prohibition where there is not the same nearness of
Kin, but there may be the same nearness of Kin where there is not a parity of
Prohibition.

Secondly, I say, where there is not a parity of Reason, though there be a
parity of degree, that is, the same distance from a common Parent by
Consanguinity or Affinity of the Uncle and the Aunt, and of the Nephew and
Niece, yet notwithstanding the Case is not the same; but the Uncle and Niece,
though not by disparity of Affinity or Blood, yet by a manifest disparity of
Reason, are really a degree lower then the Aunt and the Nephew, for there can
be no dispatity without a gradation, and in every comparison there must be a
degree.

Thirdly, That Marriage cannot be Divorced by virtue of any Law, or by virtue
of any pretended Consequence or Deduction from it, which is neither expressly
forbidden in it self, nor stands in the same rational parity with that which
is: but is a degree lower, tho not in Affinity or Consanguinity, yet in the
nature, in the reason of the thing, in the equity of the Case, and in the
construction of Law.

Fourthly, The Jewish Law was so tender of the Matrimonial Band, or of that
mutual Vow of Cohabitation, and reciprocal enjoyment, which a Man and Woman had
entered into with each other, that it never separated any Marriage by a Divorce,
where the Man and Woman were willing to live together; if the Man hated his
Wife, or otherwise had any just cause of Impeachment or Accusation against her,
he might write her a Bill of Divorce and put her away as he pleased; and as the
first of these proceeded out of a wise and just regard to the sacred and
inviolable obligation of the Matrimonial Contract, so the last was a Relic of
that absolute and arbitrary power which the Husband had over his Wife to
dispose of her, and do with her as he thought fit, by the Ancient Laws and
Usages of the East, and the last of these duly reflected upon, might serve for
a lesson of obedience to the Women toward their Husbands, upon whose
discretion they did so entirely depend, and at whose disposal they were in so
very absolute and uncontrollable a manner; the first might read a Lecture of
Constancy to the Men, since it appeared by it, how exceeding tender God
Almighty was of dissolving the unity betwixt Man and Wife, by his not having
made any provision without the consent or desire of at least one of the
parties, for any separation, whilst they lived, between them.

Wherefore to bring the matter home to the instance before us, in case of an
Incestuous Marriage, the Law not allowing any violent separation unless it were
by Death; it was necessary either that the parties so offending should yet
notwithstanding be suffered to Cohabit together, or that they should be parted
by the infliction of a Capital Sentence on both sides, since they had both of
them equally offended. The Law knew no other punishment for Illegitimate
Marriages but Death, and therefore the Marriage which was not Capital was no
offense at all against it, and had no punishment at all assigned, but was as
Legitimate to all intents and purposes as any other Marriage in the World could
be. If then this Marriage of the Uncle to his Niece be so far from being
expressly punished by the Law of Moses, that it is not any where so much as
mentioned among the Levitical Restraints and Prohibitions, if it be the hardest
Case in Nature, to put a Man and Woman to death son a Consequence, a real or a
pretended Parity of Reason, which either he or she, or both of them, might very
well not foresee or understand; and if at last there be no Consequence, no
Parity in the Case, then it follows plainly, that the Marriage of the Uncle to
the Niece is so far legitimate, that it was not at all punishable by the
Levitical Law, and that it cannot be dissolved by virtue of any Act of
Parliament now extant among us, or by any other Power that will proceed either
in Punishment or Prohibition upon the Levitical Measures.

Fifthly, As there was no legal violent Separation among the Jews but by Death,
so the Reason why Death was inflicted, seems to be, to prevent any Issue from
such Incestuous Conjunctions; or, in the Language of the Law it self, that they
might die childless; the Woman for endeavoring to bear, and the Man to beget
at once a spurious and incestuous Offspring: For a Bastard, as it is every
where a Name full of reproach, so among the Jews, he that was descended of an
unlawful Bed, was looked upon as an accursed, abominable thing, and branded
with still more peculiar and particular Marks of Ignominy and Detestation; and
the Descendants from him, as far as to the Tenth Generation, were not to enter
into the Congregation of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. and this, though it should
happen, as it did for the most part, to be the Effect of no more than simple
Fornication: And how much more detestable must such a Bastard needs be who was
the Offspring of Incest and of Whoredom (for such sort of Marriages were
esteemed no better) in a most execrable Conjunction and Combination together?

But now it is certainly a very hard Case to make any Man a Bastard by Parity
of Reason, because his Father and Mother happened to do something, which it was
impossible for him to hinder, which is like another thing which is forbidden;
much less is there any Bastardy in such a Case where the Parity of Reason does
not hold; and where ever the Offspring is not spurious, the Marriage is
legitimate: For a legitimate Son or Daughter cannot possibly be descended, but
of legitimate Parents.

Sixthly, Since all Mankind are descended of one common Parent, the propinquity
of Blood or Kindred which is a Bar to Marriage, must of necessity stop
somewhere, or else there can be no such thing as Marriage in the World: And St.
Austin thinks it very requisite, that before the Names of Kindred are worn out,
which do not extend very far, there should be a return back again to the same
Family, by two of the Relations Marrying one another: For so he says, Fuit
autem antiquis S. Aug. de C. D. l. 15. c. 16.
patribus religiosae curae, ne ipsa propinquitas, se paulatim propaginum
ordinibus dirimens longius abiret and propinquitas esse desisteret, eam nondum
long positam rursus matrimonii vinculo colligare, and quodammodo revocare
fugientem: And not only by the Law of Moses, but by the Theodosian Law
concerning Cousin-Germans, the next Degree to that which was Capital, was no
Crime at all; for it does not appear that he forbad Second Cousins to Marry,
though I believe the most ancient Prohibition, or at least the most ancient
Practice of abstaining, to have extended so far both among Jews and Romans; and
among the Jews, where there was no medium in these Cases betwixt Impunity and
Death, it is no wonder to find two Cases that have a Parity of Degree, when we
speak of Consanguinity or Affinity, so long as they have not a Parity of
Reason, (so that one of them is in some sense a real Degree lower than the
other) the one of them to be punished with certain Death, and the other not to
be punished at all; though, as I have said already, more than once, I believe
such Marriages to have been very rarely practiced among the ancient Jews, and
that they might have said of themselves, with relation to the Marriage of the
Uncle with his Niece, as St. Austin does of himself and his Contemporaries,
where he speaks of the Marriage of Cousin-Germans; Experti autem sumus in
connubiis S. Aug. ubi supra.
consobrinarum etiam nostris temporibus, propter gradum propinquitatis fraterno
gradui proximum: quam raro per mores fiebat, quod fieri per leges licebat, quia
id nec divina prohibuit, and nondum prohibuerat lex humana: Veruntamen factum
etiam licitum propter vicinitatem illiciti horrebatur.

The truth is, the Argument of St. Ambrose against the Marriage of the Uncle
with his Niece, presses the hardest of any other upon us, where, in his Epistle
to Paternus, he says, Quid est quod dubitari queat Epist. 66.
cum lex divina etiam patrueles fratres prohibeat convenire, qui sibi quarto
sociantur gradu? hujuscemodi autem gradus tertius est, qui etiam jure civili a
consortio conjugii exceptus videtur. So that there seems to be not only a
Parity, but a Potiority of Reason, when we compare the Uncle with his Niece and
two Cousin-Germans together, against the Marriage of the two former, according
to the Levitical Degrees: Which Argument of his, though some would answer, by
denying the unlawfulness of the Marriage of Cousin-Germans; yet I, who am very
firmly of another Opinion, cannot make use of such a Plea as that is: But then
there are two other things taken together, which will, if I am not mistaken,
give no incompetent Solution of this Difficulty. The first is this, That there
is a wide difference in the Reason of the Thing, as I shall prove in the
process of this Discourse, betwixt the Marriage of an Aunt with her Nephew, and
of an Uncle with his Niece; so that if the former be a Marriage in the third
Degree, the latter, though the Consanguinity or Affinity be the same, may not
improperly be called the fourth: For there is no Comparison or Distance but by
Degrees; and at that rate the Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece will be in a
manner the same with the Marriage of Cousin-Germans: But then, if you consider
in the second place, that Cousin-Germans are a Relation in plano Or rather the
one is an Horizontal Relation, the other comes nearer to a Perperdicular; the
one is a Relation in eodem plano, the other is respectus vel ratio plani
superioris, ad inferius a latere constitutum.
, they standing both upon the same Level, which brings things, as it were,
nearer to one another, and represents Objects in their full proportion at a
considerable distance; but the other is a Relation in declivi, by which Objects
are lessened at a smaller distance, and neither appear so big, nor so nigh as
they are. In this respect the Marriage of the Uncle with the Niece has much
the advantage of that of two Cousin-Germans; so as the one might be esteemed
lawful by reason of a greater seeming distance, when the other was forbidden.

And now to all that has been said, there are still Four things to be added,
to favor that Opinion which it has been my chief Design hitherto to
establish, That although such a Marriage ought not perhaps at first to have
been entered into, yet being once Consummate by Solemnization, and Fruition
consequent upon it, it ought not to be dissolved; and that, at the least, it is
not so very unlawful as the Adversaries of such Marriages would make us believe.

First then we have it upon the Authority of Servius, Tribus modis apud veteres
Servius Danielis in excerpt. a Pithaeo cit. Lips. ad Tacit. Anual. l. 4.
nuptioe fiebant, usu, Far, and coemptione, usu, si verbi gratia, mulier anno
uno cum viro, licet sine legibus fuisset, etc. So that if the Parties Married
together, and standing in this Relation, have cohabited for any considerable
time, this is one great Argument, and has been all along so taken, in the
Civil Law, against a Divorce, notwithstanding there be a Fault admitted in
their first coming together. And perhaps from the validity of such Marriages ex
post facto, though at first they were no better than mere Fornications, the
obscene use of the Words Nubo and Nuptiae in several of the Roman Authors was
derived; concerning which Justus Lipsius has made Antiqu. Lect. l. 2. c. 9. v.
and Seldom. and Authors ab eo cit. l. 5. de jur Not. and Genesis c. 4.
this Observation. Nubendi verbum antiquitus inter ea fuit, quae custos ille
hortorum libentius quam virgins Vestae usurparent. Inde Festo nupta verba,
obsaena and Petronio nuptias facere, (...). And to this purpose it is very
pertinent, what our Law has Enacted in the Case of Prae-contracts, which not
only by the Canon and Civil Law, but in the Nature and Reason of the Thing,
are, and ought to be a Bar to Marriage with any other, without the Consent of
the prae-contracted Party. For a Man or Woman, after such a mutual Contract,
have no longer the disposal of themselves, and therefore cannot properly
transfer that to another which in themselves they have not; besides, that as no
Man ought to break any lawful Promise, so certainly no Bargain ought to be more
sacred than that by which the Matrimonial Contract is assured. But yet by
reason of many Frauds and Inconveniences under color of Prae-contracts, which
it was not difficult to get two Witnesses to attest, when ever one Party 32 H.
8. c. 38.
was weary of the other; therefore to prevent such Abuses for the future, all
Praecontracts were declared null and void, after the Solemnization and
Consummation of Marriage with another Person; and all such Marriages were
pronounced valid.

Secondly, What Abraham said of Sarah his Wife, Genesis 20. 12. And yet indeed she
is my Sister; she is the Daughter of my Father, and not the Daughter of my
Mother, and she became my Wife, is interpreted not only by the Rabbis, but by
Josephus himself, of his Brother by the Father Side's Daughter. I do not stand
to justify this Interpretation, neither do I indeed believe it to be true; but
that which I observe from it is, first, That the Reason why both they and
Josephus have had recourse to this Interpretation, was to excuse Abraham and
Sarah from an incestuous Conjunction; otherwise it would have been great folly
and madness to depart, without any manner of necessity, from the first and most
simple Interpretation of the Place. Secondly, If we consider the Age of
Josephus, who was present at the Siege and Destruction of Jerusalem under
Titus, and wrote his History not long after, in the Reign of Domitian, by this
we are assured that this Opinion of the Jews, That the Marriage of the Uncle to
his Brothers Daughter is not incestuous, is at the least of about Sixteen
hundred years standing; and how much elder it is, we cannot tell. Only I say
again, that I believe, though it was never prohibited, yet it was used with
great caution by the ancient Jews; and that I should always advise against
Marriages of this Nature, if ever I were made acquainted with them beforehand.

Thirdly, The Canon of the Apostles so often referred to, and which without
question is of great Antiquity, is conceived in these Words, (...) He that
marries two Sisters, or his Brother or Sisters Daughter, cannot be a
Clergyman. So that it is plain by virtue of this Canon, that the Person so
married was not to be Divorced; only all his Punishment, which to the greatest
part was no Punishment at all, codsisted in this, that he was not suffered to
enter into Holy Orders: But for any Man that was a Layman, and intended to
continue so, the Marriage of the Uncle to his Niece was at least lawful ex
antecedenti, by the plain Concession and Acknowledgment of this Canon; and
this, for ought appears, though the Brother or Sisters Daughter, be understood
in the most strict sense of the Brother or Sister both by the Father and the
Mothers Side. But if one who was already actually a Clergyman, should engage
himself in such a Marriage, contrary to the express Inhibition of this Canon,
then I conceive a Divorce was to ensue, or else he was debarred the Exercise of
his Function any longer, or perhaps both of these; for the Canon says
expressly, (...), he cannot, or (...), it is impossible for him to be a
Clergyman. I know Haloander in his Exposition of this Canon translates (...)
by Consobrinam, a Cousin-German, cum vertere debuisset fratris De jure Connub.
p. 69.
filiam, says Brissonius; and he has not only said, but abundantly proved it,
by comparing a Testimony of Xiphiline where he says of the Emperor Adrian,
Ib. p. 60.
(...), with another of Aelius Spartianus, where he says of the same Prince,
Trajani per sororem neptem eum uxorem accepisse: And he confirms and
establishes this Exposition still further, by the concurrent Suffrages of
Pollux, Hesychius, and Moschopulus; so that it is a very great wonder to me,
how Haloander came to be guilty of so palpable a Mistake.

Fourthly, and lastly, St. Ambrose, in his Epistle to Paternus, so often
appealed to, though he use all the Arguments he could possibly muster up, to
persuade him not to Marry his Son with his said Son's Niece, by his Sister on
his Father Paternus his Side, (a Case in which the Bishop of the Diocese where
Paternus lived, and who was first consulted, does not seem to have been
positive against it) yet he speaks not one word of a Divorce, in case they
should be Married, though he dissuades from it ex antecedenti; and he might
have threatened it at least, as a Motive to deter Paternus from proceeding any
further in that Affair: but that it seems, as if, not looking upon a Divorce to
be lawful, he would not make use of the Fear of it as an Argument to dissuade
from Marriage in this Case. And this is sufficient to show, that no Divorce can
be allowed in such a Marriage as this. I will now proceed further, to show a
little more particularly than I have done yet, That all such Marriages are
antecedently Lawful.

But then, by Lawful, I mean no more, than that they are not actually
forbidden, by any Divine Law, nor, so far as concerns us here in England, by
any Humane; and that they do not come within the rational Intention of either
of these two Laws. For the first of these, it has been sufficiently insisted
upon already, and it is plain in it self, that there is no mention made in the
Law Levitical, nor in the Statute Law of England, which, as to this Particular,
takes the other for its Copy, of the Marriage of the Uncle with his Niece; and
then I am sure it cannot be actually forbidden.

As for the Intention of the Law Levitical, though I am clearly for admitting a
Parity of Reason, where such a Parity can be made out; yet I am afraid, upon a
due examination, that it is but an Imaginary Parity all this while. For, in the
first place, it is very strange, that there should be so express and careful a
Prohibition of the Marriage of the Aunt with the Nephew, as there is in Levit.
18. v. 12, 13, 14. by which the Nephew is forbid to Marry his Father or Mothers
Sister, or Uncles Wife, which is all the possibility of Auntship that can be
supposed; and that all these Cases should be so expressly and so severely
punished as they are, Levit. 20. v. 19, 20. and yet no mention in the least
made of the Uncle Marrying with the Niece, whether of half or whole Kindred, or
whether by Consanguinity or Affinity, in any wise whatsoever: So great
Solicitude on the one hand, seems utterly inconsistent with so great
Carelessness and Silence on the other, if the Law of Moses had intended to
prohibit both these sorts of Marriages alike; Much more must it needs have
appeared very hard among the Jews, as has been said already, for a Man to be
put to death for a Crime, which could not be inferred to be so, any otherwise
than by a pretended Parity of Reason; for there was no other Punishment but
Death assigned in these Cases. And that this Parity of Reason is not real, will
appear, in the second place, by this; That in the Marriage of an Aunt with her
Nephew, the natural Subordination of Relations is destroyed, and the true
dependence of Things upon one another; a Superior, as the Aunt unquestionably
was, and one that was loco parentis, as well by the Jewish as the Civil Law, as
I have proved in my Resolution of Three Matrimonial Cases, was forced to submit
not only to all the Familiarities of a Wife, but also to all the Slaveries of a
Servant; for Wives were no better according to the Law of Moses: Whereas in the
other Case, of an Uncle Marrying with his Niece, the natural Dependence was
preserved, she being already his Inferior and his Servant. The Impiety of this
sort of Marriage of a Man to his Superior, and to her that in legal
construction was parentis loco, is thus detested by Papinius Statius.

-- illum, illum sacris adhibete nefastis, Thebaid. l. 4.

Qui leto dedit ense patrem, qui semet in ortus
Vertit and indignae regerit sua pignora matri.
And by Lucan,

-- Cui fas implere parentem Pharsal. ^. 8.

Quid rear esse nefas? --
Which Places, though they be indeed meant of the Mother in the most proper
sense, yet they may be extended, without immoderate straining, to all that are
parentum loco. And to this purpose the manner of Expression is remarkable, Lev.
18 14. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy Fathers Brother, thou shall
not approach to his Wife: she is thine Aunt. As much as to say, that though she
be of Kin to thee only by Affinity, being only thy Fathers Brothers Wife, and
coming from abroad out of a foreign Stock, yet she is thine Aunt, she is
parentis loco notwithstanding; and therefore it is a great Irreverence, and a
very high and heinous Breach of Duty and Good Manners in thee, to uncover her
nakedness. And Phaedra in Seneca being deeply enamored of her Son-in-Law
Hippolytus, yet knowing the Disgrace and Infamy of a Mother-in-Law lying down
to her Son, though this were only a Relation of Affinity, and not really so
near a Kin as the Aunt by the Father or Mothers Side, was desirous to forget
that name for good and all, for thus she says,

Matris superbum est nomen and nimium potens Seneca in Hippolyto Act. 2.

Nostros humilius nomen affectus decet,
Me vel Sororem, Hippolyte, vel famulam voca.
Thirdly, In the Marriage of the Uncle to the Niece, there is a greater fitness
for Propagation, which is the great and declared end of Marriage, then in that
of the Aunt to the Nephew. And this Argument is never the less cogent, because
Albericus Gentilis, knew three or four Bonny brisk De Nuptiis l. 5. c. 10. p.
547.
Aunts that were younger then their Nephews, and his own Aunt, it seems, was
one of the number, for a Law is a general Rule, which regards only the
generality of instances, without regard to those that are so rare and so seldom
to be met with, besides that there are other reasons upon which the Marriage of
an Aunt with her Nephew is prohibited, and where this does not hold, the others
do. It is enough that, generally speaking, Aunts are much older than their
Nephews, and that Women do not continue fit for Generation so long as Men; by
which means it comes to pass, though the Aunt at the time of Marriage, may not
in many instances be effoete and barren, yet she will not continue Prolifique
so long as a Niece, so that here is a double natural obstruction against the
Marriage of an Aunt with her Nephew, which does not hold in that of an Uncle
with his Niece.

Fourthly, If we consider the same man as an Uncle with respect to his Niece,
and as a Nephew with respect to his Aunt, here are three terms at a distance
from each other, and the two extremes are probably very far asunder; there is
in all probability Youth, Beauty, and Virginity on the one hand; and on the
other, Old Age, Widowhood, and an imparturient Estate, so that generally
speaking, there is manifestly a greater temptation to the Marriage of the Uncle
with his Niece, then to that of the Nephew with his Aunt; therefore if the Law
of Moses had intended to forbid the former, as well as the latter, this is that
which ought to have been Prohibited in the first place, because there is the
greater Temptation to it, and therefore the instances of Transgression must of
necessity be more frequent, neither can any thing be a greater disparagement to
the wisdom of God, than to say, that he intended both of these sorts of
Marriages should be equally avoided, and yet at the same time to inculcate that
with so much seeming industry and solicitude, of which there was scarce any
danger, and to omit that wholly without the least word of notice, whose danger
was so apparent, whose temptation is so strong, and whose instances without a
very severe and peremptory Prohibition could not in all Probability be
unfrequent.

Wherefore it being so clear as it is, that there is no parity of reason
between the Marriage of an Uncle with his Niece and that of a Nephew with his
Aunt, it is now manifest, if we proceed upon the Levitical measures, that the
Divorce of the Uncle from his Niece is not only indefensible after they are
once Married, but that considering the Levitical, as a positive Law, it is
lawful ex antecedenti, since it is neither forbidden in express words, neither
can it be inferred to be unlawful by parity of reason, and since the measures
of the Levitical Law are in this Case of Matrimony the declared measures of
ours, it follows unavoidably that what is left indifferent in the Law of Moses,
preserves the same liberty and indifference in ours, then which I need say no
more, but because nothing can be too plain or too sure, therefore I add
further, that though there had been such a parity as is pretended, yet our Law
has no regard to any such way of illative proceeding. And this I will prove,
First by an instance Foreign to our Case. Secondly, by another instance
Bordering upon it. And Thirdly by the express words of the Act it self, where
the Levitical Prohibitions are made the measure of ours.

As to the first of these, the instance I aim at, is this, by an Act of
Parliament, 21 H. 8. c. 13 it is provided that the Brethren and Sons Born in
Wedlock of every Knight may every of them purchase License or Dispensation (for
the holding of pluralities) and receive, take, and keep, two Parsonages or
Benefices with cure of Soul. But now it is a ruled Case that a Baronets Son or
Brother shall not enjoy this Privilege, notwithstanding the reason of it was
manifestly honourary, and a Baronet shall take place of a Knight, besides that
the one is hereditary which the other is not; so that here is not only
unquestionably a parity, but a twofold very great potiority of reason, in the
behalf of the Baronets Son or Brother, and yet the Law adheres so strictly to
the Letter, that he shall enjoy no privilege by virtue of this Statute.

I know it is said that this Statute is an encroachment upon a common right,
there being no natural reason why one man should have two Livings more than
another, and therefore it ought not to be extended further than the Letter: But
then it is to be considered, that this reason will hold as well in natural as
in positive obligations; for the Laws of nature, as such, oblige only by
natural sanctions, neither is any man punished for the breach of any Law of
nature, as such, by an humane or divine positive Law, but as that Law of nature
ratified by Divine Authority or humane appointment, is made positive and has a
positive Sanction annexed to it, so that let a Law oblige naturally never so
much, yet to oblige any man not to break it by an humane Law, without which an
humane Law cannot punish the offense, is manifestly a restraint laid upon that
possible and humanely lawful liberty of action which he had before, and
therefore the humane obligation cannot extend further then the Letter of the
Law, for what the Law has not restrained it leaves still indifferent, and it
is true of humane Laws, with respect to natural as well as positive
obligations, in lege prohibitoria quodcunque non prohibetur, intelligitur
permissum.

Secondly, To come nearer to our present Case, the intermarriage of Brother and
Or of two Brothers to two Sisters.
Sister to Sister and Brother among us, as likewise of the Son in Law to the
Mother in Laws Daughter or Father in Laws Daughter are clear instances that our
Law does not proceed by parity of reason; for all these are manifest violations
of one of those great and fundamental reasons of all those prohibitions, which
was to spread Friendships, and propagate Goodwill and Charity among Men, by not
restraining the Matrimonial affinities within too narrow a compass.

Thirdly, In the Law it self, which is the 25 of H. 8. c. 22. the particulars
there specified are ushered in with a, that is to say, and in the Conclusion of
it, there is a reference made to them by the Word, before rehearsed and above
expressed: now if any man will show me, that the words, that is to say, were
ever referred to any other than the particulars thereafter expressly declared,
without respect to any dark intimations by parity of reason, or if the word
before rehearsed or above expressed were ever in any Act, or other good Writing
of Law, referred to any other Particulars, than what were before in the said
Act, or Writing expressly enumerated, than I will yield the Cause,
notwithstanding what ever else has been said in its defense; but if these
words are no where used otherwise than I have said, and by consequence cannot
be so here neither, then I am as certain as the Law can make me, as certain as
the plainest evidence of demonstration can be, that I must undeniably and
infallibly carry it.

Besides, that all this is spoken in defense of the Marriage of an Uncle with
his Niece, ex post facto at least, for though it may be defensible, though that
Niece should be the Daughter of a Brother or Sister German by Father and
Mothers side, yet I would not advise, or so much as yield to it before hand;
but our case is still more favorable, we are the Niece only by the Half-blood,
and that not the Blood of the Mother, but the Father, which, because the more
uncertain, is in all these Cases the more favorable of the two, which was the
foundation of Abraham's justification of himself to Abimelech the King of Gerar,
she is the Daughter of my Father, and not the Daughter of my Mother, and she
became my Wife, as much as to say, according to the custom and usage of those
times, that the one is not a Sister prohibited in Marriage, though the other
be, or that the Sister by the Fathers side is not legally so near a kin as the
Sister by the Mother. So Albericus Gentilis determines in this De Nupt. L. 5 c.
10. p. 540.
very case, ut tanto minus fuerit peccatum, quanto est carnis conjunctio
simplicior and minor a patre. And in another place, in his Paraphrase upon one
of the Levitical prohibitions he says. Filiam matris tuae, Ib. c. 8. p. 522.
hoc est, uterinam sororem ne accipias, pari ratione (cum filia patris tui) aut
forte etiam majori: quia conjunctio carnis major ex part est matris; and this
was perhaps one reason among others, why the Marriage of Claudius with
Agrippina his Brothers Daughter was not only ratified, but persuaded by the
Senate; for Tacitus, Suetonius and Zonaras do all of them speak of it after
Tacit. Annal L. 12. Sueton and Zonar. in Claudio.
such a manner, as if he were almost compelled to what he did by the
importunity of the Senate and People: which I, for my part, when it was so
unanimous, can scarce believe to have been dissembled, especially to so easy a
Prince as Claudius is represented, I am sure we do not live in such flattering
times, though we have the Honor and happiness of much better Princes to sway
the Scepter over us, than ever the Romans could boast of, and the example had
been like to have been imitated afterward by that good Prince Titus Vespatian,
who recommended Sueton, in Damitiano, juxta finem.
his Daughter for a Wife to his Brother Damitian, though he did not think fit
to accept of her in any higher quality than that of a Mistress, which, as to
the business of Incest was the same thing.

Besides, that several of the after Emperors did confirm this License, (though
afterward it were restrained Mosaic. and Roman. leg. collat. tit. de incest.
Nupt. p. 92.
and prohibited again by others) as appears by the Edict of Diocletian and
Maximian published in the Fragments of Pythaeus, where the marriage of the
Sisters Daughter, (not that of the Brother) is only forbidden. And Vlpian
says, speaking of his own time, nunc ex tertio (gradu) licet uxorem ducere,
where when Cujacius would correct it Quarto, he is deservedly chastised for it
by Albericus Gentilis, for Alberic. Gent. der. Nupt. l. 5. c. 10 p. ^39.
Vlpian certainly meant, that it was lawful in his time to marry the Brothers
Daughter, though not the Sisters. Nay, that even in Justinian's time the Female
Consanguinity was more Sacred, and the conjunction with it more Incestuous than
the Male, though it is true, the Marriage of the Brother's Daughter were in his
time forbidden likewise, appears by this resolution of Papinianus ad Plautium.
Sororis proneptem non possum ducere uxorem, quoniam parentis loco ei sum. He
does not say, Fratris proneptem, but Tit deritu Nupt. l. 39.
Sororis, implying the latter to be much more Sacred, and more indispensably
prohibited than the former. Neither can any reason be given why Caracalla, who
married his Mother-in-law, was never imitated so V. Spartian in Caracalla.
commonly as Claudius, bating the difference of Age betwixt a Mother-in-law and
a Niece, but that the one was always looked upon to be much more fowl and
incestuous than the other.

Lastly, St. Ambrose dehorting Paternus from marrying his Son to his the said
Son's Sisters Daughter by Paternus the Fathers side, which was but the
Halfe-blood, durst not say positively, that it was against Law, (though it were
a Sisters Daughter) as this is not, being only the half Sister by the Fathers
side. Hic autem gradus tertius est, qui etiam civili jure a consortio conjugii
exceptus videtur. And now I conclude from the Premises, that the Marriage of
the Uncle to his Half-brother by the Father's sides Daughter cannot without
Ignorance or Wickedness: and in either Case without palpable injustice be
Vacated or Dissolved.

JOHN TVRNER.

FINIS.

