AN ATTEMPT TOWARD AN EXPLANATION OF THE THEOLOGY AND MYTHOLOGY OF THE Ancient
Pagans. The First Part. By John Turner Hospitaler of St. Thomas Southwark.

Licensed,

Aug. 29th. 1687. Rob. Midgley.



London, Printed by H. Hills Jun. for Walter Kittleby at the Bishops-Head in
St. Pauls-Church-Yard. 1687.

To the Right Honorable George Lord Jeffreys, Baron of Wem, Lord High
Chancellor of England, and one of the Lords of His Masties most Honorable Privy
Council, etc.
My Lord,
WHEN I had written that dissertation which is now abroad, upon that Text of
Deuteronomy c. 25. 5. which I presumed humbly Boaz and Ruth.
to Dedicate to your Lordship; there were some Things in it which I had
thoughts to illustrate, and others which I found it necessary to amend, and
this I questioned not to do in a Sheet or two of Paper at the farthest, and so
to Print it together with the other as an Appendix to it; but it so happened,
that stepping out of my way before I was aware, I found my self of a sudden
entangled in a Labyrinth so lovely and delightful, so full of fragrant Flowers
and pleasant Fruits, that as it was difficult in it self to find the way back
again from whence I came, in a Maze whose Paths were so numerous and so
winding, so I had as little inclination as ability to be disintangled, and
would almost as soon have sought the way out of Paradise, as out of that
Orchard, that Garden, that Shady Grove, and Flowery Mead of Antiquity in which
I had so fortunately lost my self, a place whose Clime was as happy and as
sweet as that of the Golden Age, whose Banks were washed with Rivers of Milk
and Honey, less terrible and more fruitful than Tigris and Euphrates, with
which the Old Seat of Innocence was surrounded.

For in the Mythology of the Anti^nts, there is every thing to be met with,
which either Ambition or Appetite can desire; we walk and divert our selves in
the Hesperian Gardens, and pull the delicious Apples of Alcinous; we sit down
as guests at the Aetherial Banquets, and purchase to our selves the Golden
Fleece, more precious and more worthy of a toilsom Voyage than the Wrecks of
Spain, and in the Wealthy Streams of Tagus and of Ganges, we find our selves
refreshed and rich together.

Besides that, in the Theology of the Ancient Pagans, which is combined and
twisted with the other, being all of it envelop'd and obscured in Fables; we
are surprised with a noble and comprehensive Prospect of the Philosophy of
those early Times; for when all is done, the Religion of the Pagans was little
else but the Physiology of Ancient Days, or of the more knowing Architects of
Religious Worship, who wrapped up their Opinions concerning the Omniscient,
omnipotent and omnipresent Numen, in the covert of Shadows and Hieroglyphic
Fables, which putting on several Persons, Names, Appearances and Shapes,
according to the several Powers, Attributes, Respects and Operations of that
one supreme and independent Being, with Relation to the Universe which is
governed by him, became at leng^h by the ignorance of the Vulgar, who could not
see Juno standing behind the Cloud, but worshipped the Cloud it self instead of
Juno, so many sensible and material Objects of stupid Adoration; and this is
that which the Apostle charges them with, That they changed the Truth of God
into a lie, and worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator. But
yet, my Lord, it cannot be denied, notwithstanding the abuse to which these
things are subject, but that there is an excellent and an wholesome use to be
made, even of the Dotage and Superstition of those deluded Mortals, whom we
ought rather to pity than despise, in a just Deference, though to mistaken
Antiquity; and in consideration that we ow our Knowledge, though not to their
Mistakes, to their Persons, to which we are indebted for our own; for even they
that rail most against Heathens and Idolaters, are after all their Piqueantry
descended from them, and ow the power of blackning their Memories to
themselves; their Virtues ought to be strow'd with Commendation upon their
Graves, their Vices and Imperfections, like the Nakedness of Noah, ought not by
us their Sons with too much rashness and petulance to be revealed; and for
their Future State, though the same Practices that they were guilty of, would
undoubtedly be damnable in us after a clearer Light and a better Information;
yet the condition of a pious and exemplary Heathen, wanting the means and
opportunities of Conviction, and living up in his human Conversation to the
Principles of natural Religion, does not seem to be so very desperate, as some
Men of narrow Sentiments are pleased to make it; and it seems to me that St.
Paul was of this mind, when he said, That when the Gentiles which have not the
Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law are
a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their Hearts,
their Conscience also bearing witness, and their Thoughts the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another.

But whatever may be said of the Vail and Cloud it self, which the Heathens for
the most part ignorantly worshipped instead of the divine Substance that lay
hidden under it, yet it cannot be denied to be an useful Operation, to take off
the Scales from off the Gentiles Eyes; it must after all be granted to be a
noble, and an excellent Employment, if it prove Successful, to pry within this
aged and venerable Vail, and look through the Symbol and Hieroglyphic Emblem,
into the Substance and the Truth of Things; the effect of which Enquiry will be
this, that it will appear that even the Pagans themselves, those I mean, that
contrived and molded their Religion; the Priests, and Poets, and Philosophers
of the Heathen World, had a just and true Notion of the divine Being, and of
the way and means by which his Nature should be worshipped and his Anger
appeased, as appears by their Sacrifices, their Ceremonies and Lustrations,
which were all or most of them Symbolical Adumbrations of the infinite
Obligations we have contracted to him, of the Cleanness, Purity, Vprightness
and Integrity, which he expects in his Worship and in the Conduct of our Lives,
and of that awful Humility, devout Submission, and most unfeigned Repentance,
with which we ought to be acted and affected, when we look backward upon our
Sins and Follies, or forwards upon his pure, unspotted and untainted Nature,
which is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, and cannot converse with
unrepenting Sinners, continuing in a State of Impenitence and Obduration.

It is at once a pleasant and a profitable Contemplation, when we converse
either with Eastern Sages, or with the Mythology of the Greeks and Latins,
which was borrowed from them in a great measure at least, to think how the
Principles of Virtue and good Life, as in the Symbols of Pythagoras, and in
many of the Rites and Mysteries of the Gentil Worship, notwithstanding the Heat
of the respective Climates, were muffled and folded up in multiplicity of
Garments, and in so great variety of Shadows and Disguizes; and yet through all
these Coverings by their own native Brightness, they should compel and force
their Passage into the Eyes and Heart of every competent Enquirer, and make
themselves still more glorious, more powerful and attractive, more beautiful
and bright, for being thus industriously darkened and concealed.

If Antiquity with too profuse a Veneration, exalted good Men, or Men that were
useful and serviceable to their Country by great Benefactions, or by the
invention of profitable Arts, into the Rank and Dignity of Gods, and paid them
a Worship suitable to that Opinion, yet this hinders not but we may reap
advantage, even from the Superstition and Ignorance of our blind Forefathers,
and though we do not adore them as Divinities; yet we may bless their Memories,
and pay that Reverence which is justly due to the Ashes of Heroes and
Illustrious Persons, and we may lay them before us, as Copies and Examples to
imitate and transcribe as far as we are able, and as often as opportunity
presents it self.

Neither would the Ancients have been so much to blame, that they divided and
parcel'd the Omnipresent Numen into so great variety of Names and Notions,
according to the several relations and respects which that Omnipresence bears
to several and distant parts of the Creation, as that in the Heavens they
called him Jupiter and Minerva, Ceres and Ops upon the surface of the Earth and
underneath it, Pluto and Proserpina, in the Sea Neptune, upon the Shore
Priapus, and in the Port Portunus and Palaemon, but that it gave occasion to
the Vulgar sort, who could not discern the Philosophy of these things to look
upon them, because of their several Names, and of the several Rites and
Ceremonies used in their Worship, as so many distinct and independent Beings,
to each of which they ascribed a Divinity by it self, in which if I am not very
much mistaken, the true Mystery of most of the Pagan Idolatry consisted.

That which I now present your Lordship with, is but one Part in four of that
which I design; the next will be a complete Diatriba by it self of the Persian,
Egyptian, Assyrian, and Chaldean Deities, which with a great deal more, is now
already finished from my hands, and shall very soon be published to the World,
if this which I now put abroad shall meet with that Encouragement and
Acceptance which I hope it will; and the reason why I broke off here, was only,
that not intending any such thing at first, but only to write a Sheet or two by
way of Notes upon the former Treatise; I had not affixt the Numbers upon the
top of the Pages, which I foresaw would create disorder and confusion to my
Reader, and besides, it looked ridiculous to call that Notes upon a former
Treatise which had no manner of connection with it.

I hope without Vanity, I may pretend to have made much greater Discoveries
than any Man in this kind has done before me, and some of them I would by no
means exchange or part with, or lose the just Glory of having found them out,
to be thought or to have been the Author of the best Book that ever I read in
my life; and if any Man shall ask why at every turn I am thus importunate and
troublesome to your Lordship? I Answer, Because I am indebted to your Lordships
Goodness, for the leisure of composing all that I have written, and for my
Subsistence it self, and therefore the Fruit of my leisure returns from whence
it came, by a reason not unlike to that, for which Heaven claims the Sacrifice
and Adoration of Men. That God would continue to bless and shine upon your
Lordship, and to prosper you in all your Ways, and return your Favors and
Kindnesses to me a thousand fold into your own Bosom, is the most affectionate
and assiduous Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, Obedient, and for ever most obliged
Servant, John Turner.

Advertisement.
THE Reader is humbly desired to page his Book, and correct the Errata as they
are set down, or cause it to be done, before he begins to peruse it.

NOTES.
PAge 4. Since men did Sacrifice Animals before the Flood,) this is denied by
Grotius in his Notes upon Genesis 4. 4. who says there was no other Sacrifice of
Animals before the Flood, then only an Offering of their Wool and Milk; but
because in some observations of my own, which I made long since at the
University, as I read along upon the Old Testament, I have among other things
substantially Confuted this Opinion of Grotius, who is likewise followed in it
by the late Reverend and Learned Dr. Outram in his Book De Sacrifici is,
therefore I shall set down what I have written, as I find it upon Genesis 4. 4.
Obtulit de primogenitis gregis sui and de adipibus eorum) dura sunt omnia and
violenta in Interpretatione Grotiana, qui primogenita gregis de lana, adipes de
lacte intelligit. Mechelbehen, ex adipibus eorum, quorum vero? primogenitorum
nempe, quorum supra meminerat; igitur si per adipes, lac intelligi debeat, per
primogenita, lana, erit Mechelbehen. Ex lactibus lanae, quo quid absurdius?
verum quae tandem ratio impulit Grotium ut hujuseemodi interpretamenta
confingeret? audi eum causae suae patrocinantem, Cum nihil, inquit, deo sacrari
soleat, nisi quod in usu sit hominum, animantibus autem vesci ante diluvium, ut
probabilior fert sententia, permissum non fuerit, dici posset oblatam lanam ac
lac ping^issimum, quod hic cheleb vocetur, nam cheleb per (...) tranftulere 70.
Genesis 18. 8. etc. vetustissimum autem morem fuisse lanam and lac offerendi ex
multis historiis docet Porphyrius, haec ille. sed retorqueri potest argumentum,
cum nihil Deo sacrari soleat nisi quod in usu sit hominum, homines autem
vestibus ex Lana contextis nondum uterentur, sequitur lanam ab Abele oblatam
non fuisse, legimus autem pelles and tergora ferarum prima vestimenta fuisse
(cothnoth hor Genesis 3. 21.) pelles autem animalium ex quibus vestes primitus
confectae fuerunt, ex iis solummodo aut certe potissimum detractae sunt, quae
venatione capiebantur, a quo censu oves tam long removentur, quam quod
longissime.

Quod si concedamus etiam pellibus ovinis usos antiquissimos mortales, quid
inde sequitur, nisi quod oves jure excoriari poterant and pelles ab iifdem
inusus humanos; deo permittente detrahi? poterant igitur in hoc casu etiam,
jure occidi, nam excoriari animalia sine certissima morte non possunt, denique
si occidi possent, idque ut usibus humanis intervirent, sequitur, etiam ipso
Grotio fatente, potuisse etiam in sacrificiis rite Deo offerri.

Si quis hic interroget, quare animali^ tunc temporis ad vestitum occidi
poterant, non item ad esum, responsio in promptu est, nempe, quod in initiis
rerum, si tanta animantium copia, quanta humano generi pascendo suffecisset,
fuisset interempta, defecissent untique in ipso mundi exordio, pleraeque omnes
animantium species; de vestitu autem alia res est, qui semel and ex unius
animantis tergore confectus, etiam per plures annos perdurat, and arcet caeli
inclementiam.

Lana autem, inquiet fortasse Grotius, quando simul cum pellibus ovinis fuerit
detracta, quid impedit, quo minus rite potuit offerri? respondeo, primum, a
posse ad esse non valet consequentia, deinde si hoc de lana concedimus, certe
idem in pelle, cujus praecipuus in vestibus usus fuit, cum nondum panni
conficiendi arts invenirentur, multo magis valebit, at pellis omnino eximi non
potuit, sine interitu animalis, and occisio animalis ad usus quomodocunque
humanos, dat jus ad sacrificium.

Si dicas haec tergora morticinorum animantium fuisse, consideres, velim, hoc
genus pro immundo habitum, fuisse, hanc autem mundorum, immundorumque
animantium distinctionem, etiam ante Mosaicam legem extitisse, liquet ex
diluvii historia, neque mihi dubium videtur, quin mundities and immundities
utriusque temporis Noachici dico and Mofaici, eandem rationem habuerit, ut ita
eadem animantia in utroque intervallo aut munda aut immunda haberentur, id quod
ex symbolicis istius munditiei rationibus, (non enim arbitraria res fuit) de
quibus nos alibi fusius egimus, amplius constabit. Utrum autem ista distinctio
a Noacho primum inceperit, cum de eo nihil in sacris literis disertim
affirmetur, pro certo statui non potest; est autem ea probabilior sententia
quae antiquiorem facit, cum de mundis and immundis animalibus, tanquam de re
ante nota mentio fiat; cumque animalia utriusque generis hic non sigillatim
percenseantur, ut in Mosaica utriusque partitione videre est, sed tantum de
ejusmodi animantibus in genere praecipitur, ex mundis septena, ex immundis bina
arcam esse intromittenda, vero simile est Noachum tunc temporis a Deo
particulatim edoctum non fu^sse, sed recurrisse potius ad praestitutas and
praecognitas istius immunditiae leges.

Sed and alia quaedam porro restant dicenda, quae opinioni Grotianae non minus
fortiter adversantur, ea breviter attingam, ait sacra Pagina Abelem obtulisse
Mebecoroth Tsono, oumechelbehen, Mebechoroth genere faeminino, quia, scilicet,
hic moc in sacrificiis erat, ut faeminae potissimum, utpote nitidiores
delicatioresque aris admoverentur, quo nihil apertius opinionem illam laneam
impugnat, neque clarius ostendit moris hujus summam antiquitatem, Itidem
mechelbehen legitur cum affixo faeminino, cum adipibus istarum primogenitarum,
igitur si bechoroch sunt animalia, chelbehen erunt adipes istorum animalium
quod si utrumque sumatur, pro eo quod optimum est, aut pulcherrimum, aut
pinguissimum, sicut Grotio visum est, idem erit, eodemque omnino recidet ac si
dixisses, optimum optimi, pulcherrimum pulcherrimi, quod cum nisi valde
impropria locutione dici non possit, cumque obstet conjunctio copulativa, quae
distinguere videtur inter becoroth and chelbehen, hoc est, si Grotio credimus,
inter idem and idem, quod est absurdum, omnino concludimus contra Hugonum
Grotium, virum alias long doctissimum, hunc locum de veris animalibus
intelligi debere.

Quibus accedit, quod manifestum sit, sacrificari a Noacho caeptum esse, tum de
pecuino, sum de volucrum genere, Geneseos c. 8. priusquam illi carnium esus
permitteretur; quod factum est initio, c. 9. quod si quis eum ideo sacrificasse
existimet, quod jam certo sciret, se etiam ex animalibus divino permissu
propediem vesciturum, adeoque deo patri benignissimo, qua si primitias novae
mensae obtulisse, aut si quis forte pertenderit, Noachum, antea quam hoc sacrum
secerit, pastum carnibus fuisse, neque res eo, quo gestae sunt, ordine narrari,
id quod scriptoribus sacris non insolens esse congnoscimus; utcunque haec
praecarie dicantur, and homines causae suae metuentes prodant, tamen cum
possint fortasse vera esse, de his serram contentionis nolumus cum quoquam
reciprocare.

Page 15. And the Lord said, my spirit shall not always strive with man) that
the Flood was brought upon the Old World, for their many and great sins, and
particularly for that of incestuous conjunctions, is beyond dispute, but
whether God did then really shorten the days of Man, or whether it be only
spoken, as several other things in the Old Testament, are in compliance with
vulgar Tradition and Opinion, or what other possible Interpretation these words
are naturally capable of receiving, I shall enquire more largely in another
place.

Page 33. We have two known instances in the Ancient Roman Story) this power
of Fathers over their Children by the Old Roman Law, so as to put them to death
if they pleased, is mentioned and referred to by Constantine C. Th. l. 4. tit.
8. l. 2. Libertati a Majoribus tantum impensum est, ut patribus quibus jus
vitae in liberos, necisque potestas permissa est, etc. v. D. Gothofred ib --

Page 44. That very fact being made death afterward by the Law of Moses) this
was my opinion when I writ it, and I have still a strong impression that it is
true, though I cannot find it, however the inference which I make from it is
clear from many other instances which I have mentioned.

Page 63. Neither was this all, but the Husband was an absolute Lord over his
Wife, and the Wife was in the nature of a Servant to her Husband) The dominion
of Husbands over their Wives by the Ancient Laws of Rome, which in this
particular were Copied from the East, is thus expressed by A. Gellius out of an
Oration of M. Cato noct. At. l. 10. c. 23. Imperium, quod videtur, habet. That
is, the Husband has as much Power, as he pleases over his Wife; and then it
follows, Si quid perverse tetreque factum est a muliere, multatur, si vinum
bibit, si cum alieno viro probri quid fecit, condemnatur. And then it follows
as another great instance of this Arbitrary power of Husbands over their Wives,
that if the Husband had committed Adultery, which is the highest violation of
conjugal Duty, he could not be touched, but if the Wife were guilty of the same,
it was in the Husbands power to kill her with impunity with his own hands, and
without so much as bringing her to a Trial, supposing that he caught her in the
very Fact, for which his word must in this case be taken. The words of Cato
are, In Adulterio uxorem tuam si deprehendisses, sine judicio impune necares;
illa te, si adulterares, digito non auderet contingere, neque jus est.

Page 88. Yet so as he was only to enjoy it till the said Year of Jubilee,
etc.) that is, In case he did not Marry the Woman to raise up Seed to the
deceased, otherwise, notwithstanding there was another nearer in Blood, he was
to enjoy it for ever, if not in himself, yet at least in his Heir begotten by
him in his deceased Kinsmans stead, and in the descendants from him, or other
collateral Relations enjoying in his Right and Title for ever.

Page 92. That it has never been broken down without the disgrace and infamy
of those, etc.) See Tacitus and Suetonius in the Life of Claudius, where they
speak of that Emperors Marriage to Agrippina.

Page 100, 101. They have their name from Oblivion, as Men have theirs from
Remembrance) The Women are called in Hebrew Nashim, from a word that signifies
to forget, the Men Zecarim, from another that signifies to remember.

Page 104. Which name is from habad, servivit, and was given him, as I
conceive, etc.) this reason may very well be allowed, notwithstanding another
which I have given in my discourse of the Messiah c. 1. for they are not
inconsistent together.

Page 109, 110. Josephus tells you it was any of the Kindred) Our Custom of
Appeals in case of Murder, seems to have been taken from this Law among the
Jews, though whether through ignorance or inadvertency or for what reason I
know not, there are several remarkable differences betwixt the Jewish Law and
Ours; for by Their Law it was only involuntary slaughter, in which the revenger
of Blood had any thing to do, in Ours it is only wilful Murder, in Theirs the
Wife could not revenge in this manner the death of her Husband, but it was to
be done by the Heir Male, who had the first right of vengeance, and there were
besides two or three further removed in the paternal consanguinity, who had the
right of revenging the death of their Kinsman wherever they should meet the Man
that had slain him, and other differences there are which it is needless to
insist upon, but yet, as I have said, I am still of opinion that one of these
Laws was taken from the other.

Page 117. Out of Judea) or rather out of Egypt, for in Judea this Law was now
Antiquated and abolished --

Page 117. Quod post illorum mortem mansisse virgins dicebantur) This plainly
shows the Egyptian Custom to have depended upon the same reason with the
Jewish, only in the word virgins which is unquestionably to be understood in
this Law of Zeno's in the strictest sense, as appears by the next words,
Arbitrati scilicet (quod certis legum conditoribus placuit) cum corpore non
convenerint, nuptias non videri re esse contractas; there seems to be a
mistake, for by the Jewish Law the obligation to this sort of Marriages
remained in case the deceased had left no Male Issue behind him,
notwithstanding there were Female, as I have proved, besides these words cum
corpore non convenerint, do plainly show the Roman Emperor, when he made this
Law was utterly unacquainted with the Jewish Custom, for by the Mosaic Law
though they had cohabited never so long together, yet in defect of Male Issue,
the next of Kin was obliged to propagate instead of the deceased, and yet that
expression quod certis legum conditoribus placuit, may and I believe does as
much refer to the Jewish Lawgivers as the Egyptian, so that upon the whole
matter I am inclined to believe, if you are not otherwise satisfied with what I
have written, p. 118. that the Egyptians who seem to have continued this
practice long after it was antiquated and abolished among the Jews, imposing
upon the ignorance of the Romans, alleged, in their own excuse that they were
Virgins whom they Married, but meant nothing else by that word, but only that
they had not had Issue, or Heritable Issue by their former Husbands, and the
Romans seem only to have imitated them thus far, but this excuse would not be
taken to justify a practice which was so incestuous by the Roman Laws.

Page 135. Numb. 27. 8. If a Man die have no Son, etc.) in the Hebrew it is ou
ben even lo, which are the very words used Deuteronomy. 25. 5. and in this place of
numbers there is no question, but the word ben is to be understood strictly, of
the Male Issue, for it follows, then he shall cause his Inheritance to pass
unto his Daughter, so that the words being exactly the same in both places,
this, besides other Arguments which I have produced, is still the stronger sign
that my Interpretation is right, when I expound the place of Deuteronomy after
such a manner, as to restrain it to the Male Issue. --

Page 151. Somewhat of a privilege in it, by inheriting the double Portion) or
rather in this case the whole Estate, which was to descend to the Heir of the
vicarious Bed, and in the mean time to be enjoyed by the Levir himself.

Page 179. I shall give almost innumerable Instances of this agreement) It
appears in the process of this Discourse, that I have already given so many of
the agreement of the Romans with the East, both as to their Manners and
Language, that it can be no longer doubted that the one people, were at least
in part, a Colony from the other, and that they derived a great part of their
Language and of their Rites and Ceremonies from them, so that though this be a
subject capable of great improvement and of being illustrated by many more
instances then I have produced, or then it is perhaps possible for any one Man
to think of, yet since I designed no more then only to show, what I have
sufficiently done already, that the Romans were certainly a Colony from the
East, I think I am excused from any further discharge of that obligation, which
in this Paragraph I have laid upon my self. --

Page 180. If their Priests and their Sacrifices both name and thing) besides
what I have said afterward, about this very thing in the account which I give
of Numa and his Laws, and of the Rites and Ceremonies introduced by him into
the Religious Worship of the Romans, the very Name of Pontifex, is not a ponte
faciendo, a most ridiculous Etymology in my opinion, which has nothing but
likeness of sound to justify it self, but it is pure Hebrew, and is as much by
the Interposition of a Digamma and the changing of a Tsade or a shin into the
Latin x, as phoneh eth hets or phoneh eth esh. he that lays the Wood in order,
and prepares the Fire for the Sacrifice, which was one part of the Priestly
Office, as the sprinkling of Blood was another, and both of these Abraham is
described as doing, with relation to his Son Isaac, Genesis 22. 6. And Abraham
took the wood of the burnt Offering and laid it upon Isaac his Son, and he took
the Fire in his hand and a Knife, and they went both of them together. and
again, v. 9. And they came to the place which God had told him of, and Abraham
built an Altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his Son, and
laid him on the Altar upon the wood. Of the insertion of the Aeolique Digamma
in the Roman words derived from the East, I have given several other instances
toward the conclusion of this work, and of the changing of the shin into an x,
though that and the change of a Tsade into the same, be so natural that nothing
can be more, yet I will give some other instances, from shish is the Latin sex,
and from Reish is the Latin rex, which latter word though it be not extant any
where in the Bible, yet that there was formerly such an Hebrew word, may be
seen from the words reshith, and rishon derived from it, and this very word is
still to be seen in the most Ancient of the Rabbinical writings, so for
example, what the N. T. calls (...), that the Ancient Jews called Resh Gabbaei,
as Caninius de loc. diffic. N. T. and Hottinger in his Exercit. Antimorin. have
observed. See also, B^^ lex. Talmud. in voce. the Algerines at (...) day call
their chief Magistrate by the Name of the Raes, and the Turks have also an
Officer among them. whom they call Riseffendi, mingling an Hebrew word and the
corruption of a Greek together, it being as much as (...), and what the Hebrews
call Resh, that the Arabians call Rebis, by the Interposition of a Digamma, and
by the same Analogy from the Hebrew din or down signifying Judgment, is the
Turkish and Algerine Divan, for a Consistory or place of Judgment, and by
leaving out the n corruptly (to mention that by the way) the Tunitines call
their chief Magistrate the Dey, that is, the Judge, as the Carthaginians of Old
called him suffetes from the Hebrew shophet, signifying the same. Lastly, As a
shin so also a samech a letter of much the same sound and nature, is by the
Latins changed into an x, as from nous, fugit, is the Latin nox, because then
all things vanish and disappear.

This for the Priests, then for the Sacrifices, that which was called the mola
among the Romans was fron the Hebrew melach signifying Salt, as by the same
Analogy form the Hebrew keren is the Latin cornu, from the Hebrew Bier
signifying a Ditch or Well, is by a reduplication the Greek (...), signifying
Slime or Dirt, and from the Hebrew Hen, signifying Grace or Comeliness, not
only the Latin Venus by changing the h into v consonant or Aeolique Digamma as
Heinsius in his Aristarchus has with great probability observed, but also
benus and been, and benignus, and bonus. The Romans indeed in latter time not
knowing the true signification of their own word, gave it the needless Epithet
of Salsa, which it included in it self before, as likewise the public and
solemn convention upon the calends of their Months they called Curia Kalabra,
though the Hebrew word Kahal, which is a part of the composition of Kalabra
included the signification of Curia within it self, as I have shown in another
part of this Discourse. Further, the Sacrifice, was called sometimes victima
and sometimes Hostia, victima though it be not an Hebrew word, yet it includes
an imitation of an Hebrew Custom) for victima is quasi vittima a vinciendo,
whence also the Latin vitta is derived, because the Sacrifice was first bound
and laid upon the Altar, before the Throat was cut, as in that passage of
Genesis concerning Isaac, part of which has been already repeated, v. 22. v.
9, 10. And Abraham built an Altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound
bound Isaac his Son, and laid him upon the Altar, upon the wood, and Abraham
stretched forth his hand and took the Knife to slay his Son. And to this it was
that David alluded when he said Psalm 118. 27. bind the Sacrifice with Cords,
even unto the Horns of the Altar. as for hostia, the very name is Hebrew, it is
without question from the Hebrew word hasah, which I have shown in these papers
sometimes to have a sacrificial meaning, and in that sense the Latin facio by
the help of a Digamma is derived from it, and thence it was that Hostis in its
first and purest signification did not signify an Enemy, but a Pledge or Pawn
which was given for the performance of conditions, and thence hostimentum,
hostire, and redhostire are derived, but because such pledges were given out of
the Enemies Country, and out of their number, therefore by degrees it came
consequently to signify an Enemy, but its direct and primary signification is
a Pawn or Pledge, as every Sacrifice is in the stead of him for whom it is
Offered up, and these hosts, otherwise called in Latin obsides, were to be
hostiae in the proper sense, that is, they were to be slain and put to death,
which is the signification of hasah in Hebrew and of mactare in Latin, if the
conditions stipulated were not performed.

Page 183. As appears from the Books of Daniel and Esther, etc. and also from
those of Ezra and Nehemiah) I cannot altogether excuse this from error, however
it is true of the Books of Daniel and Ezra, that they have a great deal of
Chalday in them, but the name of Esther is Chalday, though the Book be not, and
so is the name of Nehemiahs Office, who was made Governor of his own Country
under the name of Tirshatha.

Page 200. To whom e're it be long, I shall give another opportunity) this
refers to the Sermon before Sir P. W. as it is long since Printed with
additions, and I think I may pretend in what I have said in that Discourse and
in the Preface, to have clearly represented all the natural reasons upon which
the present excellent establishment may defend it self, and though I do not say
they are the only Arguments, yet without them all other Arguments signify very
little, and they of themselves without any addition of Authorities and
Traditions, though they are also of our side, are sufficient to defend us
against all the reason of our Adversaries, though not against their prejudices
or their malice, the first of which seems utterly incapable of conviction, and
the second will never acknowledge it, let it be never so plain. --

Page 210. But of this and other matters of a resembling nature I have
discoursed more largely, etc.) in my middle way betwixt necessity and freedom.

Page 228. I do therefore disown and recant those reasons, etc.) this referrs
to a part of those papers in the Additions to the Sermon before Sir P. W.
which, for the reasons I have already Published, I thought it but just and
necessary to suppress; and so does that passage also a little before being, p.
226, 227. and their name put into Greek is not (...), but (...) or (...), as I
have elsewhere observed against Joseph Scaliger -- and the Book of Scaliger,
which I referr to is his Elenchus Triheresii, written against the Jesuit
Nicholas Serarius. --

Page 230. And though these reasons are sufficient to prevail with me to
retract that opinion, etc.) this is also referred to some part of the
forementioned papers which I thought it requisite to suppress. --

Page 267. If the Nones were quintanae fell upon the fourteenth, but if they
were septimanae upon the sixteenth day of the Month) this is a mistake, I
should have said, the thirteenth and the fifteenth.

Page 286. Who were used to abuse the Jews for their abstinence from Swines
flesh) as in that of Juvenal speaking of Judea.

Observant ubifesta mero pede sabbata Reges, Et vetus indulget senibus
clementia Porris.

And in another place of the Jews he says, Nec distare putant humana carne
suillam.

And Petronius represents them as worshipping of Swine, out of a mistake in the
true reason of their abstinence, which was because they thought them unclean.

Judaeus licet and Porcinum Numen adoret.

Page 309. Which was nothing else, but aliquid extra and intra muros, etc.) so
the Pomaeria are described by the Roman Authors, and so it was certainly among
the Jews, as appears by comparing the 4th. and 5th. verses of the 35th. of
Numbers together. For v. 4. it is said, The Suburbs of the Cities which ye.
shall give unto the Levites, shall reach from the Wall of the City and outward
a thousand Cubits. but v. 5. Ye shall measure from without the City on the
East Side two thousand Cubits, and on the Southside two thousands Cubits, and
on the Westside two thousand Cubits, and on the Northside two thousand Cubits,
and the City shall be in the midst, this shall be to them the Suburbs of the
Cities. now there is no possible way to reconcile these two verses together,
which are otherwise contradictory, notwithstanding they immediately follow one
another, but by saying that the First of these places, is to be understood only
of the Suburb or pomaerium without the Wall, but the other of both together, of
the empty space with in the Wall, as well as without, and the City was to be in
the midst, that is, in the midst of the inward pomaerium, for that which
the Hebrews call her, and we render City, does not begin with the Wall, but the
Houses, and there are many places so called in the Old Testament which had no
Walls at all, or in the Scripture Language, which were not fenced Cities, as
the Levitical, all of them were, and so were the fitter for that use, to which
I have conjectured Jeroboam to have put them, but then, if this way of
reconciliation be admitted, as I think it is highly reasonable, then the
Seventy are not to be excused, who have put down (...), two thousand Cubits in
both places, which I believe them to have done out of ignorance, as thinking
there was a contradiction in the place, and not understanding the nature of the
Suburbs in those times, which were so exactly answered by the pomaeria among
the Romans, which were two fold, there was pomaerium post muros, that is, the
outward pomaerium, and there was murus post pomaerium, that is to say the
inward, and this Livy makes to be the Etymon of the place in these words:
Pomaerium, verbi vim solam intuentes est locus, quem in condeudis urbi bus
quondam Hetrusci, qua murum ducturi erant, certis circa terminis inaugurato
consecrabant; ut neque interiore part aedificia maenibus continuarentur, quae
nunc vulgo etiam conjungunt, and extrinsecus puri aliquid ab humano cultu
pateret soli. hoc spatium quod neque habitari neque arari fas erat, non magis
quod post murum esset, quam quod murus post id, pomaerium Romani appellarunt.
And perhaps there is another Etymology more natural then this, and which will
answer both of these significations, and denote both sorts of the ancient
pomaerium, and that is (...), for what the common Greek calls (...), that the
Dorique calls (...), from whence is (...), anp (...) and other words of the
like nature, to be met with in our Lexicons, and taken, as I suppose, out of
the Dorique writers of the Italique or Pythagorean sect, and this way, (...) is
any Addition or Appendix, whether within or without the Walls of a City, that
is, it is the pomaerium indifferently in both sense.

Page 310. Which the Latins call otherwise tabanus) from tabes, because they
breed in the faintly and Autumnal time of the Year, or from the Hebrew teben
signifying straw or reeds, because they are chiefly found in locis arundineis
and Vliginosis. --

Page 311. I could show the same of the rest of the Roman Hills, etc.) I dare
scarce undertake for them all, but there is one more notwithstanding, which I
have not mentioned, and which I take to be of Eastern Origination, and that is
the mons Aventinus, whieh I take to be from the Chalday Aben, signifying a
Stone, the place where Jupiter Lapis, as Agellius tells us they had such a
Deity and they were used to swear by him, was worshipped among the Romans. For
in many of these cases b and v consonant are the same, as may be seen in a
thousand instances in the ancient glossaries, but it shall be sufficient to
instance in another word of Hebrew or Oriental growth translated into Latin,
that is, the Hebrew ab, whence by the addition of a Roman termination is the
Latin Avus, signifying a progenitor or forefather, for that is its first and
true signification, though the use of the Latin speech have restrained it to
him, whom we call the Grandfather, and this is plainly the sense of proavus,
being from the Latin pro with the Hebrew ab, and signifying in general a
progenitor or Forefather, as in that known place of Ovid -- Genus and proavos
and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco --
but yet in this word we have a manifest instoance of the ignorance of the
Romans in the Antiquities and true Etymologies of their own Language, for
avunculus which is from avus, and consequently from ab, is not the Uncle by the
Father, but the Mother's side.

Ib. which is derived from the Hebrew Joresh, signifying an Inheritance) Joresh
does not signify the Inheritance, but the heir in strictness of speech, but
yet even this way the Etymon holds very well, for the principle is as it were
the Heir or Landlord to whom the interest is due, or if you would rather it
^ave from Shoresh, signifying a Root, from whence the interest sprouts out and
grows, it is all one to me, only this latter Etymon, though in sense it have
scarce any advantage, yet in sound it is more natural then the other.

Page 312. Faenus is hanoush) from thence is also the Latin pignus, and by
omitting the last letter (as from the Hebrew routs is the Latin ruo) is the
Greek (...) and the Latin paena, and the English pawn, all these words implying
an exchange or penalty, or barter of one thing for another, and (...) are (...)
and therefore easily convertible into one another.

Page 319. What the Latins call quintus when it is a praenomen, that the Greeks
call (...), an Author of this name is cited by the Old Scholiast upon Homer,
(...), ad Il. n. 214. and this no doubt was a Roman Author though writing in
Greek and his Latin name was Quintus.

Page 322. Are by Catullus Epigr. 17. called salisubsuli) I deny not but the
Etymology a saliendo was the ancient, and indeed the only received one among
the Romans, and to this Catullus himself alludes, in the Epigram cited, ad
Coloniam; his words are, O Colonia, quae cupis ponte ludere longo
Et salire paratum habes --
And a little after. Sic tibi bonus ex tua pons libidine fiat,
In quo vel sali subsuli sacra suscipiunto.
And Varro l. 4. de l. 1. salii a saltando quod facere in comilio in sacris
quotannis and solent and debent. But I only argue from the repetition of the
same word, which to me is very uncouth and scarce to be mached in all the Latin
Tongue, or perhaps in any other, to which it is to be added that Mars himself,
who according to Macrobius was the same with the Sun was anciently called
salsubsulus, as appears by this fragment of Pacuvius concerning him Pro imperio
sic salisubsulus vostro excubet.
Quod procul dubio est, says Scaliger, ex fine prologi cujusdam ut illud
Plautinum, Vt vos item alias, pariter nunc voc Mars adjuvet.


Page 323. Lou parothka, or Lou parothk) from the Hebrew pharah without all
question, is the Latin pario, and partus.

Page 326. When have not only the Greek (...), but sometimes by the Elision and
omission of the quiescent, (...)) of this there is also another example very
plain, but yet never taken notice of hitherto by any, and that is in Acheron,
which the common Etymologists, for want of something to say, are used to derive
from a privative and (...), but the word, by their leave, is pure Hebrew, and
signifies the state after this life, for achar is post, and acharon, posterius,
postremum, and by the Elision of Aleph is the word charon, which is the name of
the Ferryman in the Poets, who was to waft men over into that state, not from
the same (...), as it were by an Antiphrasis, a very cold interpretation,
though I perceive Apulejus was of this opinion; his words are these in Apol.
pro Aemiliano, where he tells us that Charon had likewise another name, and
that was Mezentius, igitur agnomenta ei duo indita, Charon, ob oris and animi
duritatem, and alterum quod libentius audit, ob deorum contemptum, Mezentius.
which latter name of his is likewise as plainly Hebrew as the other, from the
verb, maas, sprevit, contempsit, from whence maasan or meesan or some such
word, signifying contemptor, as from the Chalday Tirgem, is Drogermau for an
Interpreter, from the Hebrew shallem, the Turkish musleman, for a Perfect or
Faithful person, from Aram Arman for an Assyrian, whence Armenus, and Armenia.
So that these things do strengthen and and confirm one another; upon this
occasion, I will mention another of those names by which the future state was
anciently expressed by the Poets, and that is Cocytus, which the Grammarians
would have to be (...), signifying to bewail and lament, but I had rather have
it from (...), by which word in the Greek Anthology our See my Discourse of the
true time of our Saviors Passover.
Ancestors or Progenitors are denoted, as much as to say, the place or seat
whether our Forefathers are gone, and from this word, if I am not mistaken, is
the other derived, because of men's mourning and lamentation for the dead, and
for their Parents especially, to whom the most Solemn and Religious justa were
performed, neither does it signify any thing in this case that the one of
these words is spelt by an (...), the other by an (...), for nothing is more
ordinary then for long and short Vowells to be exchanged into one another, as
these two Vowells are changed the short into the long, in all the verbs that
begin with an (...), in the preter tence, and in all the Tences and Participles
where the Augment is inserted, and in all the compositions of (...), the same
is to be found, as in (...), and the like, and if you would have a particular
reason, why it is so here, I answer it is in compliance with the nature of the
voces fictitiae that the sound may in some measure represent the signification,
the long Vowel being naturally more mournful and pathetical then the short; and
if my opinion may be taken as to the derivation of this word (...), I would
have that to be no less of Eastern origination then the other two words that
have been newly mentioned, to which purpose it is to be noted that of Ancient
time there were two proper names, viz. Og and Agag, which I take to be the
same, that is, the one to be only a reduplication of the other, though the
latter be spelt with an Aleph, the former with an Haiin, for these two letters
are, as to their potestas much what the same, as I have shown already by the
septuagint, in their rendition of proper names, taking no notice of the latter
of these, sometimes, as if it were perfectly a quiescent letter, and thus in
the pure Hebrew, haphar, and ephar, the former by an Haiin, the latter by an
Aleph are the same, though the former be usually translated, pulvis, the latter
cinis, which are much what the same, and they are exactly synonymous and
expressive of one another, Genesis 18. 27. where they are both used, And Abraham
answered and said, behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord,
which am but dust and ashes, in the Original it is haphar veepher and in the
Seventy (...), and the latter of these words is rendered by the Seventy, Job 2.
8. by (...) a Dunghill, a signification coming much nigher to (...) then (...),
and the former is translated by (...), Genesis 13. 16. and 28. 14. and by (...),
Number. 19. 17. so that it is plain these words are synonymous and expressive of
each other, to all which it is to be added that Ophir, which is by an Aleph,
and which, as I have observed, is the name of Africa in Scripture, was so
called because of the drowth and dustiness of the place, by reason of the heat
of the climate, which is the confessed signification of haphar, by an haiin.

So that it being now clear that Og and Agag are possibly, and may be very
probably the same name, the one being only a repetition, reduplication or
ingemination of the other, I proceed from hence to observe that from the first
of these names, by which the King of Bashan, conquered by Joshua is called, the
name Ochus which belonged to one of the Persian Kings is derived, of whom
mention is made by Diodorus l. 17. Aelian. var. Hist. l. 6. c. 8. v. Lloyd.
lex. Geog. and Poet. in Ogyges.
and Justim. l. 10. and from the other Ogyges, an Ancient King of Thebes, and
if we may believe others, the first King of Athens, as also of Egypt, Boeotia,
and Lycia had their names, and indeed any ancient thing or person was of Old
expressed and represented by this name, as Hesychius interprets the word (...)
derived from it, by (...) and (...) and with him Suidas, the Etymologer and
Eustathius agree, and so Nicander uses it in Theriacis (...).
Where the Scholiast interprets it after the same manner, or rather more
Emphatically, for he makes the name (...) it self to be as much as others mean
by (...) derived from it, (...) (...), all which may be excellently paralleled
and explained out of Number. 24. 7. in the benedictory Parable of Balaam, He
(Jacob) shall pour out the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be in
many waters, and his King shall be higher then Agag, and his Kingdom shall be
exalted: Now there is no mention of any Agag before this, and yet if I am not
very much deceived, this is a prophetic comparison of Saul, who was to be the
first King of Israel, and was a tall and comely person, with another Ancient
King of great renown and fame in those times, and who probably lived before the
Flood, being a Person of a Gigantick stature, for the Scripture tells us Genesis
6. 4. that there were Giants in those days and he probability, as being the
tallest, biggest and most Gigantick was their King, according to that known
saying, which was Anciently the great rule of Elective Kingdoms, (...)
And God complying with this humor of mankind, that prevailed then so much in
the World, was pleased to appoint Saul to be their first King; of whom it is
said, 1 Samuel 9. 2. that from his shoulders upward he was higher then any of the
People, which conjecture if it be admitted as true, as it must be acknowledged
not to be improbable, then it will follow that the Ogygian Flood, and the Flood
of Noah are the same, notwithstanding that the generality of Chronologers have
placed them at so great a distance from one another, but the History of those
times being so very confused and imperfect, we are not obliged by their
Authority so much, as to neglect other reasons that offer themselves, but it is
in this as in many other things, that are perplexed, uncertain and obscure that
he is (...)
And still further to confirm this, it is to be observed, that notwithstanding
some have made the deluge of Oggges to have been only a small and
inconsiderable inundation of Attica or some one single Country, yet Nonnus in
his Dionysiaca makes it to have been universal. where speaking of the Ogygian
Flood he says l. 3. (...)


Secondly, Justin Martyr expressly puts Inachus and Ogyges as cotemporary
together. in orat ad Gentiles. (...). now this Inachus is without question the
same with (...) or Noah, and though they are both made by the same Justin
Martyr and others to have been contemporary with Moses, yet this proceeded only
from this, that there is such a person as Agag, whom they thought and not
without reason, to have been the same with Ogyges mentioned in the Mosaic
writings, as I have shown, but does it follow from thence, that they were
cotemporary together? or will it not follow by the same way of arguing, that
Moses was cotemporary with Adam, and with the Creation it self? or is it not
more likely that Balaam in his benedictory Prophecy, referred to some person,
well known, of Ancient times, by which both Balak and the Israelites might take
an estimate of that happiness which was afterward to attend the latter of
these? Thirdly, When it is Prophesied of Saul by Balaam, that he should be
higher then Agag, this, as I have said referrs to the great bulk and and
stature of the Autidiluvian mortals, and is another argument that Agag and
Ogyges are the same, and thence i^ was that (...) in Greek did not only
signify that which was Ancient, but also that which was monstrous for its bulk
and greatness, (...), by the latter of which words Suidas has interpreted it,
and Heliodorus uses (...), for a man of an extraordinary size and stature, and
Hesiod (...), speaking concerning Styx in his Theogonie, (...) --

For the same that Homer calls (...) in Il. (...). (...)
(...)
(...)
And in another place where Achilles swears by his Scepter, that is, by
Justice, and by God the Fountain of it, he concludes -- (...)


Fourthly as it is now plain, why so many writers after one another, being led
away by the mistake of the First whom they followed, have placed Ogyges in the
time of Moses, so it is no less plain why they made him King of Attica, and why
the Flood of Ogyges was by them supposed only to have overflown that province.
For Attica, as I have shown p. 354. of this Treatise was so called from the
Hebrew hathik, signifying Ancient, and the Inhabitants that came thither from
the East, were called by an Hebrew name hathikin, or the Ancient people, by
which it came to pass that the Greeks having a Tradition that the Flood of
Ogyges happened among the hattikim, or, as they would call it, according to
their own way of termination the (...), this gave occasion to all that fable,
that Ogyges was an Ancient Athenian King and that the Flood in his time,
happened in the Province or Territory of Attica where he Reigned.

Fifthly, If we lay both these Grecian Traditions together, that Ogyges lived
in the time of Moses, and that he Reigned over Attica in that Age, the latter
of which mistakes I have now discovered upon what reason it depended, and the
first as I have said, (that is, that which I have mentioned first, for it is
the latter in order of time) is owing to this that there is such a person as
Agag or Ogyges mentioned in the Mosaic writings, I say, if we compare these
things together, they will sufficiently betray and expose one another, for it
is ridiculous to think that Balaam referred to any such King of Attica, a place
with which neither Balack nor the Israelites had at that time any
Correspondence, much less was he so ^amous and well known among them, that the
King of Israel who was to come many Ages after, should be Proverbially compared
to him, and that it should be said of him, that he should be higher then Agag,
and that his Kingdom should be exalted, as if Attica, a small and
inconsiderable spot of Ground, had been some vast and Formidable Empire; nay, I
dare vouch for most, if not all the Jews now living, or that have lived ever
since this Story was first broached, that they are and have been ignorant, of
any such Athenian King, and so at this rate this Prophecy would not have been
only obscure and unintelligible when it was first uttered, but would remain to
this day among the number of those difficulties, that are to be explained at
the coming of Elias.

If it be urged that Balaam in this Prophecy referred to Agag the King of the
Amalekites, who was afterward Conquered by Saul, I answer, that I do believe
Balaam in part to have referred to this, for Agag was a Successor, though at a
great distance, of Balack, and Ruled over the same Country that the other did,
and it was in requital of the injuries done by Balak, that this overthrow fell
upon the Amalekites in the days of Saul, 1. Sam. 15. 2, 3, Thus says the Lord
of Hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him
in the way, when he came up from Egypt; now go, and smite Amalek, and utterly
destroy all that they have, and spare them not, but slay both Man and Woman,
Infant and Suckling, Ox and Sheep, Camel and Ass. But yet I say, that this,
though it was a partial fulfilling of this Proyhecy, yet it is not all that
prosperity and increase of honor and power, which is shadowed out under it,
First, because Agag in comparison, was but an inconsiderable Prince, and the
Israelites when they came out of Egypt, though nothing so strong as in the
time of Saul, were more then a match for the Moabites and Amalekites, at that
time, wherefore it is said, Number. 22. v. 3, 4, 5. that, Moab was sore afraid of
the People: and Moab was distressed because of the Children of Israel, and Moab
said unto the Elders of Midian, now shall this company lick up all that are
round about us, as the Ox licketh up the Grass of the Field. and v. 5, 6. the
words of Balak in his Message to Balaam, are, Behold, there is a People come
out from Egypt: behold, they cover the face of the Earth, and they abide over
against me, come now therefore I pray thee, curse me this People, for they are
too mighty for me: peradventure I shall prevail, that we may smite them, and
that I may drive them out of the Land; for I wot, that he whom thou blessest,
is blessed, and he whom thou cursest, is cursed. So that despairing of any
success against them, by a fair Battle, he was forced to make use of Sorceries
and Enchantments, but it proved in the event, as Balaam himself expresses it,
that there was no Enchantment against Jacob, neither any divination against
Israel. And if they were so little able to resist them then, what shall we
think after so many several succeeding generations, when the Children of Israel
were for number more Formidable, for strength more United, and when the
Government was settled upon a certain, and as it then appeared, an Hereditary
foundation, the Kingdom being established in the line and person of Saul? Or
how could that be thought so great an accession to the Israelitish power and
Kingdom; as that it should deserve so lofty and magnificent a Prediction as
this seems to be, being uttered with all the rapture and ecstasy of a
Prophetic spirit) to be wholly taken up, and utterly exhausted in the narrow
and trivial Contemplation of it? Secondly, When it is said of Saul that he
should be higher then Agag, there is no question, as I have said, a manifest
allusion here made to the Tallness and Comeliness of the person of Saul, and
therefore if this Agag who lived in his time, were only pointed at, it would
have required such another description of his person also, that so the
completion of this Prophecy might the more clearly and manifestly appear, for
to say, that Saul should be higher then a Dwarf, or then a person of ordinary
Stature, was certainly no such magnificent representation of his person, as to
deserve a Prophecy at so great a distance of time, to be bestowed upon it, but
now Agag is no where described after this manner, (though I deny not but being
King, if the Kingdom of Moab were Elective, he might probably be Taller then
the usual sort of People, for the reason already mentioned, and perhaps for
this reason, for the Comeliness of his Person, and the Majesty of his
Character, he was spared by Saul when the rest of the Amalekites were
destroyed) and this is another indication that some other besides him, is in
this place likewise to be understood.

Thirdly, In the Book of Esther the Story is Famous concerning Haman the Son of
Hammedatha, who is frequently called the Agagite, c. 3. 1, 8. c. 8. 3, 5. c. 9.
24. in the firstof which places for they have omitted the mention of it,
looking upon the repetition to be needless, in the rest) the present Copies of
the Seventy have (...), but if we consider how Religiously careful, the Jews
have always been in the preservation of their Copies, from all kind of
corruption beyond the Greeks, or any other nation, how often it is repeated in
the Hebrew, whereas it is but once mentioned in the Greek, how much more likely
it is that a corruption should steal into one place, then into four; and again
how unlikely it is, that a corruption should be so constant and every where the
same, in four several places; all this will be sufficient to persuade us, that
we are not in this place and consequently in all the rest, to correct the
Hebrew from the Seventy, but the Seventy from the Hebrew. Wherefore instead of
(...), I read (...), for Og, and Gog and Agag are the same, and so Number. 24. 7.
where it is in the Hebrew, vejarim meagag malco. His King shall be higher then
Agag. There the Seventy render it (...), the Kingdom of Gog shall be exalted,
where though they appear to have followed another reading then the Hebrew
Copies do at present, and a reading certainly much inferior to it, or rather
directly opposite to the sense of the place, yet thus much is certain, that
what the Hebrew calls Agag, they have rendered by (...), taking no notice of the
Guttural as in the instances already produced.

Haman the Agagite, is as much as Haman that was descended of Agag, not that
Agag who together with his whole Family, and consequently his posterity too,
was destroyed and cut off by Saul and Samuel; but some other, and I choose to
Interpret it of this Antidiluvian Agag or Ogyges, and that this is spoken of
him to make him appear the more Illustrious, that so his fall in the sequel of
the Story might be the more remarkable and signal, and if you say that he also
perished together with all his Family and dependents in the Flood, and
therefore could leave no posterity behind him, I grant, (upon supposition that
he is not the same person with Noah) that this is very true, but yet the Greeks
had a Tradition among them, which, without question, they received from the
East, that Ogyges escaped in the Deluge, that happened in his time, for so
Africanus in Eusebius speaking of that Ogyges, (or as he calls him (...))
(...), from whom the first deluge took Eusebius. praep. evang. l. 10.
its name, says that he was (...), saved, when others generally perished in
the waters; so that by this Tradition he is confounded with Noah, who did
really make his escape; but there is a Testimony of Cedrenus which makes him to
have perished, and this depended upon a Tradition that made Ogyges to be a
distinct person from Noah who was saved; by all which it appears, that the
History concerning him is, as I have already said, and proved, very obscure,
confused and uncertain, partly by the corruption of the Tradition it self, to
which all Antiquity is unavoidably subject, and partly by the mistakes and
Anachronismes of the Greeks, the causes of which I have already partly
represented, the words of Cedrenus are (...). that is, in the time of Moses
there was a certain great or Gigantick man, of the seed of Japheth, who being a
native of Attica, reigned over it for the space of thirty and two Years, his
name was Ogygus, and in his time happened that Flood, which was peculiar to
Attica, in which himself perished, and all that province was drowned; in which
words there is nothing at all true, as I think I have already made it appear,
by discovering the grounds of the mistakes in them, but only that there was
such a man, as Ogygus or Ogyges, that he was a great or Gigantick person, and
that a great Flood happened in his time, only when he says that this Gigantick
Ogygus was of the seed of Japheth, there seems in this also, as well as in what
has been said concerning his being King of Attica and co-temporary with Moses,
to be a stricture of truth in the corruption it self, for in the first place
the Scripture speaking of the men that lived before the Flood, says expressly,
that there were Giants in those days, Genesis 6. 4.
and again in the Relation of the lewdness of those times, which drew down the
Deluge afterward upon them; it says, that the Sons of God, saw the Daughters
of Men lb. v. 2.
that they were fair, in the Hebrew it is chi toboth hennab, that they were
goodly or had a goodly aspect, and the sense would have been the same, if it
had said, chi japhoth hennah, that they were fair, as our Translation renders
it; wherefore since by the Sons of God are understood the (...), the Sons of
the Great men or Princes of those times, who did what they pleased without
Control, as some of the Ancient Interpreters have rendered it; Ogyges at this
rate will be a Prince descended of one of those Japhoth, those fair ones, to
whom the Sons of God went in, and begat Sons and Daughters upon them, and this
is all that was at the bottom of that mistake of the Greeks, that Ogygus was
descended of the Family of Japheth; to confirm which yet further, it is to be
observed, that Scripture stories delivered down by Tradition in the East from
thence, yet were not always delivered in Scripture words, but only in words of
a like signification, or words relating to the circumstances of the Story, as I
have elsewhere observed out Discourse of the Tetragrammaton and also in that of
the Messiah, c. 1.
of Bochartus, who took his hint from sanchuniathon that Sarah in the Eastern
Tradition was called Annobret, because she was past the time of Childbearing,
and Isaac (...) or Jachid, because he was the only Son, and the like: so that
Japhoth, being perfectly synonymous to Toboth, and indeed more properly
signifying beauty, then the other, here is all that can be desired to make it
at least a tolerable conjecture.

Again, as from Agag is Ogyges, so from Gog, by the Elision of the Guttural is
Gyges, both of them the same person, as I will now prove, and as Cedrenus says
of Ogygus, that he was (...) a great or Gigantick person, so Ovid represents
the Ancient Gyges, for there were several afterward of the name, in his fourth
De Tristibus Eleg. 7.

-- Credam prius ora Medusae
Gorgonis anguineis cincta fuisse comis.
Et canes utero sub virginis; esse Chimaeram
A truce quae flammis separet angue leam,
Quadrupedesque^ homines cum pectore pectora junctos,
Tergeminumque virum, tergeminumque canem,
Sphingaque and harpyias, serpentipedesque Gigantes,
Centimanumque Gygen, semibovemque virum,
Haec ego cuncta prius, quam te, carissime, credam
Mutatum and curam deposuisse mei.
Where though he reckons all these as so many impossibilities and figments of
Antiquity, yet there is no question but in all or most of them, there was a
ground of v. Pale phat. in opusculo (...).
truth, though miserably adulterated and disguised by the vanity or ignorance
of the Greeks; particularly, as to Gyges, when he calls him Centimanum hundred
handed, it may very well be Interpreted of the extent of his power, or the
fierceness and violence of his Reign, and what he adds afterward in the next
words semibovemque virum, half man, half Ox, may refer to the brutish and
belluine manners of the Antiduilvian times, or rather it belongs not to Gyges
at all, but to the Fabulous of Minotaur of Crete. But not to Argue from bare
possibilities, that is, from things that are very uncertain; there is a place
of Tully in his, 3d. De Officiis that will fully make it out, that Gyges and
Ogyges, and that the Ogygian and the Noachic Deluge are exactly the same, his
words are these: Hinc ille Gyges inducitur a Platone, qui cum terra decessisset
magnis quibusdam imbribus, in illum hiatum descendit, aeneumque equum (ut
ferunt fabulae) animadvertit, cujus in lateribus fores essent; quibus apertis
mortui vidit corpus magnitudine inusitata, annulumque aureum in digito, quem ut
detraxit, ipse induit, (erat autem Regius Pastor) tunc in concilium pastorum se
recepit, ibi cum palam ejus annuli ad palmam converterat, a nullo videbatur,
ipse autemomnia videbat, idem rursus videbatur, cum in lucem annulum
inverterat, itaque hac opportunitate annuli usus, reginae stuprum intulit:
eaque adjutrice, regem dominum interemit, sustulit quos obstare arbitrabatur:
nec in his eum quisquam facinoribus potuit videre, sic repent annuli beneficio
Rex exortus est Lydiae. I do not say that there was not a certain Gyges King of
Lydia, for it is certain there was, nothing is more known in the Grecian story
then this, and it is concerning him the Epigrammatist spoke when he said,

(...), Anthol. l. 1.

(...),
(...),
(...).
And in another Epigramme in the same Anthology, (...)
(...), etc.
But I say that here are two Gyges's plainly confounded together, the Ancient
Gyges or antidiluvian Ogyges, with the Lydian King, and besides, abundance of
Fable into the bargain, for it is plain in the beginning of this Story, he
speaks of a certain Gyges, in whose time a great Flood happened, cum terra
magnts imbribus decessisset, which answers exactly to the Mosaic description of
the Flood of Noah, in which the rains from Heaven were accompanied with Chasmes
and Ruptures of the Earth, Genesis 7. 11. In the six hundredth year of Noah's life,
in the second month, the seventh day of the month, the same day were all the
fountains of the great Deep broken up, and the windows of Heaven were opened.
For the Story of the ring it is all of it Fabulous, but yet so, as the very
Fable it self discovers the truth, and shows the Story to have traveled into
Greece from the East, for it proceeded only from a different understanding of
the same word, which two differences were afterward put together and jumbled
into the same Story, for tabah signifies to be immerst or drowned in Hebrew,
and the same word with the addition only of an he, which can hardly be
distinguished in pronunciation signifies, a ring, and by this means it happened
that the Flood, and the Ring came both into the same Story, but for the
inprovements that are built upon this foundation, I am not bound to give an
account of them, for the progress of Fables, and oftentimes their rise too, is
owing to nothing but impudence on the one hand, and credulity on the other.

For the brazen horse which this Citation speaks of, it is no other then the
Ark of Noah; and whoever it was that brought this Story into Greece, made Noah
and Gyges or Ogyges to be the same person, as it is indifferent to me whether
they be or no, only this in the general I contend for, that the Flood of Noah
and the Deluge of Ogyges are the same; but now to make this out, that the
brazen Horse in this Fable, is the same with Noah's Ark in the reality, and
truth of the History it self, it is to be considered what he says of the brazen
Horse, that it had fores in lateribus, doors in the sides, for thus the Ark it
self is described Genesis 6. 16. where God gives instructions to Noah concerning
the fashion of it -- A window shall thou make to the Ark, and in a cubit shall
thou finish it above, and the door of the Ark shall thou set in the side
thereof, with lower, second, and third stories shall thou make it.

Secondly, When it is said, quibus apertis vidit corpus magnitidine inusitata,
that, opening the doors of this house, he saw in it the body of a man of an
extraordinary bulk, this is also literally true if you do but invert, and turn
it the other way, not that opening the doors of this horse he saw the body
within, but that opening the door or window of the Ark, he saw the same without
it, as Noah certainly, did when the waters were dried up, see many such bodies
of Gigantick stature, according to the size and proportion of those times,
lying upon the Ground, and the very mention of this corpus magnitudine
inusitata, shows this Deluge to have been very Ancient, when the size of men
was much greater, then any the Greek Histories, if they will speak truth, can
give us an account of, as found among themselves.

Lastly, The reason why this corrupt and interpolated story calls the Ark a
brazen horse, is this, in Hebrew Tsi signifies a Ship, and sous perhaps also
sis, for jod and vau, in Chalday and Hebrew at least, which is no great
difference, are actually exchanged into one another, signifies an horse, and
sis at this day among the Turks, is the word for a Groom, or one that looks
after horses, to which if we add the consideration of that Wood, of which the
Ark was built, the whole mystery will quickly be explained, it was hatsei
gopher, gopher wood, that is, Wood daubed over and covered with pitch, as all
Ships use to be; the whole verse in Hebrew runs thus, hatsei gopher tahaseh
otsoh, vecapharta otsah mibaith onmichouts bacopher, where gopher, and copher
are without qustion the same, as appears by the word, gaphrith which has the
signification of copher, and is as much as pix bitumen, sulphur, the caph being
exchanged into a gimel, a letter very nigh of kin to it, as from the Hebrew
gamal, is the Greek (...) and the Latin camelus, and copher did not only
signify pitch, or any such bituminous matter or substance, but it is also used
for a certain sweet smelling Flower, Cant. 1. 14. etc. 4. 14. which the Greek
Interpreters in the first of these places render by (...), and the Latins from
the Greek call cyprus, whence because of the abundance and plenty of this sort
of Flower that is to be found in it, the Island of Cyprus took its name, as
Eustathius and Stephanus are of opinion, and as the Island took its name from
the Flower, so there is a certain sort of Brass, which took its name from the
Island, which is called in Greek (...), in Latin Cuprum or aes Cyprium, or as
we call it in our Language, Copper, and the Hebrews without question, as they
did the Cyprian Flower, and the Island that took its name from it, so they
would also have called that sort of Metal which took its name from the Island
by the name of Copher, but whether they did or no, it was obvious for the
Greeks when they understood that the Ark was made of a certain substance which
had the Epithet of Copher, to interpret it of that which in their Language they
called (...), this being the nighest in sound to it, and they not understanding
the true signification of the Hebrew word, which was the true reason of this
adulteration of the story; and this it self was enough without any likeness in
sound as to the words by which an Horse and a Ship are denoted, though they are
at no great distance from one another, to make the story pass among the Greeks
rather with the circumstance of an Horse, then a Ship, because a brazen Ship
was impossible to conceive, and the story of the Trojan horse, which was of
very great antiquity among them, was a thing that might possibly give credit
and authority to this legend also, by their resemblance one to another.

To conclude, as from Agag, is Ogyges, and from Gog by the Elision of the
guttural Gyges, so from the name Gyges, is the Greek (...), and the Latin
Gigas; and to return to that which gave occasion to all this, from the Greek
(...), by the Elision of the (...), which answers to the Hebrew quiescent, and
is actually cut off in (...), and by changing the (...) into (...), of which
sort of permutation instances have been already produced, is the (...) in the
Anthology, for Ancestors or Progenitors, whence the word Cocytus, is derived,
and made to signify the Region of the dead, which I look upon as no far secht
Etymology, neither as I presume, will any man else, who has been conversant
about such matters; though I perceive Claudian was of another mind, and
therefore I am not sollicitous about, where in allusion to the Grammarian
Etymology from (...) he says, l. 2. in Rufinum Est locus infaustis quo
conciliantur in unum
Cocytos Pblegethonque vadis, inamaenus uterque
Alveus, hic volvit lachrymas, hic igne redundat.
and such another passage there is in his 2d. De raptu Proserpinae: but whether
this conjecture will be admitted or no, yet I am willing to hope that what I
have offered in my way to it, will not be unacceptable to learned Men, and
because it must needs be no inconsiderable advantage to the credit and
authority of the Sacred Volume, if I can show of Deucalions Flood, as well as I
have done of that of Ogyges that it was the same with Noah's, because by this
means there will be a strong current of antiquity, and an unanimous consent of
sacred and profane Authors together, for the asserting the truth of such an
universal deluge, as we by the Scriptures are taught to believe, therefore
before I leave this matter, I will endeavor to show the same of Deucalion that
I have done of Ogyges, viz. that his Flood and Noah's were the same. And I begin
with the words of our Countryman Mr. Lloyd, the late learned Revisor and
Completor of Charles Stephans his Geographical and Poetical Dictionary, whose
words under the word Deucalion are very remarkable and sufficient of themselves
to demonstrate all that I intend, they are these: Haec fabula Poetica, sub
verborum and nominum involucris veram universalis diluvii a Mose Dei servo
descriptam historiam proposuit, and artibus Satanae factum est, ut quaecunque
in sacra historia occurrerent, Ethnicorum figmentis in fabellas verterentur:
Apud Lucianum libello de v. etiam H. Grot. de v. R. C. l. 1. qui integrum
Luciani locum exscripsit.
Dea Syria extat locus, ex quo manifestum est per diluvium Deucalionis
intelligi, non inundationem illam qua olim Graecia absorpta est, sed diluvium
universale quod fuit Noae temporibus. Quinetiam Plutarchus libello de animalium
industria, scribit columbam ex arca Deucalionis emissam attulisse indicium
recedentis diluvii. Secondly, The old Scholiast upon Homer citeing Apollodorus
for his Author, tells us that when Ad Il. ^^. 10.
Jupiter had resolved to destroy the Brazen Age or Generation of Men, Deucalion
by the council and instigation of Prometheus built an Ark, (...), he calls it,
which word by the Addition of All the Arabian prefix, I take to be plainly from
the Hebrew Aron signifying an Ark, and this confirms what I have said, that
Scripture Traditions, that is, Traditions that were got into the Heathen World,
and were derived from thence, were frequently delivered in other words then
those by which the Scripture expresses them; Now these two things are certain,
that Noah built an Ark, and that he did it by the express Command of God
himself, after he had taken a resolution to destroy the Old World, Genesis 6. 13,
14. And God said unto Noah the end of all flesh is come before me, for the
Earth is filled with violence through them; and behold I will destroy them with
the Earth, make thee an Ark of Gopherwood. And when Deucalion in the Fable is
said to have done this by the instigation of Prometheus ((...)) Prometheus is
that name of God by which his providence and wisdom is denoted, and that
sometimes in the Heathen Mythology, however disguised and adulterated with
inconsistent and ridiculous Fables, Prometheus was no other then the Supreme
Numen, appears by this, that the same things are attributed to him, which are
ascribed to God in Scripture, as his stealing fire from Heaven to animate his
first man, which is an argument that he himself was before him and consequently
was no mortal, is a Fable stolen, with reverence be it spoken, out of the
History of the Creation, where God is said to have breathed the nishmath
chajim, the breath of life into Adam, and so likewise his making the first man
of the dust of the Earth, of which all the Ancient Poets are so full, is
manifestly Transcribed from the same Original. Lastly, The Fable of the Vulture
or Eagle perpetually knawing upon his Liver, without being ever able to devour
it, which the Poets, not understanding the Hierogliphick Mysteries of the East,
from whence this Fable was derived, have represented as done by way of
punishment inflicted upon him, was only an Hieroglyphical or Symbolical
adumbration of the Eternity of the Divine Nature, and of its necessary or self
existence; for this Vultur or Eagle, is Time, which is as it were, perpetually
preying upon the Eternal nature, without being ever able to consume it, and
that this is so, appears very plainly by Hesiods description of the thing, who
tells us, that matters were so ordered, that whatsoever the Eagle ate in the
daytime, was repaired in the night, where speaking concerning this
Hieroglyphick Eagle, he says,

-- (...)
(...)
(...).
But what Hesiod calls an Eagle, Petronius will have to be a Vultur, in
Hendecasyllabo. v. etiam Fulgent. in mythol.
Cur Vultur Jecur ultimum pererrat,
Et pectus trahit intimasque Fibras?
And the meaning of Hesiod, when he says that reparation was made in the night,
for what was consumed in the day, is to be explained by the course of the Sun,
which sets out fresh and lusty every mornning, and is, as the Psaimist
excellently words it, as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoices
as a strong Man to run a race, but when he is got to his Meridian he begins to
decline, he is first, as it were, hot and fiery, and then, having spent his
vigor, languishing and faint, till the day is concluded by the night, and time
it self seems to be at an end; but the next morning these decays and
wearinesses are again repaired, and he sets out as fresh and vigorous as ever,
which is a very plain and natural explication of this place of Hesiod, and
shows Prometheus to have been the same with the Sun, who was worshipped by all
the Idolatrous Nations for the Supreme Numen, no wonder therefore, if what is
ascribed to the true God in Scripture, be in the fabulous antiquity attributed
to Prometheus.

And by this description of Prometheus (which I confess supposes the Eternity
of this Universe, as it is now ordered and framed, at least a part post, but
that is not to the purpose) we see what notion the Ancients had of Eternity,
namely that it was not a standing or quiescent, but a successive duration,
notwithstanding that our Schoolmen will not hear of any such thing, and as they
thought of duration that it was successive, so of the Divine Nature, they had
always an opinion that he was an extended substance, till Plato and Aristotle
and other Scholasticks began by subtleties while they pretended, and perhaps
really designed to assert and vindicate the Divine existence, to rob him of his
Divine Amplitude and Omnipresent extention, and by subtleties dispute him into
nothing.

Furthermore, As the gnawing of the Eagle or Vultur signified, without
question, the succession of an Eternal duration, so the Pillar to which
Prometheus was tied, signified the stability, the strength and lastingness, and
never failing Eternity of that succession, and the Cords or Bands with which he
was tied to it, was the Immortality or permanency of the Divine Nature, which
is commensurate with, and closely linked to, the utmost possibility of the most
unbounded, unfathomable, and bottomless duration; and the Mountain Caucasus
upon which the Poets feigned him to lie bound, is another indication that by
Prometheus they understood the Sun, by reason of the great, and as it is
usually represented the Fabulous height of that Mountain, which was so great
that Philostratus in his Second De Vita Apollonii, has had the impudence to
report that the top of it does, as it were, pass through the Sun, and seems to
divide it into two parts.

I will not deny that I have a shrewd suspicion, that it was the opinion of
the ancient World as far as from the first beginning of Idolatry, (when men
began to worship the host of Heaven) which is very ancient, that all vitality
and life, nay, so much as thought and speculation themselves, were owing to the
heat and influence of the Sun, and that this was their meaning when they talked
of Prometheus his stealing fire from Heaven, which was that divinae aurae
particula, or in the Language of the Scripture that Nishmath chajim, that
breath of life, by which the first Mortals were inspired, and which has been
since propagated by generation, and in this opinion they were confirmed by a
tradition which they had, which was afterward transmitted in writing to
posterity by Moses, that God made the World in six days, which they so
interpreted, by distinguishing the day and night from one another, as indeed
hereb does properly signify that time, when things are mixed and confounded,
and cannot be distinguished from one another, so that it is impossible to work
any longer, I say, they so interpreted these six days work, as if in the night
the Opificer had rested (as he did afterward upon the seventh day) which was
always thought to be the Suns method, to work in the day and to repose and cool
himself in his Western bed at night, until at length the Antipodes were
discovered, and that opinion vanished, together with the error by which it was
occasioned, not that they looked upon all things to have come by chance as the
Democriticks and Epicureans afterward did, for this in comparison was but a
modern error, but they had a notion of the Sun and the Stars, that they were
wise and understanding beings, and that they did not only see all things that
happened upon Earth, but that they did also order and dispose them by wise See
Dr. More in his immortality of the Soul, and mystery of Godliness, and in his
defense against Butler.
and prudent measures; but this is nothing to us, we are no farther obliged by
Antiquity, then Antiquity it self shall appear consonant to sound and impartial
reason; we know for certain that the Stars are more ignorant than any of their
worshippers ever were or could be, and that what reason and understanding they
have not in themselves, they cannot possibly communicate to us, we know there
is an older Shemesh, from S^amesh^ ministrare. --
Antiquity than this, which makes the Sun, as his name imports, to be no more
than a Servant, and that he and the Stars were appointed for nothing else, then
only to be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and for years, which
expressions in the Mosaic writings derived from the Cabbala of Discourse of the
true time of our Saviors Passover.
much Ancienter times, though they might possibly be Interpreted in favor of
Astrology, as I have elsewhere noted; yet it is enough that their most plain,
obvious, and easy sense is not this, and that we are assured from other
considerations, that Astrology is as vain as the pretenders to it, and that the
predicting tribe are now themselves of opinion that the Sun and the Stars are
stark blind, in the midst of all the wonderful discoveries, which they have
made by their light; but enough of this, ^t is sufficient that I have
discovered who Prometheus was, that he was the Sun, who was worshipped by
Idolatrous Antiquity as the Supreme Numen, and that by his impulse and council,
Deucalion was persuaded to build him an Ark, as Noah did by the Command of God,
so that these things have a perfect resemblance, and hitherto there is a very
fair correspondence of the Stories of Deucalion and Noah with one another.

Nay, in the Third place, there is not only mention made in the profane
Antiquity of Deucalions Ark, but also of the mountain upon which it rested, as
the Scripture tells us it rested upon the Mountain of Ararat, for so Juvenal
speaks,

-- Deucalion, Nimbis tollentibus aequor,
Navigio montem ascendit, sortesque poposcit,
Paulatimque anima caluerunt mollia saxa,
Et maribus nudas ostendit Pyrrha puellas.
Fourthly, What Juvenal speaks in the latter part of this citation, which is
more or less insisted upon by almost all the Poets, that Deucalion and Pyrrha
by casting Stones behind them, produced a new generation for the repairing of
Mankind, the meaning of this is thus to be interpreted, Eben is (...) and Aben
is Filius, both of them consisting of exactly the same Letters, and both of
them derived from the same Root, banah, which is indifferently applied in
Hebrew to building and generation, which gave occasion to the Tradition, that
they begat or produced Children by casting of Stones, for Children and Stones
are both of them in the plural called Abanim; and from hence, because of the
likeness or rather sameness of these two words, Ben or Aben and Eben, proceeded
that saying of our Savior, which it is probable was taken from some proverbial
speech among the Jews, expressing the extent and largeness of the Divine Power,
to which nothing is inaccessible or impracticable, which does not imply a
contradiction to be done, Matthew. 3. 9. Think not to say within your selves, we
have Abraham for our Father, for I say unto you that God is able of these
Stones to raise up Children unto Abraham,

For if it be true that the Gospel of St. Matthew was Originally written in
Hebrew, an v. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 3. 24. and 5. 10. ut and Hieron. catal.
script. Eccles.
opinion which has not wanted good Authority in Antiquity to vouch it, and
there are Hebrew Copies of it extant at this day, then the beauty of this
sentence consisted in this, that banim and abanim chimed to one another, by a
Figure in Rhetoric which the Greeks call (...) and the Latins adnominatio, and
to which the Hebrews are wonderfully addicted, as in that place of Genesis
concerning the Ark, which has been already produced, hatsei gopher tahaseh
othah, vecaphartu othah mibaith oumichouts bachopher, but more especially in
another, where the chiming is admirable to consider, he that spilleth Man's
Blood, by Man shall his Blood be spilt, in the Hebrew it is, shophek dam haadam
baadam damo jishaphek. And the attending with good heed and judgment to this
one thing, that is, to the different acceptance of words, which, being
altogether the same or very like in sound, have yet notwithstanding diverse
significations, will certainly explain many things in the Heathen Mythology,
which are not yet understood for want of this one observation.

Fifthly, The Scholiast upon Homer does not only say, as Iuvenal does that the
Ark being carried upon the Water, rested at last upon the top of a Mountain,
and he names Parnassus, according to the ignorance or vanity of the Greeks, who
applied the Antiquities of others to themselves, as has been seen already in
the Story of Ogyges, and is still further exemplified in this of Deucalion, but
he expresses the time of its tossing and fluctuation upon the Waters, after
such a manner as gives us to perceive, from whence the relation was Originally
taken, (...), for nine days and as many nights. I know the Scripture tells us
that it rained upon the Earth in the times of Noah's Flood, for forty days and
forty nights, and that the Ark was floting upon the Waters for a much longer
space of time than that also; but that which I take notice of, is the manner of
expression, (...), nine days and nine nights, as the Scripture says, forty
days and forty nights, which is plainly an Oriental mode of expression, and
the one is borrowed from the other, for the Greek Language would have expressed
all this by (...) with them generally signifying the (...), or the whole
circuit of twenty four hours, unless when the day and night are opposed to one
another, as in the citation of Hesiod above produced, or sometimes where the
sense does manifestly restrain it to the continuance of the Sun above the
Horizon, and for the difference of the numbers, it is nothing to the purpose,
for the numbers being usually expressed not by words at length, but Numeral
Letters, it is obvious for any man to perceive how prone these things are to
corruption, since the alteration of a Letter makes a change in the Number, and
by consequence a corruption in the Story, and sometimes corruptions proceed by
several steps, which it is impossible for us to trace, only in the Story which
is left us, if there be still remaining a stricture of true and genuine
Antiquity, this is a greater argument that the Story in its Original is not
fabulous, then the deviations from that Original pattern, by ignorance or time
are, that it is

Sixthly, The first thing which Apollodorus in the Scholiast makes Deucalion to
have done, after the Waters were dried up and he came out of his Ark, is to pay
his thanks for his deliverance by a Sacrifice to the Author of it, (...), says
he, (...) where (...), is Jupiter, or God that. had dissipated and driven away
the Waters, from the face of the Earth; and this was the first thing that Noah
did, after he came out of his Ark, when the Waters were dried up, Genesis 8. 20.
he builded an Altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean Beast, and of every
clean Fowl, and offered burnt Offerings on the Altar.

But Seventhly, There is still another place of the same Scholiast upon Homer,
which is more to the purpose, then, or at least as much as, all that has been
already spoken, it is upon Il. (...) 233, 234. (...). --



Upon which place the Scholiast puts this question, (...). that is, What is the
story of this Dodonean Jupiter, and what is the place from whence he received
this name; to which question he returns this answer, alleging Thrasibulus for
his Author, (...). that is, Deucalion after the Flood which happened in his
time, having got safe upon the firm Land of Epirus, preached, or rather
Prophesied in or by an Oak, and by the admonition or Counsel of an Oraculous
Dove, having gathered together such as were saved from the Flood, made them to
inhabit together in a certain Place or Country, which from Jupiter and Dodone,
one of the Sea Nymphs, or one of the Daughters of Oceanus, they called Dodone;
in which words there are several things very worthy of remark, First, if we
admit a very small Anachronism in the Greek Story, as I shall show manifestly
there is another very great one by and by, then it is true of Noah, what
Thrasybulus in this Relation ascribes to Deucalion, (...), that he Preached or
Prophesied by or under an Oak or Tree, not after the Flood, as this Story would
have it, but before it, for so St. Peter expressly calls him, a Preacher of
Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. and in the First Epistle, c. 3. 19, 20. speaking of
the Spirit of Christ, he says, by which (Spirit) also he went and Preached unto
the Spirits in See my Discourse of the Messiah, c. 1.
Prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once the long suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, when the Ark was a preparing; which words are to be
understood of Noah Preaching by the Spirit of Christ, to the Spirits in Prison,
that is, not which were so then, but were so for their disobedience when this
Epistle was Written, and long before it, and continue so still, and the Subject
of all his Sermons was, to preach Repentance and Obedience to them, to tell
them roundly of their Enormities and to forewarn them of that universal
Destruction by a deluge of Waters, which without a speedy and hearty
Reformation, would certainly overtake them; this it is certain he did before
the Flood, and this is properly (...), it is to Prophecy, being Acted and
Possessed by a Divine, or reputedly Divine Spirit, which the Ancient Mortals
used to do with so much Zeal, and so Enthusiastic, and Rapturous a concern,
that they differed little as to outward appearance from downright Bedlams and
Madmen, as the young Prophet was accounted who came by Commission from Elisha
to Anoint Jehu, 2 Kings 9. 11. where one of the Captains of the Host puts this
Question, Wherefore came this Mad fellow to thee? and it is certain that (...)
in Greek, which is the most Ancient name of a Prophet or inspired person, is
from (...) insanio, and the Ancient Priestesses of Bacchus, were for the same
reason called (...), and such sort of Persons in the Latin Authors, are called
Lymphatici, Ceriti (that is, acti a cerere) Furore, vel aestro perciti, and by
the Greeks, (...), and the like; and this perhaps may be a good account, why
Noah was not believed when he foretold the Deluge to the old World, because
they looked upon him rather under the notion of a Madman than a Prophet.

But yet I do not so wholly confine the Prophetic Spirit of Noah to the times
before the Flood, as to affirm it afterward to have ceased, for there is no
doubt but he continued to Preach the same Doctrine to his Children and
Descendants after the Flood, which he did to the rest of the World before it,
that unless they continued: See my Discourse of the Messiah, c. 1.
steadfast in their Obedience to God, or at least heartily Repented of all their
wilful Declensions and Deviations from it, and actually entered upon a new and
a better course of life, they must expect, though not the same, for God had
promised that he would not Drown the World any more, yet equally terrible and
severe Judgments to light upon themselves, to which it is to be added, that in
the 9th. of Genesis upon occasion of Cham's disrespectful and undutiful behavior
toward him, in not covering his Nakedness, we find him Actually in a
Prophetic Fit, v. 24, 25, 26, 27. And Noah awoke from his Wine, and knew (by
that Prophetic Spirit, wherewith he was then Acted) what his younger Son had
done unto him, and he said, Cursed be Canaan, a Servant of Servants shall he be
unto his Brethren, and he said blessed be the Lord God of Shem and Canaan shall
be his Servant; God shall enlarge Japhet and he shall dwell in the Tents of
Shem, and Canaan shall be his Servant. It is true therefore that Noah was a
Prophet, that is, a Preacher of Righteousness, and praemonisher of things to
come, both before and after the Flood, so that here is nothing but what is very
agreeable to the account of Deucalion given by Thrasybulus, and though it be
true that the great and principal part of his Prophetic Ministry was
transacted in the times before the Flood, yet, for ought I know, this Author
when he affirms him likewise to have Prophesied after it, might referr among
other things to this particular Story, wherein Cham is prophetically blasted
and accursed, and Sem and Japhet are pronounced blessed.

For Secondly, Which is the second thing observable in the Words of the
Scholiast, it is not only said in general of Deucalion, that he was a Propbet,
but that he did (...), Prophecy by or under some Oak, or other tall and
spreading Tree, for the Text tells us that this thing happened while Noah was
in his Tent, Genesis 9. 20, 21. Noah began to be an Husbandman, and he planted a
Vineyard, and he drank of the Wine and was drunken, and he was uncovered within
his Tent, Now it is to be observed that the first Mortals were used to pitch
their Tents in Shady and Woody places, for the greater Warmth and Shelter, as
Juvenal speaks of the Reign of Saturn and the Golden Age, Sylvestrem montana
torum cum sterneret uxor
Frondibus and culmo. --


And Macrobius speaking of the most Ancient times, describes them thus, Cum
rudes primum homines and incuria sylvestri non multum a ferarum asperitate
dissimiles meminerit vel fabuletur antiquitas, nec hunc eis, quo nunc utimur,
victum fuisse, sed glande prius and baccis altos, sero sperasse de sulcis
alimoniam -- but what is still more to the purpose it is said of Abraham, Genesis
13. 18. that he removed his Tent and came and dwelt in the Plain, of Mamre;
where the Seventy have it, (...), and again, c. 14. 13. speaking of the same
Person, (...), and c. 18. 1. we find him to have had Communion with God, as
Deucalion is said to have Prophesied (...), the words are (...) in all which
places if we cousider the Antiquity and unquestionable skill of the Seventy
Interpreters above all others that have ever appeared, their constancy in the
rendition of this word, and that in all these places the word occurs in the
Plural Number, Beelonei Mamre, it will be more rational for us to follow their
example, than that of the Rabbinical and other Modern Expositors, and to
Interpret the word rather of Trees than of Plains, and that which led them into
the mistake was this, they thought the Preposition Beth, could not be rendered
by (...), or (...), answering to the Latin prope or juxta, as the Seventy have
done, but only by the Preposition in, which would indeed have made the place
absurd, as if the Tent of Abraham wherein he and his numerous Family had their
Habitation, were pitched in the hollow of a Tree. Elan in Chalday, is rendered
by the Rabbinical Interpreters themselves by Arbor, and the same without
question is the signification of Elon in Hebrew, not for any Tree in general,
but more especially the Oak, under which as being the tallest, thickest, most
spreading and most durable, and lasting Tree of any other, the Ancients seem
most frequently to have performed their Religious Acts of Sacrifice, Incense,
and Adoration, as Pliny speaking expressly of the Druids, who derived it without
question from some other people more Ancient than themselves, says L. 16. c.
44. Roborum eligunt lucos nec ulla sacra sine ea fronde conficiunt, and from
thence the Luci in Latin had their name a lucendo, from the Light and Blaze
which the Sacrifices afforded. Elon therefore is from El Deus, as much as to
say the Tree of God, as Alah which is rendered by execratus est, juravit,
adjuravit, is from the same root, and is as much as to Swear by God, and to
call down the Divine Vengeance in Case of Perjury and false Swearing, and hence
it is that the Oak among the Greeks and Romans was arbor Jovi sacra, Dedicated
and devoted to the Service of God, as the Holly seems to have been of later
times and from thence it had its name, Alah and Elah being nownes, are also
rendered by Quercus, and from the latter in the Plural is found Elim, which
differs but very little in sound from Elohim, and does very strongly patronize
this conjecture.
being as much as to say sacra arbor, and the confounding of these three
following wordstogether, and mistaking the one for the other, El, and Elon and
heljon, which is the Name of God in the Story of Melchisedeck, gave occasion to
the Fable that Mankind, whom the Scripture truly asserts to have been first
made and brought into being by God, had their first Original from the heart of
Oaks cleft in sunder, according to that passage in the Anthology which I have
already pointed at, and will now cite, -- (...)
(...)
And Juvenal speaks also to the same purpose Quippe aliter tunc or be novo
caeloque recenti
Vivebant bomines, qui rupto robore nati,
Compositique luto, nullos habuere parents.
Where when he says that they were luto compositi, the Original of this is well
enough known, and has been already accounted for, and for the other though
perfect nonsense and plainly inconsistent with what follows, that they were
luto compositi, yet thus they received it from Graecia mendax, the great
depraver of all History, and who was her self as often deceived as she imposed
upon others, as in this and other instances which I have produced: to conclude
this matter from the Hebrew Elon or Elan, by the Addition of a b or g, as from
the Latin uro is bustum, is the common Greek (...), the Aeolick (...), and the
Latin glans, signifying an Acorn or the Fruit of the Oak.

Thirdly, As a third observable from these words of the Scholiast upon Homer,
or of Thrasybulus from whom he borrows them, it is to be observed, that he also
takes notice of the Dove or Pigeon, which was so remarkable a circumstance in
the History of the Flood, (...), etc. that by the Oracle or indication of a
Dove he settled a Colony, and together with those others that had escaped the
Deluge took up his Habitation in a certain place, which from Jupiter and Dodona
one of the Sea Nymphs, or one of the Daughters of Oceanus he called Dodona: now
this Oracle of the Dove is nothing else, but that Noah made use of this Animal,
to know whether or no, and when and how far the Waters were abated, first he
sent out a Raven from which he had no intelligence, because it returned no
more, for it is said that it went forth to and fro, until the Waters were dried
up from off the Earth, Genesis 8. 7. not but that the Waters must at that time be
supposed to have been actually abated, unless we should suppose this Raven to
have been always upon the Wing for so many days together, which is utterly
impossible and absurd to imagine, but it is the Nature of this Bird to Perch
and Roost upon the tops of Trees, which by this Story it is plain, began in
some places to discover themselves above the Waters, but this Doves and Pigeons
will not do, and therefore to know whether the Waters were any where so abated,
as that the dry Land began to appear, the Dove was a more proper Messenger than
the Raven, wherefore it is said, v. 8, 9. that he sent forth a Dove from him to
see if the Waters were abated from off the face of the Ground, but the Dove
found no rest for the sole of her Foot, and she returned unto him into the Ark;
and v. 10, 11. and he stayed yet other seven days, and again, he sent forth the
Dove out of the Ark, and the Dove came into him in the Evening, and lo, in her
mouth was an Olive-leafe plucked off, so Noah knew that the Waters were abated
from off the Earth, because the Olive was a Tree of no considerable height, and
the Dove a sort of Bird that is not found to Perch or rest it self upon any
sort of Tree, from which two things compared together he guessed that the
Ground was somewhere dry. Lastly, v. 12. He stayed yet other seven days, and
sent forth the Dove which returned not again unto him any more; by which Noah
understood now, that the Ground was dry, as before, and that the Dove had not
only a place for the sole of her Foot, but also met with Food and subsistence
abroad; and therefore it is immediately subjoyned, v. 13. That Noah removed the
covering of the Ark, and behold the face of the Ground was dry, and this I
think does as plainly confirm and explain the (...), the Oracle of Deucalions
Dove, which taught him when and where to come out of his Ark, and betake
himself again to the dry Land, as it is possible for any two agreeing Stories
in Antiquity, to explain, confirm or vindicate one another.

But Fourthly, The fourth thing to be observed from these words, is that
Deucalion called this place, where he and the rest that had escaped came out of
the Ark, and as it seems pitched a Tent and took their Abode, at least for some
certain time, in it, by the Name of Dodona, which Dodona, if we can give a
clear and intelligible account, who or what it was, or why so called, this will
give new light to the Story of Deucalion, and may perhaps confirm what I have
now so often asserted, that he and Noah were the same: the Scholiast here tells
us, the place was so called (...), from Jupiter and Dodona, but why from
Jupiter I pray? when Dodone is sufficient, for there is the whole name of the
one in the other, so that if this pretended Nymph gave name to the place, there
is no need of Jupite^ or any other to help her in it, since the names of the
Place and the Nymph, are both of them exactly and to a Letter the same; but
here we see a manifest instance of the Ignorance of the Greeks, and of their
corrupting the Traditions of the East, for want of understanding the Language
in which they were delivered, for it is true, as the Greeks did still retain a
smattering of the business, that Dodona was so called (...), not from the word,
but the person so called, who is in Hebrew called Adonai, and by the
Carthaginians or Phaenicians Donai, as I have proved elsewhere from that
salutation of Plautus in his Penulus Discourse of the Tetragrammaton.
Avo Donni, and from thence by a reduplication is Dodone, for a place Dedicated
to the Worship of Jupiter, or of the Supreme God, as from the Hebrew Tor is the
Latin Turtur, and this is certain that the first thing Noah did after he came
to Land, was to do Sacrifice, and usually such places by virtue of any
Sacrifice at any time Offered, retained their name and Consecration for ever
after; so Jacob when he Consecrated Bethel by pouring Oil upon the Stone which
he had used for his Pillow, the Consecration seems to have remained for ever,
for so the words of Jacob seem to entimate, Genesis 28. 22. This Stone which I
have set up for a Pillar shall be God's house: and of all that thou shall give
me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee, and the same is to be seen in the
History of Abraham, of whom it is said, Genesis 12. 8. that, he removed from
thence, (viz. from the plain of In Hebrew it is Elon Moreh, and the 70. (...),
which confirms what I have said above that the Ancients used to pitch their
Tents in Shady and Woody places.
Moreh, v. 6.) unto a Mountain on the East of Bethel, and pitched his Tent,
having Bethel on the West, and Hai on the East: and there builded he an Altar
unto the Lord, who appeared unto him, and again, c. 13. v. 3, 4. and he
(Abraham) went on his journeys from the South even to Bethel, unto the place
where his Tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai, unto the
place of the Altar which he had made there at the first: and there Abraham
called on the Name of the Lord, by which it is plain that this place being once
set apart by Abraham for the performance of Religious Worship, retained its
former Sanctity without any new Consecration, and was chosen above all others
thereabouts, for the exercise of Religious Duties, by virtue and in right of
its former separation: and usually at the time of any such Consecration, the
place received some Name or other intimating the occasion of it, and signifying
that peculiar manifestation of the Divine Favor and Presence, which God was
pleased at that time to afford: so Abraham called the Altar which he built and
the place in which it stood, Genesis 22. 14. (upon which his Son Isaac was to have
been Sacrificed) Jehovahjireh, and Moses upon Gods promise to destroy and root
out Amalek, Exodus 17. v. 14, 15. built an Altar and called the name of it
Jehovah nissi, for he said, v. 16. because the Lord has Sworn, that the Lord
will have War with Amalek from generation to generation, and Gideon upon the
Angel of the Lord saluting him, and saying, peace be unto thee, Jud. 6. 23. and
so removing the consternation he was in v. 22. Alas O Lord God, for because I
have seen an Angel of the Lord face to face (therefore I shall surely die)
built an Altar in the same place unto the Lord, v. 24. and called it
Jehovah-shalom, and the Text goes on to tell us, unto this day it is yet in
Ophrah of the Abiezrites, he does not mean that the place stands still where it
was, which it will certainly do as long as the World endures, but that the
Altar was still to be seen at the time when that Book was Written, and that the
memory of what had happened was carried on by Tradition to succeeding
Generations.

Wherefore the Altar which Noah built and the Sacrifice which he Offered upon
it, being perhaps upon the most memorable occasion that ever any Sacrifice was
offered upon, a Sacrifice of Thankfulness and an Altar of Praise not only for
the deliverance of Eight persons from the Deluge, but for the continuance and
preservation of Mankind, for the hopes of a new World, and a People to come, in
the room of those Nations that had been destroyed, and being in its self so
large and so magnificent a Sacrifice, a Sacrifice of every clean Beast and Fowl
that had entered into the Ark, in both of these respects it deserved the the
most particular and signal commemoration, and the place where this Solemnity
was performed, was without question Famous through the East, and could not but
be perpetuated by some name or other, expressing the occasion and meaning of
its Consecration, and this as I have said might be Dodone or Dodonai by reason
of its being set apart to the Service and Worship of the Supreme Numen, by whom
both the Flood was brought upon the Earth, and the deliverance of Noah, his
Family and posterity from it was graciously contrived, but this if it do not
fully express the whole thing, as indeed I think it will not, yet there is
another Etymology yet behind, which is both more expressive, and more natural
than the former, when the Sacrifice of clean Beasts and Fowls had been Offered
upon the Altar, it is said, Genesis 9. 21. that the Lord smelt a sweet savor, and
the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the Ground any more for Man's
sake, etc. so that Dodone is plainly as much as Doddonai, beloved of God, as
this place above all others might well deserve to be called, in which God
accepted so graciously the first Sacrifice after the Flood, and was reconciled
to Mankind upon it.

I am not positive that it was called thus by Noah himself, it is enough if it
had any other Name of an aequipollent or Synonymous notion, as Jacobs Gal heed,
and the Chaldeans Jegar sahadutha were the same; as the Phaenician Annobret,
and (...) were the same with Sarah and Isaac among the Hebrews, and the Name of
this Altar might possibly be Jehovah shalom, as that of Gideon was called, or
Jehovah Jariach, the Lord smelt, meaning what follows, eth riach hanichach, a
sweet savor, or a smell of rest, with allusion to the Name of Noah, and this by
the Phaenicians might be called by the Elision of the Aleph out of Adonai,
according to their Custom, (which is still a further confirmation of my
Etymology of ^he Chaldean Saroas) Doddonai, that is, From hasor by the Elision
of the guttural.
(...), beloved of God. But yet the Phaenicians, though they did sometimes
curtail the Hebrew Adon, or Adonac, yet this was not perpetual among them,
sometimes they pronounced it at length, as (...) From (...) is the Latiu stella
qu. sterula.
and (...) in Greek are the same, and so Hesychius explains it without the
omission of the Guttural as a Phaenician word (...), and from thence without
question the Greeks received as well the Name as Worship of Adonis. again, I
deny not that there was such a place in Epirus as Dodone, only I say it was a
Colony of Phaenicians, and was built in memory of that deliverance from the
universal deluge which happened in the time of Noah or Deucalion, and had its
name from that other Dodona or Doddonai which Noah himself consecrated by
erecting an Altar, and Offering Sacrifice upon it, immediately upon his coming
out of the Ark, as York and Boston in New England are so called in remembrance
and imitation of the same Names and places here at home, and for the proof of
this, it is sufficient to consider, First, That Bochartus a Man of singular
knowledge in this sort of Antiquities, tells us expressly that the Islands
adjacent to the main Land of Epirus were Anciently Planted and Inhabited by
Phaenicians, and therefore it is very likely the distance being so very small,
that they Landed upon the continent likewise. Secondly, that the Scholiast so
often cited, tells us, that the place took its name (...); now I have shown
plainly that it cannot possibly be from both of these, and I conceive that
there is no way possible, by which it can appear to have taken its Name (...),
but that which I have assigned and laid down. Thirdly, As it cannot be denied
that this is an Etymology so natural, that nothing can be more, so it is to be
considered, that not only the Phaenicians, but the Greeks themselves do
sometimes for better sound sake, where the article being a Vowel immediately
precedes it as in the Carthaginian salutation Avo Donni, contract and cut off
the first Letter of Adonis, only upon this account, to make some amends for it,
they change the preceding short Vowel into a long, as in that of Theocritus.
(...). (...),
(...).
Fourthly, as another indication that this Dodona had its Name (...) as the
Scholiast expresses it, we find no mention of Dodona in Antiquity, but there is
a connection of Jupiter together with it, sometimes Dodona is made to be a
Person, and then she is the Daughter of Jupiter and Europa, sometimes it is a
City of Chaonia in Epirus, and then we are told, that the place was Consecrated
to Jupiter, and that there was a Wood hard by it which consisted all of Oaks,
which was Jupiters Tree, as has been already proved and explained, and
Herodotus has delivered it as the report of Antiquity, that in this Wood there
was a sort of Oraculous or Prophetic Pigeons or Doves, which though he
explains by saying, that in Thessaly they were used Anciently to call
Soothsaying or cunning Women by the Name of (...), yet, not to question the
matter of fact, which it is no great sin to do, in an unlikely tale of
Herodotus his telling, who does not always tell truth, notwithstanding that no
Man can boast more of his sincerity than he does, I appeal to any Man whether
this does not look like a very cold and jejune Interpretation, or whether it be
not more likely, especially considering what has been said already, concerning
the Dove of Noah and Ducalion, that this is only a traditionary relick of the
Ark, and of the Dove that was sent forth from it, which Ark was probably built
of Oak (for the Gopher Wood in the Hebrew is indifferent to any sort of Pitched
Wood ^^ss. de ^0. Interp.
whatsoever, and the (...) of the Seventy after all that Isaac Vossius has
offered concerning it; may be explained of any sort of plained Wood whatsoever,
which is by that means made quadrangular) the Oak by its natural strength and
firmness being the most likely to resist the violence of the Waves, and to
remain afterward for the longest interval of time, as a monument of the deluge
and the deliverance of Noah and his Family from it, and as the Ship was
probably built of Oak, so the Dove that was in it, though it was not really
Oraculous or Prophetic, yet it might well enough give occasion to such a
Tradition among the Greeks, and perhaps even among the Easterlings themselves,
at a considerable distance of place and time from the Ark, for the reasons
already explained.

Fifthly, As a Fourth indication of the same thing, that Dodone was (...) in
that sense which I have explained, and that it was not a Greek, but an Exotic
and an Eastern Name, I observe that the Scboliast says of her, that she was
(...), one of the Sea Nymphs, or one of the Daughters of the Ocean, which is
not inconsistent with what was said before, that she was the Daughter of
Jupiter too, but only the meaning is, that this Name Traveled by Sea into
Greece, as all things that came that way, before the Art of Navigation was
known, and when the Sea was thought to be the boundary of Nature, (as Seneca
expresses it upon occasion of Alexanders deliberating with himself Swaser. 1.
and his confidents that were about him, whether he should put to Sea or no)
were thought and said to be born or bred of the Sea, and in this sense Clymene
the supposed Wife of Japetus is by, Hesiod in See upon that passage of
Apollodorus, l. 2. c. 1. concerning Inachus that the was the Son of Oceanus and
Tethys, our Learned Dr. Gale ^ath this observation hoc ideo finxerunt Greci
quoniam navi in Pelopannesum venit --
his Theogonie called (...), that is, born or bred of, or belonging to the
Ocean, (...).

For I shall show by and by, what in the Mythology of the Ancients was meant by
Clymene, and that this very word and the whole story concerning Japetus and
Clymene is of Eastern Growth.

Sixthly, as the Sixth and Last observable from these words of Thrasybulas in
the Scholiast upon Homer, I would have it taken notice of, that when he says
of Ducalion, that he did after the Flood (...), this must not be understood of
any Tree whatsoever, as (...) in its most Ancient and proper sense is
indifferent to any, as appears by the compounds (...), and (...), in all which
words that part of the composition, which is taken from (...), is indifferent
to any kind of Tree whatsoever, but it is to be interpreted of the (...), which
is the Interpretation of the Hebrew Alah or Elon, and is as much as to say the
Tree of God, or the Oak under which the most Ancient of the Patriarchs were
used to pitch their Tents, and though I am not solicitous, whether this
prophetic Ministry of Deucalion be in the reality of the thing, placed before
or after the Flood, knowing how subject and prone the Greeks are in matters of
so remote Antiquity to mistakes and Anachronisms concerning them, and though it
may be said, that all the taller and more spreading sort of Trees were
destroyed and rooted up by the violence of the Waters, which in a great measure
I acknowledge to be true, yet it may be considered on the side of the
Scholiast, that there are some exceptions of necessity to be admitted, from
what has been said above concerning the Ravens not returning to the Ark; that
the Oak, by reason of its natural firmness and large spreading Root, was
perhaps the fittest to withstand the force of this universal deluge; that the
pressure of the Water was lateral and in a manner equal on all sides, as Mr.
Boil has observed and proved in his Hydrostaticks, of common Waters not
determined any whither in a certain Stream or Channel, so that this may seem
rather to have served to uphold and keep steadfast the Trees which it met with,
than to have destroyed or thrown them down, were it not that by the continual
poaching and soaking of the Water into the Earth, their Roots would be so
loosened, as that then their own weight, or preponderancy one way more than the
other, may be thought sufficient to overturn them and throw them down; But to
this it may be Answered, supposing so violent a Wind to be added to this cause,
that the Roots of a Tree may be very much loosened and weakened, before this
effect will follow; that in such tall and massy Trees they usually descend
deeper than any Rain Water can reach, so as to poach or loosen the Earth to any
considerable degree; that it is not unreasonable to believe that the Earth at
some considerable depth, might be rather hardened and rendered more close and
firm by the weight of the incumbent Waters, than any way sok'd or loosened by
it, as fresh Water is sometimes found at the bottom of the Sea, the reason of
which, our ingenious Mr. Hook in his Micrography imputes to this, that by
reason of the great weight of the superincumbent Water, the Salt particles are
squeezed upwards, and the pure aqueous parts are brought so close together,
that they cannot receive or imbibe into themselves the Saline any longer, and
if this be the case of Water it self, a thing so fluid and so porous as that
is, it must be much, more true of the Earth, which by reason of its comparative
solidity is more susceptible of such a pressure, than any Water can be, and in
experience it appears, that places which are known to have been recovered out
of the Water, such as a great part of Holland and the Fenny parts of England
are, are usually plain and flat, because of this pressure of the Water, which
was once equal and of long continuance over the whole surface, and this made
Antiquity believe that Egypt it self, as large a Tract of Ground as it is, was
once recovered out of the Water, or at least was forsaken by it, because of its
flat and equal Soil: not that I believe the force of any Flood to be such, as
that it shall turn a Mountainous Country into a plain, but it is sufficient in
general to observe from what has been said, that in so great a pressure of
Waters, the Earth at least at some considerable depth, would rather be
hardened, than any way loosned by it, and perhaps. in such prodigious showers
as those were, by which the universal Deluge was occasioned, descending with a
violence so great and so equal together, it might so compress and harden the
Earth in some places, where no subterraneous Ebullitions met with the Rain that
descended from above, which they neither did nor could do equally in all
places, that the Waters might not perhaps penetrate so far, as in showers that
are more gentle, if they be but constant and of long continuance.

To all which it is to be added, that it is certain that Noah pitched his first
Tent there where the Ark it self rested, and where he came out of it, when the
Waters were assuaged, and this was upon the Mountains of Ararat, upon the top
of which the Waters could not have any thing near so much force, as in the
Plains underneath, where there was a so much greater weight of superincumbent
Waters, besides that it was so much the longer before these places were
overflown, and in proportion to their height they were so much the sooner dry,
than other places, neither could the Waters fall with so great force upon them,
as upon the plain and level Country, because their journey of descent is
comparatively so small, which the longer it is, so much the greater is the
weight of the descending body, so that if what I have offered above, concerning
the Waters hardening rather than softening the Earth, may be admitted, it will
hold also here though in a less proportion, and if it will not, as I think
there is no reason why it should be rejected, then whatever force there was in
the Waters on the Level for the destruction and overthrow of all Trees, or
other obstacles that they met with in their way, was for the reasons just now
mentioned infinitely less upon the tops of Mountains, besides that when it said
Genesis 8. 1. That God made a Wind to pass upon the Earth and the Waters assuaged,
this Wind, as it must be acknowledged by its determination one way, to have
destroyed the equality of the lateral pressure of the Waters, and as such to
have been a natural cause of overturning every thing that came in its way, so
it had probably but little force upon the tops of Mountains, the Wind it self
being occasioned by those Watery exhalations, which were first exhaled from the
top of the watery surface, and by consequence made the depth less to the Fathom
of the Mountains themselves, and left that Wind less force to act upon them,
for the Flood never rose higher than Fifteen Cubits above the tops of the
highest Mountains, and it is probable did not continue long at that high Water
mark, so that that which was a prodigious Deluge, in respect of the whole
Earth, was little more than an ordinary Flood in respect of the highest
Mountains, and particularly those of Ararat upon which the Ark rested almost
Three Months before the tops of the other Mountains were seen, and almost Five
Months before the Ground was wholly dry, and that Noah did first pitch his Tent
upon a Mountain, and particularly upon that of Ararat, is plain from this, not
only that the Ancient Patriarchs and first Mortals were used to Inhabit upon
such Mountainous places, for the convenience of Divine Worship, because in
these they used to offer their Sacrifice and to pay their Devotions, but also
because till Men began to cohabit in larger communities, these were the places,
of greatest security from the wild Beasts and from one another, and of the
farthest prospect to discover an approaching danger, but after the Flood, there
were these Two particular reasons why Noah should choose such a place for his
first Habitation, First, Because it was most wholesome, considering the Damps
which the Earth had contracted by so long an inundation: and Secondly, Because,
otherwise we must suppose Noah not to have stirred out of his Ark for Two
Months and an half after she struck upon the Land, and by conseqence to have
deferred his thank offering for so long a space of time, which without
ingratitude he could not do, and therefore it is not reasonable to suppose it;
to conclude, the Trees upon the tops of Mountains, and particularly upon those
of Ararat, which are represented as the highest of all, did therefore stand
more firmly than in the places underneath, because those Mountains themselves
intercepting and interrupting the passage of the Waters, might cause either a
swister Current, or an Eddy and violent return of those Waters upon themselves
in the intermediate spaces, and so Homer describes Oaks upon the top of
Mountains, as standing the firmest of any other^ Il. (...).

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
But as I said before, so I say still, I am not sollicitous for the credit of
Thrasybulus as to this particular, whether John a Nokes or Deucalion, who is
said to have Prophesied by or under a Tree, where he pitched his Tent, did this
before or after the Flood, though after it there is this further to be said for
the credit of this Tradition, that it is probable there were scarce any Trees
left, but upon the tops of Mountains, and that as the Plains were unwholesome,
and for a while uninhabitable for the reason already mentioned, so the tops of
Mountains would have been too bleak and piercing, without some shade to protect
them against the sharpness of the Weather: and thus much upon occasion of this
passage of Thrasybulus produced by the Scholiast upon Homer, and for that other
cited out of Apollodorus, P. 22, 23. ed. Paris. 1675.
it is still extant with some very inconsiderable verbal alteration in
Apollodorus his Bibliocheca.

But there are still Two other resemblances remaining betwixt Deucalion and
Noah, which I have not yet mentioned, the First is this, the Scripture says of
Noah, Genesis 6. 9. Noah was a just Man and perfect in his Generation, and Noah
walked with God, and so Ovid says of Deucalion and Pyrrha his Wife, Non illo
melior quisquam nec amantior equi, Metam. l. 1.

Vir fuit aut illa reverentior ulla Deorum.
And with these Two Lucian exactly agrees T. 2. p. 883. ed. Solmurii, 1619.
in his De Dea Syria, (...). that is, Deucalion was the only person that was
left to the second Generation or the Generation after the Flood, for the sake
of his piety and his wisdom, and then describing the manner of his deliverance,
he does it almost in such terms, as if he had transcribed it from the Original
of Moses himself, in these words, (...), that is, the manner of Deucalions
escape was this, he betook himself to a large Ark or Ship which he had, and
caused his Women and Children to do the same, and he was followed by Hogs, and
Horses, and Lions, and Serpents, and all other Animals that breed and feed upon
the Earth, which entered into his Ark two by two, and he received them all, who
did him no hurt, laying by their fierce and Savage nature, and maintaining an
entire friendship both with him and one another, so that they all Sailed in the
same Ark together, so long as the Waters prevailed. This is what the Greeks
have recorded concerning Deucalion, where when he says that all Animals entered
into the Ark by two's, the thing speaks for it self, and tells us undenyably
from whence the Greeks received their Tradition, and when he takes no notice of
the Seavens which is the number of each species of the clean Beasts and Birds
that entered into the Ark, it was manifestly for this and no other reason, that
the Greeks had no such distinction amongst them of clean and unclean in the
several species, and that the propagation of them was all that they regarded in
this Tradition concerning the Flood, now this was common to the clean with the
unclean Animals themselves, that Two of them only were preserved merely upon
account of propagation, if nothing else had been to be considered, but the odd
one of each kind was to be for a Sacrifice, as it afterward proved, when Noah
came out of the Ark, and the other Four were added in regard of the great
consumption and expense which there was to be afterward of the clean species,
as well for Sacrifice as Food for ever, not but that in reality the Greeks had
such a distinction of clean and unclean among them, for we do not find that the
unclean kind were used in the Sacrifice and very rarely in the Food of any
nation, as I have observed already, in the beginning of this Treatise, but I
say, they did not attend to this distinction, neither had they any such express
and explicit partition among them.

Further Lucian, as well as Thrasybulus Jaiim is vinu^^ and jonak in Hebrew is
columba, which likeness of sound made some attribute the Dove to Pachus.
and others, makes mention of the Dove, with reference to the Flood, though he
seems not to have understood it himself, p. 903. ib. where speaking of a
certain Image or Statue he says (...). and the reason he gives why some
attribute this Image to Semiramis is, (...) because Semiramis was Worshipped in
the form of a Dove, but it is manifest that this reason belongs to Deucalion as
well as her, and that it was the Dove made it suspected to be Deucalions Image.

Again, It is further observable in Lucian, what he says concerning the manner
of the Flood it self, which agrees very well with the Mosaic description, and
with the story of Gyges above mentioned out of Cicero, and by him Transcribed
out of Plato in his 2d. De Rep. (...) p. 882. ib.
(...) that is, the Earth gushed out with abundance of Water, and great Rains
descended from above, as also great Rivers or currents from the higher Grounds,
and the Sea overflowed its banks, till all things were covered and immerst in
Water; and all that Generation was destroyed. The same character of a Good and
Virtuous person which Ovid and Lucian have given of Deucalion, is likewise
allowed him by Apollonius the writer of the Argonauticks, who gives him the
Title of (...), and says other things concerning him which do sufficiently show
that Epithet to have been his due. l. 3.

(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Where wen he says that Deucalion was the first that built Cities and Temples,
and that he was the first Monarch, this must be understood of the Period after
the Flood, for there were Kings and Cities, and the true God, to say nothing of
Idolatry, was Worshipped by Adam, by Cain and Abel, by Seth and Enos, and
others before it, but all that Period, though it were not utterly forgotten by
the Greeks, yet it shall be very clear before I have done, that they had but a
very obscure remembrance of it.

Plato in his description of the many Floods which from time to time were
supposed by the Greeks Anciently to have happened, affirms every Flood to have
wiped away the memory of all things that were before it, there being only left
a few v. Plat. in Critia. p. 1100, 1101. and in l. 3. de leg. statimi ab
initio. and Eusebius. ex Platone. praep. Evang. l. 12. c. 15.
Mountainous and Barbarous People, ignorant of all things even before the
Flood, and so taken up with the cares and the necessities of life after it,
that they had no time to look back into former Ages, nor any means to preserve
those few Traditions which were left among them, and this he makes to be the
reason why Arts and Sciences had made so small a progress in his time, and why
the History of former Ages extended to no higher Antiquity than it did; but
herein was Plato manifestly deceived that he did not perceive at this rate, if
only the Inhabitants of Mountains, or those that could get thither upon the
surprise of a Flood coming upon them, escaped, that very many Species of
Animals must have perished, being bred and overtaken by the Flood in the Plains
below, so that unless we suppose the Earth after every Deluge to have been so
prolifick, that it could produce all the several species anew, which yet, as
absurd as it is, I perceive Plato sometimes to have done, and then there would
be no need, to salve the credit of an universal Deluge, for any to be saved
upon the tops of Mountains, since mankind and all other Species might by this
expedient be repaired without it, there is no other way to Salve it, but by
supposing such an Ark or Ship, as the Scripture, and from thence several
profane Authors have done, whether some of each Species might betake themselves
and be reserved for the replenishing a new World, and therefore when Lucian,
who speaks expressly of the Ark, and of all the several Species entering into it,
speaks afterward of a Tradition, as if Men in the time of Deucalions Flood,
had saved themselves upon the tops of Mountains, and upon the top Branches of
the tallest Trees, where, if they could be saved from the Deluge, they would
have been sure to have starved with hunger, he subjoyns immediately (...) ib.
p. 899.
these things are altogether incredible to me.

But yet notwithstanding, thus much of Plato is agreeable to truth, that after
any such universal Deluge, and by consequence after that of Noah too, partly
for want of any standing Monuments to preserve Tradition, and partly by reason
those that escaped must needs be wholly taken up in the cares and necessary
encumbrances of Life, which must needs lie heavy upon them, where there are so
few, though in a world well Peopled there are many that have plenty and ease,
that the memory of the Antidiluvian persons, and things, must be almost utterly
extinct, and that the Tradition concerning them must needs be very uncertain
and obscure, and therefore it is no wonder to find Deucalion, that is indeed
Noah, though Apollonius speaks of him as a Native of Thessaly, according to the
usual vanity of the Greeks, who ascribed all these things to themselves,
represented as the first person that built Cities and Altars, the first head of
civil society and inventour of Political Administration, that is, he was the
first that was so after the Flood, of which Period the Greeks had a more
certain and particular knowledge than of that before it, though at other times
we find some little sparks and strictures among them, even of the Antidiluvian
interval likewise.

Further though Plato were mistaken as to the manner of the preservation of
Mankind from the Flood, and though he is very uncertain as to the number of
those universal Floods that had hapened before his time, for one while he says
acco^d^ng to Ancient Tradition, according to the (...) De Leg. l. 3. init.
(...). that many such universal calamities had happened to mankind, by Deluges
and Plagues, wherein a very small and inconsiderable remnant escaped to repair
the loss, and propagate themselves to after Ages, another while he is very
particular and precise in the business, and tells us Deucalions was the Fourth
such universal Deluge that had happened, (...) In Critia p. 1102.
(...) there being Three other fatal Deluges before that of Deucalion. And at
others, he seems inclinable to believe that Mankind and the World had no
beginning at all, so that these things might very well have happened though at
a good distance from one another, yet a prodigious number of times, for so he
speaks in the Person of an Athenian whom he introduces. (...) L. b. De Leg. p.
875.
(...), that is, that it becomes every Man to know, that either Mankind had
never any beginning nor shall have end, or at least that its Original is at so
vast a distance, that it is impossible to trace it to its first beginning. Yet
notwithstanding all this strange variety, there is in the midest of it still a
constant acknowledgment of such a thing as an universal Deluge, and that not
founded only upon Fancy or Opinion or Philosophical conjecture but upon the
(...), upon Ancient Tradition, which if you compare with these Two things,
First the improbability, if not utter impossibility of Plato's expedient to
Salve and account for the reparation of Mankind and of all other Animals after
such an universal Deluge; and Secondly, if you consider, that even in Plato
himself there is no Historical certainty, no particular account of any
universal Deluge, but that which happened in Deucalion's Unless it be that of
Gyges mentioned out of him by Cicero, which I take to be the same with it.
time, whom, I think, I have sufficiently proved to be the same with Noah, all
this is no less than a manifest attestation to the truth of the Mosaic account,
and the very Deviations from it, do but serve to confirm and strengthen it the
more.

With Apollonius, Ovid, and Lucian, Homer also agrees in his Character of
Deucalion, for he gives him the Epithet of (...) in Il. v. where Idomeneus
addressing himself to Deiphobus, thus describes Deucalions Genealogy and his
own,

(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...) --
Which place of Homer I have therefore cited thus largely, that I may take
notice of the differing accounts which Homer and other Genealogists have given
us of the pedigree of Deucalion, and that I may reconcile them together. Homer
makes him to be the Son of Minos, but others of Prometheus, which Two, though
the Names be different, are the same persons. Prometheus is, as I have already
proved in the Heathen Mythology no other than God himself, or it is that
partial consideration of the Divine Nature, which is taken from his Providence
and Wisdom, whereby he foresees and orders all things, both in Heaven and
Earth, and so is Minos; only the one of them is the Greek Name by which that
Wisdom was signified, the other the Hebrew or Oriental, for Minos is from Min
species, or from Manah numeravit, and thence also is the Greek (...), (for the
Mother of the Muses) (...) for a certain Coin which in Latin is called Mina and
the Latin Minerva for the Goddess of knowledge and Patroness of all the liberal
and ingenious Arts, because all knowledge is a sort of remembrance a kind of
Calculating or computation, a distinguishing of those things whose Natures are
distinguished, and a sorting those things and notions into the same classis,
which have an agreement or resemblance with each other. From the same root is
likewise the Greek (...), because all Numeration proceeds by Unites, and (...),
is not as the Grammarians usually expound it, (...), but it is (...), ira
menstrua, or Lunatica, a Lunatic Madness and Phrenzy, from (...), Luna which
See more of these derivatives in my discourse of the true time of our Saviors
Passover.
is from the Hebrew Manah numeravit, this being the Ancient way of measuring
Time, by the motion of the Moon, and as from (...) is (...), so also from (...)
or from (...) it self, is (...), and (...), signifying such a Madness as is
Governed and influenced by certain Periods and seasons of the Moon.

For this reason, Because his Name includes Knowledge, Distinction and
Judgment, Minos is made by the Poets the Judge of the infernal shades, that is,
the great and just dispenser of Rewards and Punishments after this life; and
Claudian, though ignorant of any Oriental Language, yet gives him his Character
from the distinction which he makes betwixt the innocent and guilty, as if he
had alluded to the Etymon which I have given from Min species or Manah
numeravit., in the Second in Eutropium.

-- Quaesitor in alto
Conspicuus solio pertentat crimina Minos,
Et Justis dirimit sontes.
Neither is it at all repugnant to what has been said, that he is made by the
Poets, to be the Son of Jupiter, as Minerva is his Daughter, which does not
hinder them from being Jupiter or the Supreme Numen himself under that partial
consideration which I have mentioned, for all the attributes may in some sense
be said, to be the Sons and Daughters, that is, they are the constant, natural
and inseparable effects, properties, and emanations of the Divine substance.
Neither am I ignorant that the Scholiast upon Apollonius makes the Son of Minos
and the Son of Prometheus to be Two different and distinct Persons from one
another, where, upon the place lately produced out of that Poet, he tells us,
there were Four several Persons that went by this Name of Deucalion, and I
shall prove by and by that there were a great many more. (...) that is, there
is also another Deucalion (besides the Son of Prometheus) of whom Hellanicus
makes mention, and another the Son of Minos mentioned by Pherecydes, and a
Fourth the Son of Abas of whom Aristippus speaks in his Arcadica. And
Apollodorus also mentions these Two as distinct, as may appear by comparing l.
1. c. 7. and l. 3. c. 2. of his Bibliotheca together; but even according to
this account, by which one of the Deucalions is made the Son of Minos, that
Deucalion will have lived in the Age immediately preceding the Trojan War, for
Idomeneus his Son was present at it, and if we consider, that that is the
highest distance of time of which the Greeks afford us any tolerable account
according to that of Lucretius, Cur ante bellum Thebanum and funera Trojae,
Non alias alii quoque res cecinere Poetae?
If we consider that both of these lie at the very furthest end of the Greek
Antiquity, though if they be the same with Noah, they must in reality have
lived before this Period also, if we consider that the Names of Minos and
Pometheus, as I have proved, have both of them exactly the same sense and
signification, the one being only a Translation of the other, and if to all
this we add the great confusion of the Greek Chronology in those Ancient times,
from all this I leave it to the Judgment of Learned and Judicious Men, whether
my conjecture do not yet stand upon a tolerable Foundation, and such as is at
least as firm, as can be expected or hoped for in these matters.

But Secondly, The Second and Last remaining resemblance, which I shall mention
betwixt Noah and Deucalion, is, that the Floods which happened in their times
are said to have been sent as a particular judgment for the sins and enormities
of that Age, which suffered by them. This is plainly the Language of Moses
himself, Genesis 6. v. 5, 6, 7. And God saw that the Wickedness of Man was great
in the Earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his Heart was only
evil continually, and it repented the Lord, that he had made Man on the Earth
and it grieved him at his Heart, and the Lord said I will destroy Man whom I
have Created, from the Face of the Earth, both Man and Beast, and the creeping
thing and the Fowls of the Air: for it repents me that I have made them. And
just thus Ovid describes the time immediately preceding Deucalions Flood, where
Jupiter speaking of the Cruelty and Inhumanity of Lycaon and his Family and
dependants, he does it after such a manner, as to involve the whole World more
or less in the Guilt of those Crimes of which Lycaon was accused.

Contigerat nostras infamia temporis aures: Metam. ^ 1.

Quam cupiens falsam summo delabor olympo,
Et deus humana lustro sub imagine terras.
Longa mora est, quantum noxae sit abique repertum
Enumerare, minor fuit ipsa infamia vero.
And a little after having spoken of the destruction of Lycaon and his House,
he adds,

Occidit una domus, sed non domus una perire
Digna fuit, qua terra patet fera regnat Erynnys.
In facinus jurasse putes, dent ocyus omnes
Quas meruere pati, sic stat sententia, paenas.
And then follows the story of Deucalion's Flood.

Apollodorus calls the Generation that was destroyed by the Flood (...), the
Brazen Age implying their degeneracy from the purer times of Gold and Silver
which were the Two first Periods, of human Life upon the Earth, the First of
which was absolutely, and the Second comparatively innocent, with respect to
the Brazen and Iron interval that followed after; the same Apollodorus in
another place, though he seem to attribute that Apollod. Biblioth. l. 3. p.
187, 188, 189. ed Paris, 1675.
judicial inundation to the Wickedness of that Age wherein it came to pass, and
places it as Ovid does in Lycaons times, yet he rather blames the Sons of
Lycaon than himself, and says that it was in the Reign of Nyctimus the only
Son of Fifty that was spared, in which this Deluge happened, and that it was
their extreme Wickedness and Inhumanity that was the Cause of it, and the Reign
of this Nyctimas over the Arcadians, if we will believe him in another place,
was contemporary with that of Cranaus the Son of Cecrops, over Athens, for so
speaking of Cranaus he tells us, (...) p. 225. ib.
(...). in whose time it is said, the Flood of Deucalion happened.

Lucian also speaking of the manners of those Men who lived immediately before
De Dea Sir. p. 882.
the Flood, says, (...), etc. that is, it is reported concerning those Men that
lived in that Age when Deucalions Flood fell out, that they were a sort of
Arbitrary Men, inured to all manner of violence and rapine, whose will was
their Law and their only measure of Justice, that they neither kept Oaths nor
were Hospitable to Strangers, nor merciful to the suppliant and the afflicted,
for which things sake a great and dreadful calamity befell them, the Earth
immediately gushed out with abundance of Water, etc.

Lastly, Suidas speaking of Cecrops the Suid. in (...).
Ancient Athenian King, who first introduced Marriage among them, whereas
before there was nothing but promiscuous Lust, assigns this reason of that Law
of Cecrops, (...) This was done by Cecrops being an Egyptian, and being
skilled in the Laws of Vulcan or Hephaestus one of the Kings of Egypt, and
being of Opinion that the Deluge with which Attica was overwhelmed, was
inflicted by way of Judgment upon them, for the sake of that Promiscuous Lust
of which they were guilty; which answers exactly to that which is spoken of the
Antidiluvian Mortals, Genesis 6. 2. that the Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men
that they were fair, and they took them Wives of all which they chose. which
words in the beginning of this Treatise I have explained of incestuous
conjunctions, which also were practiced in Attica before the time of Cecrops,
if this story be true, and which, though in themselves they were very heinous,
as being flattly repugnant to the great Law of Nature, which is the interest
and welfare of Mankind, yet the Text tells us, at least according to our
Translation, that they took them Wives, which implies a state of Marriage in
opposition to promiscuous Lust, but yet this was not inconsistent, otherwise
than de jure, either with Polygamy on the one hand, or with Fornication,
Adultery, or Arbitrary divorce on the other.

If we Interpret Nashim by Wives, as our Interpreters do, and understand it so,
as we do usually that English word, then all those inserences hold good which I
have made from the place, but if we expound it of Women in general, as the Word
will very well bear that Interpretation, and indeed this is the most proper and
familiar notion of it, then this Answers exactly to this place of Suidas and
shows without dispute, that one of those sinsfor which Noah's Flood was brought
upon the World, was the use of a wandering and promiscuous Lust, without
distinction of property on the one hand, or of affinity or consanguinity on the
other. Only thus much must be confessed, that the Flood to which Suidas in this
place refers was not that of Deucalion but Ogyges, the latter of which, or
rather the first in order of time, the Greek Writers are generally used to
confine to the Province of Attica, and the other to that of Thessaly, but I
have affirmed both of these to be the same, and if the reasons I have given for
it may be allowed, this place of Suidas will belong to Deucalion, as well as
any of the other that have been produced, though Suidas meant it only of Ogyges
as distinct from him, and to show once for all how very uncertain the Greeks
are as to the time wherein Ogyges lived. There is a place in Eusebius which
from the Authority of Philochorus affirms all the pretended successors of
Ogyges in the domimion of Attica to have been mere figments and impostures of
Antiquity, and that no such real Persons were ever in being. (...) Eusebius.
praep. Evarg. l. 10.
(...) that is, neither Actaeus nor any other of those feigned Persons who are
pretended to have been successors to Ogygus, had ever yet so much as a being in
nature, if we will believe Philochorus; now it is very strange they should be
so clear, or may be so safely relied upon as to the Age of Ogyges and yet be so
much in the dark, as to his immediate successor and those that afterward
succeeded him, who came proportionably nearer and nearer to the time of their
Historians themselves; besides, that the only reason why the more Modern of the
Greek Historians, since Christianity was introduced, have placed Ogyges in the
time of Moses, is to be taken from the mention of Agag in the Prophecy of
Balaam, as I have already conjectured, is undenyably plain from this, that
Eusebius does not only speak of him as contemporary with Moses, but places him
exactly in that part of it, when Moses was upon his journey out of Egypt,
which does so accurately and so patly suit with the mention of Agag in the
Prophecy of Balaam, which was uttered at that very time, that nothing can do
more. And this is a new confirmation that the Flood of Noah and Ogyges were the
same, being brought upon the World for the very same cause and reason and not
only so, but this is also a new and clear indication, that this Flood being
confined by the Greeks to the Province of Attica, we are to understand by this,
as I have said, no more but that it happened among the Hathikim, the Ancient
Inhabitants and People of the World, from whence also the Attici had their
name, as being a Colony from the East of great Antiquity in Greece. And for a
further proof of the solidity of this conceit, I will here produce another
Instance or two by which it shall be plainly confirmed. Justin the Epitomator
of Trogus says of the Athenians, Soli enim Athenienses praeterquam incremento,
etiam origin gloriantur: quippe non advenae neque passim collecta populi
colluvies originem urbi debit, sed in eodem nati solo quod incolunt, and quae
illis seeds, eadem origo est. that is, that they were not like other Nations,
Strangers, and Colonies from another Country, but that their first Ancestors
were born of the Earth, and sprung up in that Country where they and their
Posterity have ever since dwelt: and the very same thing is assirmed of them by
Plato, where speaking of Attica. he uses these words, (...) In mene^eno. p. 518.
(...). that is, another just commendation of Attica is this, that at that time
when all the rest of the Earth brought forth all manner of living Creatures, as
well Wild Beasts, as Tame, or Beasts of pasture, then Attica Barren of any such
productions, chose Man out of all the Creatures to be her offspring, a Creature
far more Noble and Excellent than any of the rest, and to whom Justice and
Religion do peculiarly belong. Not that in reality the Province of Attica did
ever yield such a Crop as Plato and Justin and others have recorded, but that
this was the first Original of Mankind, the Hathikin, the first and most
Ancient Mortals were born after this manner. For this was the Greek Tradition
concerning the first Mortals, that they were born out of the Earth, as appears
by another passage of the same Plato; where Socrates speaking of those early
times thus enquires of the (...) or stranger another person in the Dialogue
concerning them. (...); that is, what sort of Generation was there Plat. in
Politic. p. 537.
then, O Stranger, of Animals, and after what manner were they produced from
one another, to which he returns this Answer, (...) (...), that is, it is
manifest, O Socrates, that in that state of things, Animals were not born by
generation of one another. That brood of Creatures, which we have just now
affirmed to have sprung out of the Earth, returning to the Earth again from
whence it came, sprung up anew from thence again, as it has been delivered
down by Tradition to us from our Eldest Ancestors, who bordered upon that
primitive state, and were the first Inhabitants of this, and we believe these
things upon the credit of their testimony, though there be some so rash now a
days, as to reject them for Fabulous and Romantic. What that primitive state
or revolution of things, which he speaks of, is I shall explain more largely by
and by, but now I go on to observe that this Tradition, which the Greeks had of
Men at First being produced from the Earth, though it were miserably Corrupted
and Adulterated, as appears by this that they confined it only to Attica, and
that one whole Age or Revolution or Period of time was spent in this sort of
aequivocal production, without any proper or univocal Generation all this
while, yet that in its Original it was an Eastern Tradition, and consequently
that by the Attici we are not to understand the People of that particular
province among the Greeks, but in general the Hathikin, that is, the Ancient
and first Mortals, though this was more than the latter Greeks themselves
understood I will now prove from another passage of the same Plato; where
speaking in a Fabulous manner, for he himself calls it a Fable, though there
were more truth in it then he was aware of, he says, First concerning the
production of all other Animals besides Man. (...) Protag. p. 223, 224.
, that is, there was a time when the Gods were, but none of the mortal Species
were yet produced into being, but when the fatal or predetermin'd time came
that they also should be produced, then the Gods formed them within the Earth,
by mingling Earth and Fire together, and whatsoever else is capable of a vital
union with those Two, and having spoken after this manner of the Creation and
Production of all other Animals, he speaks of that of Man last of all, as the
Scripture does, which shows undenyably from whence this Tradition among the
Greeks was derived, (...) ib. p. 224.
(...) at length the fatal or praeappointed time was come, wherein Man also
from the Earth was to be brought to light. to all which it is to be added that
in his Critias he describes the primitive state of innocence before the Fall,
just after such a manner, as if he had received it, not from Moses himself, but
at some distance, from others that had, for it is not delivered without
something of corruption, though these Three things are still very plain in his
account, First, That Man was made after the Image of God, as the Scripture
expression is, and Secondly, That the meaning of this Image was a kind of
participation of the Divine Nature, partly by all the inward habits and outward
effects of Righteousness and true Holiness, as the Apostle has explained it,
and partly by a mavelous rectitude of understanding as well as will. His
words are these, describing that state of primitive simplicity in the persons
of his Athenians, that is again the Hathikin, the Ancient and first Mortals,
(...) Plat. in Critia. p. 1108.
(...) (...), etc. that is, for many Generations, so long as the nature or life
of God continued powerful and prevalent among them, they were Obedient to Laws,
and had an affectionate and warm sense of the Divinity to which they were
nighly related. Their sentiments were true and generous, they conversed with
one another, and they encountered all the diversities of Fortune, with meekness
and humility, and with a wise and steady temper, they despised every thing
besides (or in comparison of) virtue, and had a very little esteem for present
things, they looked upon Gold and Silver and other possessions under the notion
of a burden, they used a very sparing and temperate Diet, and were not subject
to be deceived and blinded by the Fumes of Wine. In another place as the
Scripture says of our First Parents, Genesis 2. 25. that they were both naked,
the Man and his Wife and were not ashamed. So Plato says also of the First
Mortals, (...) Politic. p. 537.
(...), that is, for the most part they were naked and without any covering,
exposed to the open Air, and living sub Dio. And Lastly in another place, he
says they abstained from all manner of Flesh, as the Scripture intimates the
First Mortals till after the Flood to have done, (...) L. 6. de Leg. p. 875.
(...) Leg. Forte (...).
(...) Mallem, (...). and statim,
(...) (...).
(...). that is, it is familiar even to this day in some places for Men to
Sacrifice one another; but formerly we have heard they were so far from it,
that we of Athens particularly (for it is an Athenian that speaks) did not hold
it Lawful so much as to taste of the Flesh of an Ox, and our Sacrifices to the
Gods were not made with Animals, but Cakes and Fruits sprinkled with Honey, and
other such like pure oblations, but those first Mortals abstained wholly from
Flesh, as thinking it a sin to eat it, or to defile the Altars of the Gods with
Blood: they lived a sort of Orphick lives, as they are called, enjoying and
feeding upon all things whatsoever they pleased, that were void of Life, and
abstaining Religiously from every animated or living substance.

Where, when he attributes this peculiarly to the Ancient Athenians, this is
again to be understood of the Hathikin, that is the Ancient or Antidiluvian
Mortals, and when he calls this sort of diet, the Orphick life, it is to be
noted that Giants in Scripture such as the Antidiluvian Mortals, who abstained
from Flesh, are generally reckoned to have been, are called Rephaim, to which
it is but adding an Aleph at the beginning, and we have all but the Greek
termination of Orpheus, and this Aleph is indifferently either added or
subtracted in very many words, as Ram and Aram are the same, and so Hesychius
interprets, (...), which is the signification of Ram in Hebrew, and Armenia was
so called, not only from Aram its first supposed planter, but also with respect
to its high situation, and to the Mountains of Ararat or the Gordiaean and
other Mountains to be met with in it, so also Shur and Ashur are the same, as
has been already declared, and Dam which signifies Blood, is but a contraction
of Adam, which has the signification of Red and So also from the Hebrew Arbah
signifying Four, is the adjective Rebihi and other words by the ejection of the
Aleph.
from the Hebrew Mar by the addition of the same Aleph, the Latins have made
their Adjective Amarus, and the Derivatives from it, so that according to this
Etymology the Orphick Diet, will be the Diet of the Rephaim, or Antidiluvian
Mortals, which was altogether upon vegetables without the use of Flesh, which
does not appear to have been permitted in Food, till after the Flood was over
or otherwise it is literally true, at least the Poets have told us so, that the
Ancient and so much celebrated Orpheus did abstain from Flesh himself, and
exhorted all his Followers and Disciples to do the same, according to that of
Horace,

Sylvestres homines sacer interpresque Deorum Hor. de Art. Poetic. ad Pisones.

Caedibus and victu Faedo deterruit Orpheus,
Dictus ob hoc lenire tigres, rabidosque leones.
But then if it be asked who this Orpheus was? this is an hard Question, which
has very often baffled the Endeavors of Learned Men, Gerhard Vossius after
Tully, who cites Aristotle for his Author is of opinion that there never was
any such determinate person G. Voss. de orig. and progr. Idololat. l. 3. c. 44.
and de art. poet. not. and constit. p. 78, 79.
who was called by this Name, and he says further that it is only the general
Name of a wise or sage and skillful Person in the Language of the Phoenicians,
because Arifa in Arabic signifies to know, and Arif a Man of knowledge and
learning, and Tatianus says Exresly that the Ancient Verses v. loc. Tatiani
apud Voss. p. 78. ubi supra.
which went under his Name, were not really his, no more then the Golden ones
of Pythagoras are thought to be, but that they were compiled and put together
by Onomacritus the Athenian, and nothing is more certain than that the
Argonauticks, which at this day go under his Name, however very Ancient, are
yet notwithstanding, (...), counterfeit and surreptitious things, whose true
Authors Name is unknown. I agree perfectly with Vossius as to the Etymology,
and I had that which was Equivalent to it in my mind, before I met with his
conjecture, and besides I am certain that I have light upon the true Mystery of
this Ancient Orpheus, which is this;

The Arabic Arifa by the addition of an Aleph, is from the Hebrew Rapha
Sanavit, so that, it signifies most properly a Man skillful in Herbs, or in the
practice of Physic, or a good Physician or an Healing or Sanative Person: and
so this Orpheus is the same with Apollo, who is Herbarum pater and Deus, and is
withal the God of Knowledge and Wisdom, the Sun, as has been said, being looked
upon by all the Pagan World as the Supreme Numen, and skill in Herbs or the
knowledge of Nature, being in good earnest an argument of the greatest and
truest Wisdom, and he was made by Antiquity to preside over Herbs, because the
vegetable World is ripened and concocted by his Beams, and all the several
Species are fitted for that use, to which they are appointed and ordained by
Nature; therefore Orpheus as well as Apollo was made by Macrob. l. 1. c. 19.
Lyra Apollinis chordarum septem, tot caelestium sphaerarum motus praestat
intelligi, quibus solemn moderatorem natura constituit.
Antiquity to preside over Music, as well as Medicine, because of the
regularity of the Suns motion, the constant returns of Day and Night and of the
seasons of the Year, and because all things are so tempered and poised by his
influence, that Nature goes on in a constant and steady course, keeping a
perpetual harmony and agreement with her self in the preservation of the
several Species, and for that Fable of Orpheus that he drew Stones and Trees
after him by the Charms of his Music, this is partly that they are generated
by his influence, and that they flourish and prosper under it, and partly that
Cities are built, and all the great Monuments of Art and Industry are reared by
his light, so that in this sense also he may be said to draw Stones and Trees
after him for the Building of Cities, because when he is once set, the Work of
the day ceases together with him, as also to make To this purpose it is very
apposite what Macrobius says, l. 1. c. 17. (...) cognominaverunt (Antiqui) non
ex officio pastorali and Fabula, per quam fingitur Admeti regis Pecora pavisse,
sed quia sol pascit omnia quae terra progene rat, unde non unius geueris sed
omnium pecorum pastor canitur, etc.
Bears and Tigers and Wolves and other the most fierce Animals to dance after
him, because all the Animal World does, as it were, bask it self in his kindly
heat, and does rejoice and is glad in his Beams, whereas in the night they
either sleep or howl and are disturbed with a melancholy sense of the absence
of their Friend and Benefactor, and to show this yet the more plainly, the very
same things are attributed to Amphion, for Orpheus and Amphion are the same,
but you will say how comes the Sun to be called Amphion? to which the Answer is
easy, it is not as the Grammarians triflingly suppose, (...), but yet it is
true that Amphion is a Greek name of the Sun, as Orpheus is an Hebrew or
Oriental, and his name is plainly (...), he that So also he is called (...) by
the Poets as well Latin as Greek, (...).
goes about, or fetches a perpetual Circuit as the Sun seems to do, and was
believed to do according to the most Ancient Astronomical Doctrine, and the
contraction of the two short Vowels into one, is the true reason that the
penultima of this word is long in all the Poets, so that here is all the
Analogy that can be required.

According to this Etymology, which is without question the true one, the
Orphick life, is the diet upon Herbs, because though all things are warmed and
cherished by the Sun, and all things are nourished and sustained by his Beams;
yet in a more Apollo is said more particularly to preside over Herbs, because
they lie more open to his view, not Cloystered up in Dens or Caves or Houses,
or shaded and concealed from his piercing Beams by the shelter of Woods, and
because the Animal World, though it could not endure his total extinction yet
it does more easily brook his absence, than the Fields and Flowers can do,
which are in a manner dead all the Winter, and depend wholly upon his warmth
and influence for their appearance above Ground.
particular manner he was by Antiquity supposed to preside over Herbs, or the
Orphick life is the most Ancient and Primitive way of Feeding, which comes to
the same thing, because of the great Antiquity of the Fable of Orpheus, which
was so very great that the Greeks themselves were strangers to its meaning, as
I think has been abundantly manifested, from what has been said concerning
him and Amphion.

But though the Greeks did not understand that Orpheus and the Sun were the
same, yet from the Fabulous account which they give of his Birth, it is plain
they had once such a Tradition though afterward they lost it, Apollonius the
Writer of the Argonauticks puts him down first in the Catalogue of those
Ancient Heroes that were so famous in the Grecian Story for that expedition,
and makes him to have been the Son of Oeagrus and Calliope, l. 1. v. 23, 24, 25.

(...) v. Etiam Orphea (...) or, in fine Argonaut. quae sub ejus nomine
circumferuntur, and Plat. in symposio, and Apollod. Biblioth. l. 1. c. 3. and
9. ut and ipsum Apollon. ib. l. 4. v. 1193, 1194.

(...)
(...).
Now this Oeagrus and the Sun are the same, for as (...), or rather, as it
should be written, (...), is from (...) hasta, and (...), which is as much as
(...), as (...), and (...), and (...) are the same, as much as to say, venator
hastatus, so is Oeagrus, from (...) solus, with the Addition of the same Word
and Signification, as much as to say venator solitarius, as Hunting is ascribed
to Apollo, as much as Wisdom, or Medecin, or Poetry, or Music, Macrob. l. 1.
c. 17. Sagittarum autem nomine, non nisi radiorum Jactus ostenditur; qui tun^
longissimi intelliguntur, quo tempore altissimus sol diebus longissimis
solstitio aestivo conficit annuum cursum, inde (...) dictus, (...), e
longissimo altissimoque radios in terram usque demittens.
because of the swiftness of his Course, and because his Rays are as so many
Darts or Javelins by which he shoots from Heaven to the Earth, and therefore in
the Greek Poets he has the Epithets of (...), and (...), and (...), and (...),
and he is said to Hunt alone because all the Stars are extinguished by his
Presence, and nothing does or can appear but himself: so that there was no real
difference, though Pherecydes, in the Scholiast upon the place of Apollonius
last cited, thought there was, betwixt Oeagrus and Apollo, (...), Pherecydes
says that, Orpheus according to Asclepiades was the Son of Apollo and
Calliope, but according to others of Oeagrus and Polymnia, for this Oeagrus and
Apollo are the same, and that he is said to be the Son of Apollo, though indeed
he were the very same person with him, it is in no other sense, then that the
Attributes, as I have said already, may not improperly be called the Sons or
Daughters of the Divine Substance, and Medecin is but one of those perfections
for which Apollo was Celebrated by the Ancient Poets, (...), the Greek
Termination (...) very frequently denoting a person, being as much as And by
this name the vestal Virgins of old were used to invoke him. Apollo Medice,
Apollo P^an. Macrob. l. 1. c. 17. ib. paulo supra hinc est quod eidem
attribuitur medendi potestas: quia temperatus solis calor morb^rum omnium fuga
est. --
Medicus or Sanator: neither are we to wonder at all that Orpheus is placed so
low by the Writer of the Argonauticks, as the expedition which he Celebrates in
his Poem, for it is a vanity to think that all his Heroes were contemporary,
but he amarsses together all the great names of Antiquity, of which Orpheus was
the chief, to make his Catalogues the more august and splended, and to adorn
the drapery of his Poem; for it is a great mistake to think that the Ancient
Poets were any exact observers of Chronology, but they frequently not only out
of mistake, but de sign, to grace and embellish their performance, brought the
greatest Names together out of all quarters and times, without any regard to
truth, which is not the virtue of a Poet, and this was the true reason why
their Historians were in many things guilty of such gross and palpable
impostures, because they took their measures from the Poets, as if Poetry and
truth, that is, any other than a truth of Nature, a truth of Emblem or
Hierogliphick meaning, a truth and justice or natural probability of Action, a
truth of order and decency and proper circumstance, had any relation or
affinity together.

It is the more suspicious concerning Orpheus, that Apollonius was guilty of a
designed error, if we may call that an error or mistake which a Man does
knowingly commit, because he places him the very first, as indeed he was the
first and greatest Hero in Antiquity, and Celebrated under diverse Names by all
the Ancient Poets, Philosophers and Priests; and it is not very remote from
this business, what Vossius observes concerning the crowding the Histories of
diverse Persons into the Character of one; to make him appear the more
Honorable and renowned, Veterum mos erat, quo G. Voss. de orig. and progr.
Idololat. l. 1. c. 19.
magis ad mirandae essent virtutes eorum, quos in Deos retulissent, varios
eximiae virtut is in unum conflare, unique omnium gesta attribuere, quod
difficile non erat in rebus ab aetate sua remotis, and gest is in terris long
dissitis.

To all that it is to be added, that Linus also, another pretended Poet of the
remotest Antiquity, is by Apollodorus said to have been the Son of the Oeager
or Oeagrus, though he tells us in the same place, notwithstanding he was really
the Son of Oeagrus, yet he was reputed the Son of Apollo, and passed for such
by common fame, his words are, (...), Biblioth. l. 1. c. 3. So the Scholiast
upon Homer ad Il. Z. 155. says of Belle prophon, that he was (...), by nature
and in truth the Son of Neptune, but by common fame of Glauens, and other
instances there are very obvious to be met with.
for this is the meaning of (...), that he was the Son of Apollo by common
fame, notwithstanding that he was really the Son of Oeager, not as the
Translator has very unskilfully rendered it, qui and patrem habuisse Apollinem
dicitur, but the whole place ought to have been rendered thus, Calliopes and
Oeagri filius reapse Linus fuit, quem vulgi tamen rumor perhibet Apoll^ne
prognatum, and this is also to be applied (...) to Orpheus himself, of whom it
is immediately said, (...), that he also was the real Son of Oeager, though the
pretended of Apollo, but Apollodorus is out, as well as his Translator, for
Orpheus and Linus are the same with one another, and the same with Oeager and
Apollo themselves, between whom there is no difference at all, and Virgil no
contemptible Author in these matters, makes Linus to have been really the Son
of Apollo, at v. de Pirithoo schol. ad odyss. (...). 304.
least as much as Calliope was Orpheus his Mother, and they say the Mother's is
the surer side.

Non me carminibus vincet nec Thracius Virgil. Eclog. 4.
Orpheus,
Nec Linus, huic matter quamvis at que huic pater adsit,
Orphei Calliopea, Lino formosus Apollo.
Vossius gives it as his Judgment, that there De art. Poet. not. and constable. p.
78.
was no such Person as the Ancient Linus nor Musaeus neither, no more than
there was a certain and determinate Orpbeus, and he makes the signification of
Linus to be only general, signifying a Writer of Mournful or Elegiack Verses,
because Telounah in Hebrew signifies Murmuring and as he says Lamentation,
though of this latter signification I doubt it would have puzzled him to produce
an instance, but in the truth of the thing Linus, who according to the
Mythologers and the Poets, was the Son of Oeagrus or Apollo and Calliope, is in
reality no other than Apollo or the Sun himself, and he has his name from his
brightness, which is the signification of Linus or Lunus, as Hesychius
Interprets it, (...), and thence the Latin v. Aegid. Menag. in D. La^rt.
Luna is derived, as Learned Men have already observed, for these Vowells are
easily and familiarly changed into one another, as from the Common Greek (...),
or as the Greeks themselves would pronounce it, (...), is the Jonique (...),
and from the oblique case (...) is the Latin unus, and our very English word
Sun, has its name and So from the Latin Lux or Luceo is the English Lict or
Light, and from the Greek (...) or the Latin Nox Noctis is the English Night.
signification from Shining, and yet might he well be called the Son of Apollo,
though he were indeed no other than Apollo or the Sun himself, because Light is
an attribute or perfection of the Sun, and the Sun is justly called the Father
of Light.

Further yet; Orpheus is sometimes said to be the Son of Calliope, as others of
Polymnia, of Calliope, because being the Father and President of Music, as the
Sun was thought by the Ancients for the reasons already declared, the congruity
of the Fable did require, that he should be descended from a mother carrying
Harmony in her Name, and because the Ancients usually Sung to the Ha^p, which
was the instrument of Orpheus, adding instrumental Music to Vocal, to this
when it is well performed is said to be done (...) in the Language of Homer,
where speaking of the Feast of the Gods he says.

-- -- (...) Il. (...). prope. fin.

(...),
(...),
(...).
And as he was said to be the Son of Calliope with respect to the harmony and
sweetness of his Music, so of Polymnia too with respect to the subject matter
of his Poetical Song, (for Apollo was the Patron of Poetry as well as Music)
which is supposed to be a lofty and magnificent commemoration of gallant
Persons and Deeds, the proper subject of an Epick or Heroic Poet, so that
Calliope and Polymnia are indeed the same, and so are all the Muses, the
Daughters of Polymnia or Poesy in the general, expressing only the different
accomplishments of a complete and universal Poet, though perhaps Herodotus when
he called the Books of his History by their names might look upon them as real
persons distinguished from each other.

And as Orpheus was the same with Apollo or the Sun, so was Eurydice his
supposed Wife, no other than the Moon, whom Orpheus is said to have followed to
the Shades below, and to have obtained leave of Pluto for her return from
thence; though for a Fabulous reason, which the Poets give us, she was
afterward remanded, by which nothing else is meant but the perpetual course of
rising and setting of those Two Heavenly Bodies, and their seemingly perpetual
pursuit of one another, which is yet further confirmed by the Disease of which
Eurydice is said to have Dyed, that is, by the bite of a Serpent, which is
nothing else but the Moons Diurnal motion, the Serpent in the East being an The
Serpent of Epidaurus under which form Apollo or Aesculapius (for these are both
the same) was Worshipped both in Peloponesus and Rome was but an Eastern
Hieroglyphick of time, which is measured principally by the Suns motion.
Macrob. v. l. 1. c. 20. initio.
Emblem of time, and every entire revolution of any Heavenly Body, being
compared to a Serpent biting it self by the Tail, because every Circle ends
where it begins, and as soon as the Arch which is described by it, returns to
the same point from whence it set out, the circumference is complete, and one
entire revolution is at an end. She is called Eurydice as much as to say late
jura dans, because the Moon has the Government of the Night, and this
Government in Scripture is called Memlecheth, her Kingdom or Dominion, Genesis 1.
16. and for the same reason the Sun is called (...), in a citation that shall
be hereafter produced, because the Care and Government of the Day is committed
to him.

Having said thus much upon occasion of the last mentioned place of Plato,
where he speaks of the (...) the Orphick or Orphaick life, which I have shown
to have consisted in abstinence from Flesh, I cannot but observe one thing more
in it, which to me seems to have been a great mistake and a manifest corruption
of the primitive Tradition, and that is, that he makes their Sacrifices as well
as their Diet to have consisted only in incruentis, and that they thought it a
very great offense (...), to defile the Altars of the Gods with Blood, for
besides what has been said already in Answer to Grotius his conceit concerning
the Sacrifice of Abel, it is to be considered, that there were Two main reasons
of all Sacrifice, the First was Thanksgiving for the Goods and Comforts of
Life, of which a part was to be offered up by way of humble Acknowledgment to
the Author of them, and these indeed were for the most part dona incruenta, so
long as Mankind continued to abstain from Flesh, these were for the most part,
though the Sacrifice of Abel himself was not so, (...), as Plato calls them,
chaste and pure Oblations, (...), Cakes and Fruits besprinkled with Honey, which
belonged manifestly to the Genus Eucharisticum, and were offered up by way of
Thanksgiving, or in way of faederal Communication, with a reconciled and
propitiated Numen. But there was also the (...) or expiatorium, there were
Sacrifices offered by way of expiation or Atonement, which were always without
Question Bloody Sacrifices or Sacrifices of Animals slain before the Altar or
upon it, whose Blood was shed by way of commutation, instead of that of the
Offender himself, which, though I do not say, is depended upon a Law of Nature,
for then it could never have been dispensed with, yet nothing is more certain
than that it was the general practice of the World, before the delivery of the
Law of Moses, and a Custom whose beginning cannot be assigned any otherwise
than by saying, that it seems most probable to have began immediately after the
Fall, and to have been as old as Sin it self, which gave the first rise and
occasion to it. Upon the whole matter I leave it to be considered, whether the
reasons I have given, as well in this place, as in what has been said above
upon another occasion, are not sufficient to weigh against the Authority of
Porphyrie and Plato, and those who esteeming such Authority more sacred than
that of the Scripture it self, have strained the one so miserably to make it
comply with the other.

To confirm which yet further, it is to be considered, what is reported of
Pythagoras, by those that have wrote concerning him, that having found out the
demonstration of that proposition in Euclid, that in a reclangular Triangle,
the square of the Subtender is equal to the square of the two other sides, he
is said by way of Thankfulness for so important a discovery, as he esteemed it,
to have offered up an Hecatomb to the Gods, notwithstanding that he and his
Disciples abstained from all manner of Flesh in their Food, and this, if
admitted for truth, as I think it was never yet called in Question, is a plain
instance of the use of Animals in Sacrifice, among those very People who did
Religiously abstain from them in their Food, for as for those who would have
this passage in the Life of that Philosopher, to be so understood, as if it
were an Hecatomb of Meal or fine Flower molded into the shape of so many
Animals as the Hecatomb consisted of, which the Greek Grammarians tell us were
Twenty five in Number, and that where there were not (...), there was no
Hecatomb, properly so called, they are to be heard, First because the Imitation
of Animals in Flower and Past, would not in reason be acceptable in Sacrifice,
so long as the Animals themselves were prohibited to be put to any such use,
for all imitation in Religious Worship, does certainly suppose the thing so
imitated to be at leastwise Lawful, otherwise it is rather to be interpreted as
an affront, than an acceptable service, or a proper Act of Worship and
Adoration. Secondly, I challenge any Man to show me one instance besides the
thing in Question, which is but to beg instead of proving, where the word
(...) in any Greek writer, is used for any inanimate oblation, But yet after v.
D. Galaeam in not. ad Apollod. p. 85. v. etiam and Meurs. de Reg. Athen. l. 1.
and Scal. ad Eusebius. Chron. l. 1. ^. 26.
all, I acknowledge that in the account which the Ancients give of Cecrops, who
is by them supposed to have been the first King of Athens, one thing which they
say of him is, that he forbad all Animal Sacrifices whatsoever, and I do not
wholly deny, which it would be absurd for me to do, unless by a particular
induction of all Ages and Nations I could prove my assertion, that there was
never any Nation or People among whom the cruenta Sacrificia were unlawful,
only I say, that, generally speaking, they were in use before the Flood, and
that it is most reasonable to believe they were as Old at least as the
Sacrifice of Abel, for of Adam we do not read that he ever offered up any
Sacrifice at all, and if we speak of Adam in his first and Innocent estate, it
is very true of him that he did not Sacrifice by way of expiation, because
there was no need, there being no such thing as Sin yet stirring in the World,
and explatory Sacrifices were, as I conceive, the only Animal Sacrifices in use
before the Flood; so that if Cecrops and Adam were the same persons, as I do
verily believe them to have been, then it is no wonder to find it recorded by
the Ancients in the account which they give of him, that he forbad the use of
Animals in Sacrifice, which Tradition of theirs arose only from hence, that in
the state of Innocence such sort of Sacrifices did not yet obtain.

Now that Cecrops and Adam were the same, I can make it very probable from
several considerations, First as to the Etymology of his Name, I make account
that as (...) is from (...), so is (...) from (...) with the addition of (...)
by a very ordinary and usual way of reduplication in the Greek Tongue, as in
our Lexicons may be seen; where we have (...) a verb from (...) or (...), and
(...) for (...), and (...) for (...), and (...) and (...), for (...) and (...).
And so the signification of (...) will be as much as (...) or (...), the And
Cecropia is the hidden Land, or the Land of Paradise, whose situation is not
known. --
hidden, that is, the Ancient King of Athens, or he, in the Language of Seneca,
cujus origo ultra memoriam jacet. Secondly, He is called the First King of
Athens, that is, as I interpret it, according to what has been frequently
inculcated already, the first King among the Ancients, or the first King in
Antiquity, which is as agreeable to Adam, as can be imagined, he being the
first Father and Monarch of Mankind. Thirdly, Though by some of the Greek
Writers he be represented as an Athenian, yet by the Scholiast upon
Aristophanes, by Cedrenus, and Eusebius, by Suidas, by John and Isaac Tzetzes,
and among the Latins by Papinius Statius he is represented v. Lloyd. lex.
Geogr. p. 256, 257. and Jo. Scal. in Eusebius. Chron. p. 26.
as an Egyptian, that is, an Easterling, For of this extent is the sense of
the word (...) and (...) in many of the Greek Writers, who, for want of
particular knowledge in the East, are by no means accurate in their relations
concerning it. Fourthly, He is represented as living before Deucalion, that is,
as I interpret it, before Noah, so Justin says of the Athenians, Ante
Deucalionis tempora Justin. l. 2.
regem habuere Cecropem. And Apollodorus reckons the Flood of Deucalion to have
Apollod. Biblioth. l. 3. p. 225.
happened in the time of Cranaus who was the second from Cecrops, so that there
is as much agreement between these things as can be expected in so great
confusion of the Grecian account of time, for in strictness of Chronology,
according to the account of Moses which is the only true one, Adam was Ten
Generations before Noah.

And this account of Apollodorus placing Deucalion in the next Generation to
Cecrops, is the least to be regarded, because the profane Writers themselves do
not all of them concur with him, for Justin makes the Flood to have happened in
the time of Amphitryon, whom Apollodorus calls (...), who was the Successor of
Cranaus and the Third from Cecrops, his words are these in the place last cited
out of him, huic (Cecropi) successit Cranaus, cujus filia Athis regioni nomen
dedit, post hunc Amphitryon regnavit, qui primus Minerte urbem sacravit, and
nomen civitati Athenas dedit. hujus temporibus aquarum illuvies majorem partem
Graeciae absumpsit, superfuere quos refugia montjum receperunt, aut ad Regem
Thessaliae Deucalionem ratibus vecti sunt, a quo propterea genus humanum
conditum dicitur. Fifthly, This Cecrops by the Generality of Greek Authors is
called (...), by Ovid, Geminus and by Justin, biformis, of which there are Two
reasons assigned, First that upwards he had the shape of a Man, but downwards
of a Serpent, and in this sense the And so they are also called by the Schol.
upon H^mer. ad ^dyss. (...). 304.
Centaurs are somewhere called (...) by Apollodorus, though at present I cannot
bring the place to my remembrance, which some do so interpret, as if this
Cecrops at first had been a good and Gracious Prince, but afterward
degenerated into a Tyrant, but Plutarch. de Ser. number. vindict.
Plutarch for I know not what reason, will have the clean contrary of this to
have been represented by it; Demosth. in Orat. fun.
Demosthenes will have it refer to the Gigantick stature of those first
Mortals, and to be as much as if the Ancients had told us more plainly, that he
had the knowledge or wisdom of a Man, added to the strength and power of some
pernicious Dragon, or destructive Serpent. But I am very much mistaken, or
nothing of all this is a true account of the matter, but if we would explain
it, as it ought to be explained we must seek for its meaning in the Sacred
story.

The true account of ancient this Story is this, Cecrops was the first Man, and
his being made up, after a Monstrous manner, as the Fabulous antiquity has
represented him, of the parts of a Man and a Serpent or Dragon put together,
was to signify the Two Natures in Man, the one of which is the rational or
intellectual, the other the animal, serpentine or sensual, exposed to Lusts and
Passions and Temptations, which are therefore compared to a Serpent, because of
their winding and insinuating-Nature; or else the Man and the Serpent, are to
signify the Two several states and conditions of Life in which our First
Parent was successively engaged. The First is the State of Innocence and
simplicity, the purely humane and intellectual State, undefiled and uncorrupted
by any Indiscretion, Lust, or Passion, being at a perfect Friendship with, and
having a perfect Dominion and Mastery of it self, and enjoying a free and happy
intercourse with that self-originated Mind and Will, which comprehends within
it self the whole Extent and Latitude of truth, and is the Eternal and
Immutable Standard, of all kind of Moral rectitude and virtue. The Second, or
the Serpentine Estate, is the State of Degeneracy from that happy condition, by
the Temptations of the Serpent, that is, by the suggestions of the lower Life,
which did more easily insinuate themselves by the Ministry of a Woman, whom the
Devil made use of upon this occasion, as being by reason of the weakness of her
Sex, the fittest to be first Tampered with and wrought upon her self, and
afterward the fittest Instrument to convey the Poison of her own delusions
into the mind of her Husband, and these, whether suggestions of the lower and
sensual Life in our selves, or temptations of the Devil from without, are
represented, as I have said, in the Ancient Story, which I take it for granted
in the Scripture it self, is partly Hieroglyphical, under the type and shadow
of a Serpent, because of their winding and insinuating Nature. --

And both of these Interpretations agree excellently well, with that particular
description which the Ancients have left us of their Cecrops, in whom they
place the Humane Nature uppermost, and the Serpentine beneath, for in the First
of my Interpretations the Humane or Intellectual Life or Nature, is uppermost
not only in dignity but in place too, with respect to the sensual or
concupiscible, which keeps its residence and performs its operations below,
besides that the rational Nature was intended to be the guide and counselor of
the other, and is therefore by the Greeks called (...), to keep it within its
due bounds and measures: and in the other Interpretation, there is as exact an
agreement of the Fable to the truth, as in this, for the State of Innocence was
in order of time, before that of degeneracy and declension from it. And thus
Cecrops is described by Nonnus, Dionys. l. 41. (...),
(...).


And by Aristophanes in Vespis. (...),


Where the Scholiast thus Glosses upon the place, (...), that is, the Ancients
say that Cecrops had Two Natures, his lower parts being made after the fashion
of a Serpent.

The Second reason assigned by Authors of this Name of Cecrops, (...), is that
he was the first that instituted Matrimony or conjugal Obligation between Man
and Wife, Athenaeus, Deipnos. l. 13. (...), Justin l. 2. part of which words
have been already produced, Ante Deucalionis tempora (Athenienses Regem habuere
Cecropem, quem, ut omnis Fabulosa est Antiquitas biformem prodidere, quia
primus marem Faeminae matrimonio junxit. Syrianus in Hermogenem: v. etiam
Eastath. ad Il. (...) and w. and Isaac Tyesty. in in Lycophr. p. 24.
(...). Nonnus ubi supra.

(...),
(...)
(...).
Than all which testimonies I think there neither is, nor can be any thing more
suitable to the case of our First Parent in the sacred Story, who was without
all question the very first by whom the Matrimonial band was tied, only whereas
in the Citation of Athenaeus, it is set forth that before the time of Cecrops,
Copulation was promiscuous and the use of Women common, which implies as if
there had been several Generations before him, so that at this rate he could
not be the first Man. This is no more then Suidas also says concerning him,
(...) Suid in (...).
(...) -- that is, at that time (in the time of the Judges, when he makes
Prometheus to have lived) Cecrops surnamed (...) Reigned in Athens, he was so
called according to some, because of the bulk and bigness of his Body, or
rather as others would have it, because of a Law which he Enacted, that Women,
being yet virgins, should be disposed of to one Man only, and for this reason
he called them (...), or sponsae (quod essent uni viro (...) sive desponsatae)
whereas before, Copulation was brutal and every Woman was common to all without
distinction, being no Man's Wife, but prostituting her Chastity to every one as
it happened, so that no one could tell whose Child it was that was at any time
Born -- -- and a little after he gives the reason why Ceorops made this Law, in
words that have been already produced (...) (...). This Cecrops d^^ as being by
Birth an Egyptian, and being acquainted with the Laws of Hephaestus or Vulcan,
an Egyptian King, and he said moreover that it was for this promiscuous and
brutal use of Venery, that Attica in the time of Ogyges was overwhelmed with
Waters, which words, though, as I have said already, they may be, and they are
a very great confirmation to the truth of that opinion which I have endeavored
to assert, that Noah and Ogyges were really the same, because the Flood, which
is said to have happened in their times, is in profane and sacred Writers so
plainly imputed to the same reason, the great Debauchery and Sensuality which
then Reigned among Men, and particularly to the use of Belluine Conjunctions
and promiscuous Copulations, without distinction of property, consanguinity or
any other Relation, yet so far as Cecrops is concerned, nothing hinders but
there may be an Anachronisme committed by the Greeks, or a confounding of Two
Times and Stories together, for I am inclinable to believe that what I have
already offered, besides what I have still further to suggest, concerning
Cecrops his being the same with Adam, will be of greater weight with any
considering Man to prove them to have been the same, than the Two last
Testimonies of Athenaeus and Suidas put together will be to part them in sunder
from each other.

To which purpose it is still further to be observed, that these Ancient
writers speak not only of Deucalions Flood, which they make to have happened
after the time of Cecrops, and of that of Ogyges, which according to them was
before it, but we have also an account of a Flood which happened in the time of
Cecrops himself, by which all Attica was overflown, the occasion this: There
was a controversy betwixt Neptune and Minerva to whose Patronage or
Guardianship the City of Athens should belong, which being referred to a
Counsel of the Gods, being Twelve in Number to determine, the verdict by the
Testimony of Cecrops was given in favor of Minerva against the other, at which
Apollodorus tells us, Apollod. Biblioth. l. 3. p. 222.
(...), Neptune being very angry overflowed the Thriasian Field, and laid all
Attica under Water. The Moral of which Fable is this: Attica is the Ancient or
newly created Earth, Athena or Minerva is, as I shall show more largely by and
by, the Aetherial or subtle matter of the universe, and Neptune is the Element
of Water, or all kind of M^ist and Watery substance here below, and these Two,
the Ether and the Water contended together, to which of them the Fertility and
Fruitfulness of the Earth was chiefly due, which being referred to the decision
of Cecrops or the reasonable Nature, he gives Judgment in favor of Minerva or
the Aetherial matter, which is the great principle of Life and Vegetation in
the Universe, and which though, in the productions of this lower World, it make
use of the Moist and Watery Substance as its Instrument in all its operations,
yet is that substance Phlegmy and unactive, having nothing vital or operative
in it self, any otherwise than as it is actuated and impregnated by the
fruitful and enlivening influences of the Aetherial or Heavenly matter, and
then he adds, without any strict and sacred regard to truth, but minding only
to fill up the outward form and Schesmatism of the Fable, that Neptune being
angry at this determination, overflowed the Thriasian Field, etc. by which
nothing else is meant than that Neptune or the Watery substance of the Universe,
does still continue, though in an inferior and subservient way, to be aiding
and assisting to the Aetherial matter in all its Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral
productions. And this is the meaning of what the same Apollodorus tells us
Biblioth. l. 3. c. 13.
in the beginning of the same Chapter, that when this contention first arose
between Neptune and Minerva, Neptune making the first trial of his skill,
(...), and striking with his Trident upon the middle of the Acropolis or
highest eminence of the City of Athens, he made that Water to gush out, which
(continuing to after Generations) was (in the time of Apollodorus, who was
himself an Athenian) called Erectheis, from (...), terra, because it was forced
out of the Earth, by the stroke of Neptunes Trident, and this is nothing else
but a Mythological description of the Eruption of Fountains and Rivers and
other subterraneous Waters, which being kept in, without having any vent, were
Anciently looked upon as one of the causes of Earthquakes, and thence Neptune
had his A. Gell. Noct. A^t. l. 2. c. 28.
Epithets of (...) and (...). Agellius. Quaenam else causa videatur, quamobrem
terrae tremores fiant, non modo his communibus hominum sensibus opinionibusque
compertum non est, sed ne inter Physicas quidem Philosophias satis constitit,
ventorum ne vi accidant specus hiatusque terrae subeuntium, an aquarum subter,
in terrarum cavis undantium fluctibus pulsibusque, ita uti videntur existimasse
antiquissimi Graecorum, qui Neptunum (...) appellaverunt.

But after Neptune had made this effort to obtain the Dominion of Athens, then
it came to Minerva's turn to show what she could do, and the (...) Apollod. ib.
, taking Cecrops to witness of the feat she was about to perform, produced that
Olive Tree, which to the time of Apollodorus remained in Pandrosium: that is,
it was first necessary that Neptune or the Watery Element should moysten and
prepare the Ground, before Minerva or the Aetherial, could impregnate it and
make it Fruitful, according to that passage of Moses in the Book of Genesis,
Genesis 2. 5, 6.
where such another Deluge as this of Cecrops, that is, not a wasting and
destructive, but a prolifick and impregnating Deluge is described, and a Deluge
not occasioned by Rain, but by the Ebullition of subterraneous Waters. And
every Plant of the Field before it was in the Earth, and every Herb of the
Field before it grew; for the Lord God had not caused it to Rain upon the
Earth, and there was not a Man to Till the Ground, but there went up a mist
from the Earth and Watered the whole Face of the Ground. Furthermore though this
Aetherial substance be the cause and principle of all manner of Fruitfulness
and Plenty, yet the Olive is here only instanced in, as being so Fat and Rich a
production, that it is a fit emblem of Fruitfulness in the general considered,
or else the Olive being Anciently looked upon as a Symbol of Peace, is fitly
ascribed to Minerva or the Aetherial matter, which being pure and simple, and
separated from the Vapors and Exhalations of this Atmosphere, by which all
Storms and Tempests are occasioned, is the seat and region of rest and Peace,
as Homer describes the region upon the top of Olympus, which was thought to
carry its Head above the Clouds,

(...) Hom. edyss. Z.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Neither is it any wonder to hear Apollodorus speaking of this contention
between Neptune and Minerva, as if it had been a literal and real Emulation
between Two Divine Persons, and saying that the Olivetree which Minerva upon
that occasion had produced, was even in his time to be seen in Pandrosium, and
that the Water which Neptunes Trident had at that time forced out of the Earth,
much after the same manner, as the Rod of Moses is recorded in Sacred Story to
have done out of the Rock, continued still to be a Monument of what had
happened even in his Days, for nothing is more certain than that the Ancient
Greeks, as far off and farther than the time of Apollodorus, did not understand
their own Mythology, which had been delivered down by Tradition to them from
their Fathers, which was the reason they understood many things, in a literal
and not unfrequently, in an absurd and impossible sense, which had a very
natural and easy, however Mystical and Hieroglyphick meaning, and so
Apollonius speaks of Orpheus his drawing Trees and Rivers after him, which I
have shown plainly in what sense it is to be understood, and that by the
Ancient Orpheus nothing but the Sun is or can possibly be conceived to be
meant, as of a thing that was really and literally performed, and directs us to
a place where some of those Trees were Anciently to be seen,

Apallon. Argon. l. 1. v. 26. etc.
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
There is also a Third reason of this surname (...) given to Cecrops, which the
Ancients have mentioned, but such a reason it is, as I scarce thought worth
setting down, being manifestly nothing to the purpose, and that is, that being
an Egyptian born, and coming afterward into Greece, he came by this means to
be Master of Two Languages, the Egyptian and the Greek, as if (...) and (...)
Two Languages, and Two Natures were the same. Eusebius, (...) Eusebius. Chron. l.
1.
(...). And to the same purpose Suidas, (...) Suid. in (...) v. eund. etiam in
(...) ubi alias quasdam causas (...) adducit, sed meo judicio futiles and inept
as. v. etiam de his omnibus Phavorin. in voce.
(...).

But in the Sixth place, to evidence yet still more clearly how contradictory
to themselves the Ancients are in their account of time, when they make Cecrops
to have Reigned after the Ogygian Flood, it is to be considered what Hyginus
has reported concerning his Genealogy; that he had to his Mother the Earth,
and to his Hygin. Fab. 48. collat. cum Fab. 158.
Father Vulcan: nay not only Hyginus but Antroninus Liberalis, the Author of
the Metamorphoses calls him expressly (...), Cecrops the Son of the Earth.
Nothing Anton. lib. (...). c. 6. initio.
can Answer more exactly to the Story of Adam, than this account of Antiquity,
which makes Cecrops to have been the Son of the Earth, and by his being also
the Son of Vulcan, nothing else is meant, but that he was also the Son of God,
or of the Sun who was Worshipped as the Supreme Numen by the Ancient Heathens,
for Vulcan and the Sun are the same, who had not his Name, as is commonly
thought, from Tubal Cain in Genesis, to whom Moses in the same place gives this
character, that he was an instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron,
which added to the likeness of the sound, created this conceit that Tubalcain
and Vulcan were the same, but Vulcan with the Addition of an Aeolique Digamma
is El Kanna. Deus Zelotypus, as God is expressly called Exodus 20. 5. And Fire
and Jealousy are frequently in Scripture compared together, so that from
hence, without question, from the Hebrew Kanna, is the Latin Candeo, Candens,
Candidus, Candor, (all which words do signify, first and most properly the
color of a glowing Iron or Furnace in their utmost extremity of heat) from
thence also are the Nounes Candela, and cicindela, and the Verb excandesco,
with its derivative excandescentia, as also the compounds incendo, succendo,
succensus, succenseo, and as by the Latins he is called Vulcanus, so by the
Greeks Hephaestus, that is, ab eshta, the Father of Fire, as Bochartus before
me has observed, though he apply it only to the Fire of Smiths Forges or other
Culinary or Artificial Fires, of which Vulcan was thought to be the inventor,
but in truth Vulcan is the Element of Fire, and more particularly the body of
the Sun it self, to which all our sublunary Fires, whether Artificial or
Natural or of what kind soever do ow their being and their propagation, and
which though fed and supported by grosser Fuel, yet are they kindled and
ventilated by the subtle matter, which having its chief residence in the body
of the Sun, is yet notwithstanding plentifully diffused through the whole
Creation, and by the same Analogy, Aesculapius or (...), which is another name
of the Sun, is as much as Eshel ab, the Father of the Fields, or the God of
Herbs, because all vegetation is owing to his influence, and I have already
observed in Discourse of the Tetragrammaton.
other Papers, that See the Etymons of Plato, Chrysippus, Speusippus, Chanthes
and others in Macr^bius, which are all of them very frigid and plainly f^olish,
as the Greeks ar^ usually in all their Etymologies, Macrob. Saturn. l. (...).
c. 17.
(...) is as much as ab helion or pater excelsus, and Priapus, as much as Pri
ab, or pater fructuum, both of which are but Two other Names of the same
multifarious and Polyonymous Numen. Besides that Vulcan and the Sun are the
same, will appear not only from the Etymology of this word it self in Latin and
of Hephaestus in Greek, but also from the Fable of his being thrown down from
Heaven by Jupiter, or by the universal Nature, or that Divine providence and
Eternal wisdom to which the Fabric and contrivance of this World is owing, and
therefore Homer measures his fall by the motion of the Sun, with whom he first
sets out in the Morning, and with whom in the Evening he ends his course, as
much as to say, that these Two motions, the motion of Vulcan and of the Sun are
the same, being so exactly agreeable to one another, for thus Vulcan speaks to
his Mother in Homer, persuading her to be quiet, when Jupiter, whose Power is
irresistible, was angry, (...)


And then it follows soon after,

-- (...) --

But in the Hymn to Apollo which is ascribed, among others, to Homer, it is
Juno her self, not Jupiter, who is said to have cast him down, which though it
be a new Argument, besides the Authority of Athenaeus, whom I remember
somewhere to have called the Legitimacy of these Hymns into Question, that the
Author of the Hymns is not the same with the writer of the Ilias and the
Odyses, yet it is out of all dispute that these Hymns are very Ancient, and in
this very passage in the Hymn to Apollo, Vulcan is made to have fallen into the
lap of Thetis who took care of him, which is no more than a Poetical
description of the setting of the Sun, who is by the Poets supposed to refresh
himself and his weary Horses every Night in the Ocean. It is Juno her self that
speaks.

(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
With so long a fall as this it so happened, as well it might, that Vulcan was
miserably lamed, as Lucian has expressly observed, Lu^i^n. D^^^ de Sa^rif.
(...) (...), which lameness of his was nothing else but a Poetical description
of the inequality of the Days and Nights according to the different seasons of
the Year, and different periods of the Suns motion; and all this I hope, may
pass for as tolerable an account who Vulcan was, and for as good a proof, that
Intell. Syst. c. 4. p. 489, 490.
by him the Sun or the Supreme Numen was Anciently understood, as that which
the Author of the Intellectual System has given us, a Man that has heaped a
great many Authorities together to very little purpose, and is nothing but mere
industry without a Genius in any thing of this Nature, though in the Preface to
his work he pretends great familiarity with Philological Learning; and yet to
prevent Jealousy he declares, as his manner is, in Proclamation style, that for
our parts, we neither call Philosophy nor yet Philology our Mistress; but it
seems they are both of them kind Friends at a need, for we serve our selves of
either as occasion requires, and perhaps it is true of them, with relation to
his Worship, what Agamemnon said of his Charming Chryseis, -- (...) --



But it does not follow that the kindness is equal on all sides, for I doubt
Philology is coy, though the Doctor be willing, and it is usually seen in
Misses and such kind of Harlotry Creatures, that they are but the more shy for
being Courted so much, however it is ill done to make his Boast in Print of a
fair Ladies kindness, and worse to represent her as a common Jilt, that is
ready upon every occasion; so that the Doctor must not hereafter think it
strange or unjust, if Philology, who after all his braggs was never half so
inward with him, as he is pleased to pretend, be now more cautious, more sullen
and reserved, than ever she was before.

Furthermore, as by Vulcan it is manifest beyond contradiction, that the Sun is
to be understood in the Mythology of the Ancients, so also the Cyclops who are
by the Poets fained to be his Ministers in the forming of the Thunder and
Lightening, will admit of no other meaning or interpretation, being nothing
else but partial effects, attributes and considerations of the same supposedly
Supreme Numen. For the Sun in the Greek Poets by reason of his raising those
exhalations from whence the Clouds, Rain, Snow, Winds, Hail, Thunder and
Lightning, and such like meteors are formed, has the Epithets of (...), and
(...), and (...), and (...), and by the Latins for the same reason he is called
Altitonans, Altisonus, and Tonans, and because of the great noises, and
terrible eruptions of the Furnaces of Aetna, and Vesuvius, therefore by the
Poets he was wittily represented as forming his Thunder there. For this reason
it was that Vulcan, though he were indeed nothing else but the Supreme Numen,
in the sense of the Ancients, who esteemed the Sun as such, yet considering him
as the Author and maker of the Thunder, he is represented as the Son of
Jupiter, and (...) or Juno; of Jupiter, because Jupiter as I shall prove is the
same with the Sun, by whom Cic. de. N. D. inter pl^res Vulcanos tertium numerat
filium Jovis ac Junonis, qui Lemni fabric^ traditur praefuisse. v. and vet.
Schol. in Hom. Il. (...). v. 609.
all exhalations and meteors are raised, and of (...) or Juno, because (...) is
the Region of the Air or Atmosphere, within which compass the Thunder is
confined, and to whose resistance it owes the double terror of its noise and
flashing. The very Name Cyclops is a sufficient argument, who it was that was
meant by it, for the Cyclops were so called from their being supposed to have
one circular or orbicular Eye in the midst of their Forehead, as the Sun is a
Circular or Orbicular luminary in the midst of Heaven, which may not unjustly
be called the Forehead of the Universe, as being to sense the highest and most
elevated part of it, so Hesiod describes the Cyclops in his Theogony,

-- (...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
And to this purpose it is that Macrobius produces a fragment of an Ancient
Greek Writer, wherein the Sun is expressly called Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 23.
See also the answer of Serapis in the Oracle to Nicocreon the King of Cyprus,
where representing himself as the universal omnipresent Numen, he calls the Sun
(...), his bright or refulgent Eye. ib. 2. 20. in Fine -- v. etiam c. 21. ib.
p. 256, 257. ed Lug. Pat. 1628. Cic. de Divin. p. 449. ed Land. 1681.
(...), the Eye of Jupiter, (...).


Where by Jupiter the Ether or the Azure Sky is to be understood, of whom the
Sun is here called the Eye, for this was one sense in which the Name Jupiter
was taken, though at others it were restrained only to signify the body of the
Sun, because the subtle matter in that Heavenly Luminary, and that which is
dispersed abroad through the large and spacious Regions of the Ether, differ
only in degree, that is, in greater or lesser proportions of purity and tenuity
from one another, and this according to the sense of the Ancients themselves,
as appears by a fragment of Tully cited by himself in his Book De Divinatione,

Principio, Aetherio flammatus Jupiter igni
Vertitur, ac totum collustrat lumine mundum,
Menteque Divina caelum terrasque petessit;
Quae penitus sensus hominum vitasque retentat,
Aetheris aeternis septa atque inclusa cavernis.
And that the Ether it self is sometimes expressly called by the Name of
Jupiter, we have the Authority of the same Tully for it, who cites a fragment
of Ennius to this purpose, Adspice hoc sublime candens, quem invocant omnes
Jovem.



And also of Euripides which he thus Translates. ^ic. de (...). D. p. 420, 421.
edit ut supr^ -- add ^^^am loc. Macrobii l. 1. c. 18. Physici (...), quia
solemn mundi mentem esse dixerunt, mundus autem vocatu^ caelum quod appel^ant
Jovem, unde Aratus de caelo dicturus, ai^ (...) -- id ib. c. 21. solemn Jovis
(i. e. Aetheris) oculam appellat antiquitas.


Vides sublime fusum, immoderatum Aethera,
Qui tenero terram circumjectu amplectitur,
Hunc summum habeto Divum: hunc perhibeto Jovem.
The Cyclops therefore, that is, the Eyes of the Universe, are the same with
the Sun, who is expressly so called, and for their different Names, Brontes,
Steropes, and Pyracmon, they are all but so many partial considerations of the
same Numen, considered as employed in forming the Thunder, the last of them
denoting the manual operation which was supposed to be performed upon a
Fabulous Anvil in the Cavernes of Aetna and other places of Sicily, and the Two
first of them signifing the Two different effects, the one of Noise or Thunder,
the other of Lightning, consequent upon the operation, and therefore it is
observable that Claudian, having first named Mulciber, that is, Vulcan himself,
to whom he ascribes the formation of Thunder, which Mulciber, is as much as
Melec Abir, the Potent or Powerful King, as the Sun in the sense of the
Ancients did very well deserve to be called, being by them looked upon as the
Supreme Numen, he then describes his Three Ministers, that are supposed to be
assistant to him in his operation, as it were dividing the Genus into the
several Species of which it consisted, in his Third Book De consulatu Honorii.

-- Vobis jam Mulciber arma v. Etiam Virgil. Aeneid. l. 8:

Praeparat, and sicula Cyclops incude laborat:
Brontes innumeris exasperat aegida signis:
Altum fulminea crispare in Casside conum
Festinat Steropes, nectit Thoraca Pyracmon,
Ignifluisque gemit Lipare fumosa cavernis.
Neither is it any wonder to find the opera fabrilia, all kinds of working in
Iron, Brass or Steel, or any other hard Metal ascribed to Vulcan, as well as
the making of Thunder; because Vulcan as I have said, being the Sun or the
Element of Fire, whatever works are performed by Fire, are rightly ascribed to
him as their cause, and therefore all sorts of Weapons whatever are by Juvenal
called Arma Vulcania,

Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis Juv. sat. 8.

Aeacidae similis Vulcaniaque Arma capessas,
Quam te Thersitae similem producat Achilles.
Nay, not only so, but because of the Analogy and resemblance which all the
Works of Art have to one another, as to the skill and contrivance by which they
are effected at least, though not as to the materials of which they consist,
therefore all such Works are sometimes attributed by the Poets to Vulcan, as
the several Houses and Apartments of the Gods in Homer are, though such do not
use to be built of Iron or Brass or any other Metal, but by this was only meant
that the Sun according to the Ancient Doctrine, was the great Architect and
Demiurgick nature by which all the Symmetry of the Universe was contrived.

Hom. Il. (...). 605, etc. speaking of the Gods after revelling all Day, going
to their several apartments at Night.

(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...), etc.
In which words there are Two things especially to be remarked, First as to the
Feast of the Gods, of which these words of Homer give us the conclusion, by
conducting them all home to their several apartments at Night, ^nothing else is
meant by it, but that the Ancient Poets looked upon the greatest part of their
reputed Gods, as the Epicureans, and Stoics afterward determined, to be
nothing else but so many several concretions of Aetherial matter animated with
a mind or understanding, which while the Sun is up, who was supposed at Night
to repose himself in the Sea, do all of them bask themselves and rejoice in
his presence, with which all the Animal World is always infinitely pleased and
delighted, but in his absence they are Sad and Melancholy, and betake
themselves, as it were, to forgetfulness and sleep; this is the meaning of
Juno, that is, the Air or Atmospherical region receiving a cheerful Cup from
the hands of Vulcan, that is, the Sun, by which the Atmosphere is rarefied and
warmed, and all its numerous Inhabitants are wonderfully delighted and
refresht, and of the same Vulcan's Ministering to the rest of the Gods, that is,
to all other Animated Aetherial concretions, who are represented as full of
Jolitry and Laughter, wanting neither Mirth nor Music, nor good Cheer, all
which cannot be better represented than in the words of Homer himself.

(...) Il. (...). 595. etc.

(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
The Second thing observable from the words of Homer above cited is the Epithet
of (...) given to Vulcan in that and other places of that Poet, which word the
Scholiast renders by (...), which must not be so understood, as if he were lame
of both Feet at once, but, as I have said, by Vulcan's being Lame, the
inequality of the Days and Nights in several places, according to the various
respects and distances of the Sun is to be understood, so that this Lameness is
not of both Feet at once, but of each at different times and seasons, that Leg
of Vulcan which is the shortest in Winter, being in Summer the longest with
respect to the same place. Wherefore (...) might have been better Interpreted
by (...) utroque pede male affectus, which is true of both Feet at once, with
respect to their disproportion, though the short one be only properly said to
be Lame, or if you will, he may be said to be Lame on both Feet, because this
inequality of Days and Nights, considered at equal distances on both sides of
the Equator, makes the one Foot as much too long, as the other is too short,
and the Sun according to this Mythological way of speaking, can no where be
said to be (...), perfect in his Limbs, upright and steady in his motion, but
where and when the Days and Nights are equal.

But to these Two things there is also a Third to be added, which comes now
into my mind, and that is, that in this place of Homer, he is not only called
(...) but (...), in which composition the Preposition (...) in conjunction with
(...), denotes the equal splendour and glory of the rays of the Sun, by which
he is, on all sides environed and encompassed.

So true is it what Macrobius tells us, Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 17.
speaking in the person of Vettius Praetextatus, who thus replies upon his
friend Avienus demanding of him some rational account of the several Names by
which Apollo or the Sun was called in the Mythology of the Ancient Heathens,
Cave aestimes, mi Aviene, Poetarum gregem cum de Diis Fabulantur, non ab Adytis
plerumque Philosophiae semina mutuari, Have a care, Avienus, whatsoever you do,
that you be not guilty of so great a mistake, as to think the Poets did not
consult Nature in the Fables which they made concerning the Gods, or that they
did not borrow the First Seeds and Principles of all their Mythology from the
depths of Philosophy and from the inmost recesses of Physiological Learning.
And whoever he is that goes about to explain the Mysteries of the Heathen
Fabulous Antiquity without this clue of Nature for his guide, will not only
loose his time and labor, but also run himself into new and inextricable
difficulties, instead of explaining or interpreting the old.

Again, as the Cyclops were nothing else, as has been shown, but so many
Poetical descriptions and adumbrations of the Sun, so the Shield or Target of
Minerva, which by Greek and Latin Authors is called (...) or Aegis, and which
the Scholiast upon Homer somewhere calls (...), a piece of Armor of Vulcans
making, is nothing else but another such Poetical description and Hieroglyphick
adumbration of the same thing, for first of all, this Shield is attributed to
Jupiter, and thence it is that in the Greek Poets he has the Epithet of (...)
bestowed upon him, to this belongs that place of Virgil Aeneid. 8.

-- -- Arcades ipsum
Credunt se vidisse Jovem, cum saepe nigrantem
Aegida concuteret, dextra nimbosque cieret.
Where by nigrantem Aegida nothing else is meant but the Sun himself wrapped up
and darkened in Clouds, as appears by the words immediately following, nimbosque
c^eret; and by Jupiter in this place, not the Sun, but the whole Ether or Sky
is understood as in the Instances already produced. But at other times by (...)
or Jupiter, nothing else but the Sun is meant, as appears by those Epithets
given to him in Homer, of (...), and (...), all which Epithets are manifestly
belonging to the Sun, to whose exhaling and attracting virtue both the Thunder
and the Clouds are owing; and in this sense also (...) is to be understood when
the same Poet calls him (...), he being the Principal Inhabitant and as it were
Lord of the Ether, and therefore this Epithet or Character, (...), belongs in
a more peculiar and eminent manner to him, especially considering that so long
as he continues above the Horizon, the Stars are all sunk into their sockets,
and seem to be utterly extinguished and put out, so that he has all the Ether
to himself, and there is no other Luminary to be seen in all that vast Region
of subtle matter but he, though sometimes this Character is likewise given to
the Earth, which is as manifestly, as sensibly, and to sense more constantly,
an Inhabitant of the Ether than he, as in that of Euripides produced by
Macrobius, (...) Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 23.

(...).


And the drift of that Chapter where this passage of Euripides is alleged, is
to prove that Jupiter and the Sun are the same, which is that which I am now
about, and in favor of this opinion, he cites that passage of Homer at the
latter end of ^is First Iliad, (...).



The Interpretation of which place in him is very ingenious, but it being long,
I shall not Transcribe it, the thing it self that Jupiter and the Sun are
sometimes the same, being already sufficiently clear, and to this place of
Homer he adds another of Plato from his Timaeus where the word (...) cannot
possibly bear any other signification. In this sense the word Jupiter is
plainly to be understood in that of Ovid in his Fasti, Vendicat Ausonias
Junonis cura Kalendas,
Idibus alba Jovi grandior agna cadit.


Where Juno is the Moon, the Wife of Jupiter, and the Queen of Heaven, to whom
the Patronage of the Calends belonged, they being computed from her Renovation,
at least Anciently they were so, before the Intercalary Days were added to the
Roman Month, though Juno or (...) sometimes signifies more than this, it
signifies not only the Moon, but all the sublunary Region, or more particularly
the Atmosphere, which we Inhabit, which is the reason of the frequent quarrels
that happen in the Poets betwixt Jupiter and Juno, because Juno is the Region
of Clouds, and Storms, and Tempests, by which Jupiter, that is, the Liquid
Ether, in which the Atmosphere swims, is, as it were, ruffled and discomposed,
and by which the Sun is frequently darkened and obscured. And as Juno in this
place of Ovid is the Moon, so is Jupiter the Sun, to whose illumination the
Ides, that is, the Full Moon is owing, and therefore to him they then
Sacrificed a White Lamb, whose Whiteness was an Emblem of the Day of which the
Sun is Lord and Master, and for the same reason the Flamen Dialis, or Priest of
Jupiter was used to wear a White Hat; they are the words of Varro cited by
Agellius, who also confirms this observation of the White Sacrifices being
Offered to Jupiter. Is solus Agel. Noct. At. l. 10. c. 15.
(Flamen Dialis) album habet galerum; vel quod maximus est, vel quod Jovi
immolata hostia alba fieri oporteat. And what these Authors say of Jupiter,
that Macrobius affirms of Apollo, that he also was appeased and Worshipped with
White Sacrifices; where speaking of the first rise of the Ludi Apollinares
among the Romans, he says, Decemviris praeceptum est, ut Graeco Macrob
Sa^urnal. l. 1. c. 17.
ritu hisce hostiis sacrum sacerent, Apollini love aurato and capris duabus
albis auratis, Latonae bove femina aurata. and to all this we may add that of
Orpheus produced by Macrobius, (...).
And that of the Oracle of Clarius Apollo in the same Author, (...),
(...),
(...).
But when it is further said in that place of Homer, which Macrobius alleging
Cornificius for his Voucher in it applies to the Sun, (...).
That all the Gods followed him, by this, says Macrobius, Sidera
intelliguntur; quae cum eo ad occasus ortusque quotidiano impetu caeli
feruntur, eodemque aluntur humore. (...) enim dicunt sidera and stellas, (...),
id est; (...), quod semper incursu sint, (...). where to pass by his
Etymologies, which I matter not, having assigned, as I am verily persuaded, See
my discourse of the Tetragrammaton.
a much better my self, yet here is a plain confirmation of what I have so
lately asserted, that by the Gods in the place of Homer, the Aetherial
concretions of subtle matter, whether they be Stars, or other to us invisible
consistencies are to be understood, and so also in the place of Plato produced
by Macrobius out of the Timaeus, as nothing else but the Sun can possibly be
understood by (...) as has been already declared, so it is every whit as clear
that by (...) and (...), he means nothing but the Stars; his words are these,
(...). that is, Jupiter the great Captain of the Heavenly host, sitting in, and
driving himself his flying Chariot or Calesh, leads the Eternal Dance or March
of Heaven, ordering and disposing all things as seems best to himself, and
being followed by an Army or Host of Gods and Demons. where it is not only
most evident what Macrobius immediately subjoynes: His verbis magnum in caelo
ducem solemn vult sub appellatione Jovis intelligi, alato curru velocitatem
sideris monstrans. But it is every whit as undeniable that the Gods and Demons
that follow him, can be nothing but the Stars, and other subtle concretions of
Caelestial Bodies, and the expression is remarkable, and is another instance
how conversant Plato was in the Eastern Learning, (...), which is plainly the
Language of the Scripture it self, Genesis 2. 1. The Heavens and the Earth were
finished and all the Host of them. in the Hebrew, col Tsebaam. the Seventy,
(...). but it would be more exactly rendered in the Language of Plato (...), all
their Army; though (...) be here intended by the Seventy to signify the order
of an Army in their March, which is otherwise more properly, as well in March
as in Battalia called (...), and the Art of doing it is (...), and many other
places of Scripture there are that are too numerous to bear a repetition, and
too well known to need it, wherein the Sun Moon, and Stars are called the Host
of Heaven, but all that I take notice from it is that the Phrase of Plato is of
Eastern growth, and that this is a new confirmation that by (...) and (...) the
Stars are to be understood; but yet notwithstanding it is not without something
of impropriety that the (...) and (...) are here joined together by Plato, as
if they were the same thing, for as (...) in the Language of these Ancient
Writers did properly fignifie an Aetherial substance endued with life and
understanding, so (...) is an Aerial, whose place of abode is much inferior to
the other, being in the Air or Atmosphere, and parts nearer adjoining and
bordering to the Earth, and therefore Possidonius in Macrobius endeavors to
excuse it, by supposing that even the Demons have something of the Ether mixed
and incorporated into their Airy Vehicles, though not so pure, or of so fine a
consistence, or in so great a proportion; the words of Macrobius are, Nomen
autem Demonum cum Deorum appellatione conjungit; aut quia Dii sunt (...), id
est, scientes futuri, aut ut Possidonius scribit in libris quibus titulus est
(...) quia ex Aetheria substantia parta atque divisa qualitas illis est. And
then follow some very silly Etymologies which I think much to Transcribe; this
which has been already mentioned by Macrobius, (...), being certainly false,
though I perceive the Greeks are generally very fond of it, for want of
sufficient skill in their own Language. For (...) is qu. (...), from (...) or
(...) terra, as v. nos. supra p. 366. ut and in diatriba de Tetragrammato.
(...) is the same with (...), and (...) as much as (...), and (...), which is
otherwise called (...) from (...) terra, is as much as (...) signifying
properly the rent of Land, the Land being considered as the Principle and the
Rent as the Use accuring from it, and other instances there are which it is
needless to mention; to conclude this matter, the same sort of beings are
otherwise called (...), Heroes, from (...) which is the region of the Air to
which they are confined, and Hesiod describing them gives them expressly this
Character, that they are clothed with Airy Vehicles, and that at all times and
in all places, they are perpetually hovering about the Earth, (...).


And so also Apollonius describes the Nereides or Sea Nymphs, which are
conversant in and about the Water, as these (...) or (...) are about the Land,
as (...), like to or Clothed with Vehicles of Air, as being most suitable and
congenerous to the Region of the Atmosphere to which they are confined. (...)
Apollon. Argonau^. l. 4. v. 945, etc.
(...).

And these Demons or Nymphs whether by Land or Sea, were not supposed to wander
all about by perpetual long Journies and uncertain motions, but were fixed and
determined to a certain place, and were as certain inhabitants of it, as the
Men of any Town or City are known to be, and therefore the same Apollonius
calls them (...) the inhabiting Demons; where taking his leave of the Island
of Electra, which the Ib. l. 1. v. 919, etc.
Scholiast Interprets of Samothrace, and speaking of the Religious Mysteries
there in use, he says, -- -- (...).



And such Demons as these by the Latins, are sometimes called Penates, perhaps
from the Greek (...), (as Pampinus is thought to be from (...), and pubes from
(...)) and by the Greeks otherwise (...) and G. J. Voss. de permut. lit.
(...); and besides these there were also the (...) or (...), the underground
or subterraneous Demons, as the other with respect to the whole Earth, not
reguarding any particular place, to which they belonged were called (...), and
these as well as the other were Aerial Demons too, having Bodies or Vehicles
made of the subterraneous Vapor, or of the Element of Tartarus which was
supposed to be of an Aerial consistence, but withal Dark, Gloomy, and Stagnant,
never refined or rarefied by the presence of the Sun, or any other Heavenly
body, and this was the true notion of Tarratus, it was a Dark and Gloomy
Hemisphere on the other side of the Earth, of an (...) consistence, which is
the reason Homer expressly gives it the Epithet of (...), the im^^iration of
unfortunate and tormented (...), and of equal capacity and extent with this
enlightened Hemisphere which we Inhabit. This is plainly and undeniably the
sense of Homers words where he gives us a description of it, in (...). where
Jupiter severely threatening any of the Gods that without his consent or
privity should offer to assist or take part either with the Greeks or Trojans,
says, (...).



And that this is indeed the true meaning of Tartarus in the sense of the
Ancients, is not only plain from the words themselves, but is still further
vouched by the opinion of the Scholiast concerning them, which is expressed in
these following words, (...). that is, By this the Poet signifies that the
World is a Sphere, of which the Earth is the Center, and that the strait lines
drawn from it on both sides from the circumference are equal. And again, (...).
that is, As the Heaen or the upper Hemisphere is divided into Three parts or
regions, there is the regio of Air, extending to the Clouds, and that of
Ether to the Stars, and then the Starry Region it self, so it is also in the
subterraneous space, first there is the body of the Earth it self, and then
there is Hades, (which this Author makes to be as it were the Atmosphere to the
neither Surface of the Earth,) and all behind is Tartarus.

Moreover Macrobius having alleged that place of Homer concerning Jupiters
going to Supper in the Ocean, to prove that Jupiter and the Sun are the same,
which is also still further confirmed by what he says of the Assyrians that
they Worshipped the Sun, sub nomine Jovis calling him by the Name of (...), and
at the end of the same Chapter by a passage cited out of the Orphaick Verses,
wherein Jupiter, Bacchus, and the Sun are affirmed to be the same, and he is
also expressly affirmed to be the Father and maker of all things, (...)
(...)


Yet as has been shown already, he does not so obstinately stick to his sense
of the word (...), as to restrain it wholly within that compass, and to allow
it no other signification, for in that fragment which he produces out of some
Ancient Writer, whose name he has not acquainted us with, (...)



It is manifest that by (...) not the Sun it self, but the whole Ether is to
be understood, of which the Sun is here called the Eye, and in this sense it
was that the Sun is called the (...) or Shield of Jupiter, taking Jupiter for
the Ether, and this Aegis or Shield, was said to be made of the Skin of the
capra Amalthea, or Amalthean Goat, which was only a Symbolical or Aenigmatical
desCription of the Ether, which is, as I have said, the cause of all plenty
and fruitfulness in the Universe, for the Goat by reason of its Milk, and of
the delicacy and nutritive Nature of its Flesh, and of the usefulness of its
Skin and Hair for Clothing, was a very proper Emblem of Plenty, and the
Addition of Amalthea to it makes it more, for Male in Hebrew signifies plenum
esse, and millah or millath is plenitudo, and from thence there is no Question
but the word Amalthea is derived, and the true meaning of the (...) or copiae
cornu, after all the Fabulous representations of the Greeks and Latins
concerning it, is nothing else but a ray of the Sun, which rays diffuse Plenty
and Fruitfulness wheresoever they come, for Keren in Hebrew signifies an Horn,
and perhaps it might also signify, though we have no such signification now
extent in our Bibles, a ray of the Sun, for Karan derived from it, signifies
lucere, and thence the Greeks used (...) for the same thing, though this
signification was afterward lost in a Fable, and they were ignorant, as of the
Original of many other things which they borrowed from the East, so also of
this; but to make it still more evident that by the capra Amalthea, the Ether
is to be understood, and consequently that by that Shield which was made of her
Skin we are to understand the Sun, I will here produce a fragment of the
Orphaick Verses cited by Saturn. l. 1. c. 18.
Macrobius, where he speaks as that Author words it, De ornatu vestituque solis
in sacris Liberalibus, which will put the matter out of Question, for there
among other Ornaments of the Sun, he assigns him as a Garment, the Skin of a
spotted Deer, which for all the reasons above mentioned, may be as proper an
Emblem of Plenty as the other, and over and above by reason of the nimbleness
and agility of both these Animals, the restless Activity and Swiftness of the
subtle matter of the Heavens might be signified, the words of the real or
pretended Orpheus are, (...).



That is, that the Sun was first to be Clothed with a Vail of a Purple, or
Azure or Flame color, like to his bright and splendid rays and over that to
wear the broad and motley Skin of an Hind or Deer full of Spots on the Right
Shoulder, which he tells us in the very next words was, (...)


An Imitation or Emblem of the Stars and the Heavens.

This Shield of his, Jupiter is afterward said to have given to Minerva, upon
which she clapped the Head of Medusa, otherwise called the Gorgon's Head, which
whoever beheld was immediately petrifi'd or converted into Stone, and this
Shield of Jupiter or Minerva thus ordered and circumstanced according to this
latter description, is thus represented and set forth by Virgil in the Eighth
of his Aeneids,

Aegidaque horrificam turbatae Palladis arma,
Certatim squamis serpentum auroque polibant,
Connexosque angues, ipsumque in pectore Divae
Gorgona, desecto vertentem lumina collo.
The meaning of all which, which is without controversy to be Interpreted in a
Physiological way, is this, Minerva is the same with Jupiter, as that word is
sometimes taken, that is, the same with the Ether or subtle matter of the
Heavens, and in this I perceive all the expositors are generally agreed, though
I owe not mine own opinion to any of them, which is the greater Argument of its
truth, when I concur so exactly with them without consulting any of them before
hand. But yet I wonder how it came to pass, that the Learned writer of the
intellectual System, who seems to be extravagantly fond at every turn of a
Trinity, notwithstanding, as I have proved elsewhere, he has made it his
business to undermine and overthrow it, should in Minerva smell a Second
Hypostasis, and out of her in conjunction with Jupiter and Juno, should be able
to make out so plainly and so fully that the Romans had a Trinity, though he
has none. The First Intell. System. p. 451.
of these Divine Hypostases called Jove, being the fountain of the Godhead, and
the Second of them called by the Latins, Minerva (which as Varro Interprets,
was that wherein Ideae and exempla rerum, the Ideas and first exemplars or
patterns of things were contained) fitly expressing the Divine Logos, and the
Third Juno, called amor ac delicium Jovis, well enough Answering, as De Theol.
Gent. l. 8. c. 12.
Vossius thinks, to the Divine Spirit.

For if Jupiter and Minerva are both of them exactly the same, then they cannot
make Two several and distinct Hypostases in the pretended Trinity of Pagan
Rome, a thing so utterly fantastic, and depending upon no Ground or Color, or
so much as shadow of reason, that this alone might be enough to blast the
Reputation of any less Celebrated Author, but aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus,
it is the privilege of great Men to dote when they please.

It is true indeed St. Austin makes a manifest distinction betwixt Jupiter and
Minerva, representing Minerva as the uppermost, and Jupiter as the inferior and
lower St. Aug. de Civ. D. l. 4. c. 10.
part of the Ether, in these words, Si Aetheris partem superiorem Minerva
tenere dicitur and hac occasion fingere poetas, quod de Jovis capite nata sit,
cur non ergo ipsa potius deorum Regina deputatur, quod sit Jove superior? but I
shall prove by and by, that in this notion St. Austin and those from whom he
had it were palpably mistaken, however if it be admitted for true, and if we
suppose also, what has been already proved, and what Cicero and St. Austin v.
Loc. Augustini and Ciceronis cit. Intel Syst. p. 493.
do also expressly affirm, that by Juno the Air or Atmosphere is to be
understood, from hence there results a Trinity not of Divine persons, but a
Manichean composition of intergral parts, which I hope, the Doctor upon second
thoughts, will not maintain to be good Christian Doctrine, and I am sure the
Romans never drea^^ of Ib. p. 151.
any such thing But when he is pleased to tell us out of Varro, that Minerva
was that wherein Ideae and exempla rerum, The Ideas and first exemplars and
patterns of things were contained. This agrees exactly well with that notion of
Minerva which I pretend to establish; and that is, that by Minerva nothing else
is meant, but the subtle matter in general, which I have already she (...) to
be sometimes the meaning of Jupiter in Mythological Writers, and in which the
first Ideas and patterns of things may very reasonably seem to have been drawn,
as I See my Epist Ded, before the Discourse of the Messiah; (...) 144, 145, 146.
have elsewhere more largely represented, and am very glad after having
formerly alleged the Authority of Seneca, to find also so great a Man as
Varro, who was thought by Cicero, a very good Judge to deserve the Name of
Doct^^simus Romanorum, so favorable and propitious to my opinion.

But this will be further made out by considering first the Epithet which is in
Homer given to Minerva, of (...) and secondly, the Name by which the Greeks are
used to call her, (...). For the First, (...) is as much as caesios, or
caeruleos oculos habens, which refers to the A^ure color of the S^y, or Ether
which will be still more clear, by reflecting upon some other Epithets, which
are bestowed upon other personated parts of the Universe by Homer, and which
are all to be Interpreted in a Physiological way, as (...) or Juno, that is,
the Air or Atmosphaerical Region, is by the same Poet called (...), white
Elbow'd, or white Armed, not only because this is in it self a beauty, and
therefore is in general ascribed to any fair and Beautiful Woman, but also
because the appearance of the Air in a fair and serene Day is white, and if we
compare the whole Universe, as Homer does in these Epithets to an Organized
body, Minerva is the Eye, as being the uppermost, and the seat and Region of
the Stars, and Juno is the Hand or Arm, being seated betwixt the Head and the
Foot, and Thetis or the Sea, being lowermost, is the Foot, from whence she has
the Epithet in Homer of (...), or Silver footed, and the Earth in Hesiod is
called (...) or broad Breasted, not so much by reason of its Situation in the
Universe, considered as Organical, as for another Physiological reason, because
the Earth is the Dea Multimammia of Antiquity, she that gives Food and
nourishment to all things, and who^e Breasts are, as it were sucked, by all the
Animal World.

Further, Juno is not only called in Homer, (...), but also (...) and (...),
for with (...) I do not meddle, that not being to be expounded to any
Physiological meaning, but being only the general Epithet of a grave and
venerable Matron. The First of these Two Epithets is given her, not only
because in general, large Eyes were, as they are still, accounted a Beauty in
Greece, which is the use of (...), in composition to signify largeness and
excess, as in (...), and (...), but also because the Sun and Moon in their
rising and setting by the refraction of the Atmosphere appear usually larger
than at other times, or if this will not pass, as I am not very much concerned
whether it do or no, yet (...) does certainly refer to the setting Sun, when
the Sky by refraction usually appears redder than at other times, and for the
same reason because of the more than usual redness of the Suns appearance at
his rising, the Morning in Homer, that is that part of the Atmosphere which
borders nearest upon the rising Sun, is called (...) rosy Fingered, for if the
Atmosphere, as has been shown, be compared to the Arm of the Universe
considered as Organical, then the Horizon is the Finger of that Arm. Now that
(...), sitting or lying upon a Golden Couch or Seat, is the Physiological
Epithet of the Atmosphere next adjoining to the setting Sun, will appear from
the place of Homer where it is used, at the end of his first Iliad, (...).



And for the same reason the Morning season in Latin is called Aurora, qu.
aurea Hora, according to the common Etymon, which when I compare it with this
Epithet of (...) given to Juno in Homer, I believe to be the true one, from the
more than ordinary brightness and refulgency of the Atmosphere at that time.
From this place of Homer there are also two other things to be observed, First,
That by (...) is manifestly understood the Sun, to whom he gives the Epithets
of (...) and (...). (...).


And so it is also no less clearly to be understood in another place already
cited, though that reflection were not made upon it. (...)


For that (...), cannot refer to the Ether which is every where present, in
which sense it was that Aratus said, -- (...) --



It must therefore refer to the Sun, who is the great and distant inhabitant of
the Ether and who was Worshipped by antiquity under a Thousand names as the
Supreme Numen.

Secondly, From this place of Homer we may observe one of those reasons, for
which Antiquity made Juno or the Atmosphere to be the Wife of Jupiter or the
Sun, because she lies by him every Night, as Juno in this place of Homer is
represented to do, -- (...).


But there is also another reason of this Fiction among the Ancients, and that
is, that the Region within the Atmosphere is the Region and Seat of Generation,
in which because the Suns influence has so great and principal a share, and
the Atmosphere is so necessary, as well to the production, as sustentation and
maintenance of those Animals, that are to be met with in it, therefore Jupiter
is said to be the Husband of Juno, who accordingly sets out every Morning,
fresh and lusty as a Bridegroom, and rejoices as a Giant to run his course.

And as these are the Physiological Epithets of the several parts of the
Universe considered asunder, so all of them considered together at one view,
are called sometimes Pan, at others Proteus, Thetis, and Jupiter. Pan is the
Universal nature considered together, as it were, in a lump, without
distinction of parts. Proteus is the same nature differently modified, and
putting on several shapes in several parts and Species of the Universe; so
Homer says of him Odyss. (...). in these words, (...).



And the same things are affirmed of him by Virgil, Ovid, Horace, and Silius
Italicus, whose Testimonies it is needless to insert, all which is very wisely
and skilfully accommodated by Orpheus in his Hymns to the Universal nature,
putting on, as I have said, several shapes and colors, and appearances in
several parts and Species of the World; his words are as follows, (...).



The same is also the true Interpretation of Thetis, how that she might avoid
the Marriage of Peleus, ( And in another place the same Apollodorus she is said
to have done the same to avoid the congression of Jupiter himself, his words
are, l. 1. c. 3. (...).
) disdaining as it seems, to submit to any mortal Embraces, is said to have
concealed her self under several shapes, as of Fire and Water, and different
sorts of Animals, they are the words of Apollodorus, l. 3. c. 12. (...). that
is, There are some say that Thetis being (...) H(...) unde^^ Juno. the Air^
being in (...) tion superior to the Wa^er, by which the Communication of
Jupiter or the pure Ether was intercepted. -- v. Natal. Com. Mythol. l. 8. c.
2.
bred up by Juno, would by no means (...) persuaded to the enjoyment of
Jupiter, at which Jupiter being very angry was resolved to Marry her to a
Mortal, wherefore Pe^eus being instructed by Chiron how to catch her, and
wacthing her narrowly through all her shapes, at length apprehends her, for she
was sometimes hid in the appearance of Fire, sometimes in that of Water, and at
others in that of some Animal or other, but Peleus never left her till she
returned to her own proper shape again, which was that of a fair Nymph or
Goddess of the Sea. This is the sense of what Apulejus says concerning the
Goddess Isis, whom he represents, though Macrobius somewhere Interprets it only
of the Earth, as another Name or Emblem of the Universal Nature. Cujus Numen
unicum, multiformi Apul. M^tam. l. 12.
specie, ritu vario, nomine multijugo ^otus veneratur orbis, whose single (but
Universal and Omnipresent Deity) is worshipped by the whole World, in several
shapes and species, by several Names, and after several manners. Lastly, the
Universal Nature is sometimes represented, as changing it self into all shapes
and appearances under the Name and Person of (...) or Jupiter; as in these
passages of Aeschylus in the Grotian excerpta. (...).



And again, -- (...).



But yet it is in different senses that the Universal Nature is represented by
the Ancients under these Three Names of Proteus, Thetis, and Jupiter. It is
called Proteus, from (...), as being the First cause of all things, for which
reason it was that Orpheus in the Verses above cited, alluding to his Name
gives (...), the Epithet of (...), that is, in the sense of that Ancient Poet,
not first Begotten, but first Existing and in this sense he is said to put on
several shapes, as displaying himself in several effects of his Wisdom, Power,
and Goodness, and as many such effects as there are, more numberless than the
Stars of Heaven, or the Sands of the Sea shore, which all of them put together
make but a small and inconsiderable parcel of this immense diversity, so many
are the shapes, colors, appearances and forms of this Mythological Proteus.

Again, When the Catholic or Universal Nature is shadowed out under the Name
of Thetis, who is represented as putting on so many several shapes and appear
ances, Thetis in this case does not signify as in the other of Proteus, the
efficient cause or the causa per quam, but the causa ex qua or the causa
materialis, the Universal Mass out of which this vast diversity of Innumerable
Kinds and Species was formed, for Thetis is the Feminine of the Egyptian or
Alexandrian (...) or (...) or as Eusebius frequently expresses it, (...), all
which are from the Hebrew Tohu, a word by which in the Mosaic account of the
Creation and Origin of things, the chaos or Universal Mass is denoted, which
(...), as I have said ( Discourse of Tetragram.
) elsewhere, is nothing else but choshek, or darkness because it is said in
that state of things that there was choshek hal phnei Tehom, darkness upon the
face of the Abyss. And therefore in a fragment of Aristophanes preserved by
Lucian and by Suidas, (...) and (...) and (...) are made in a manner Synonymous
to one another, (...).

And a little after he gives (...) the Epithet of (...), where speaking of
Love, he says, (...),

(...).

For as chaos is from choshek, signifying darkness, so does hereb signify that
confusion and blindness which is occasioned by it, and (...), as it seems to
me, is from nous, fugit, because all things then vanish and disappear. But at
other times the Greeks not understanding the true meaning and original of these
words, and having by length of time, and by Poetical sophistications corrupted
the Tradition, which was, as it is represented in the writings of Moses, that
there was once a time when this beautiful Fabric and Structure of the Universe
was a ruinous and confused heap, overwhelmed with darkness and inanimate
silence, they made these several words which signify the same thing, to be as
it were persons descending from each other, as Hesiod tells us that Chaos begat
Erebus and (...) and that (...) and Erebus in conjunction together, begat
between them the Ether and the Day, which is nothing else but a plain
Interpolation of the sacred Story, which makes the Night always as being prior
to it in order of time, to preceed the Day, and makes the Day or the Light to
have resulted, from the separation of the subtle parts of the Chaos from the
more gross and heavy; the words of Hesiod in his Theogonie are, (...).

And such another place as this is that of L. 3. de N. D.
Cicero, where after other discourse the connection of which it is needless here
to reguard, speaking of Saturn, he says, Qui si est Deus, patrem quoque ejus
Caelum esse Deum confitendum est. Quod si ita est, Caeli quoque parents Dii
habendi sunt, Ether and Dies, eorumque fratres and sorores: qui a Genealogis
antiquis sic nominantur, Anor, Dolus, Metus, Labor, Invidentia, Fatum,
Senectus, Mors, Tenebrae, Miseria, Querela, Gratia, Fraus, Pertinacia, Parcae,
Hesperides, Somnia: quos omnes Erebo and Nocte natos ferunt. The true meaning
of which, to put this Mythological and Mystical way of talking into a plainer
dress, is this, that night and darkness as the Mosaic account does
sufficiently assure us, was Superior or antecedent to light or day that out of
the Dark and Gloomy Chaos, the more subtle and volatile particles being
separated, the Ether or the Day began to appear, and that the Brothers and
Sisters, that is, the Companions, the Objects, the perpetual entertainment of
both Day and Night are all these passions and accidents of Life, Amor Dolus,
Metus, Labor, etc. or in the language of Juvenal, Quicquid agunt homines,
votum, timor, ira, voluptas,

Gundia, discursus.



Further that by Thetis we are to understand the Universal and primigenial
Mass, and that it is no other than the Egyptian Thoth or the Tohu, will be
still more clear by reflecting upon Tethys, which differs only by a Metathesis
from the other, or rather by the change of of an aspirate for a lene in both
places, than which there is no sort of permutation more familiar or more easy,
and that Tethys is the same with Toth or Thoth or Tohu, I prove very plainly
from this, that at sometimes in Ancient Writers it is taken for the Earth in
opposition to the Sea, as in that of Homer, (...). Hom. Il. (...). 201, 302.



And so also in these places of Hesiod in his Theogonie, (...), Hesiod. Theog.
p. 258. de Heins.
(...) --



And again, (...) ib. p. 262,
(...) --



And so also the old Scholiast upon the place of Homer expounds it, (...).
Homer calls the Earth Tethys as being the Tithene, that is, the Nurse and
Fostermother of all things, that are born or bred upon it, or out of it. Which
place of the Scholiast is Transcribed by Suidas, and the Etymologist says thus,
(...).
which is the same thing.

And sometimes again it is taken no less plainly for the Sea in distinction
from the Earth, as in that of Suidas, (...), for which he produces this
fragment of some Ancient Greek Poet, or Epigrammatist, where it can be taken
for nothing else, (...) Videtur hoc quicquid est fragmenti decerptum ex veteri
quodam Epigrammate (...)
(...).

So it is also expounded by the Etymologist, though the place is corrupt, and I
will take this occasion to mend it, (...) where it is manifest that after
(...), we must insert, (...), otherwise from what went before, that (...) was
as much as (...), it is a false inference, (...), etc. that is, For Water
nourishes and feeds all things, or else Tethys is taken for the Water,
because she is the Mistress or Goddess of the moist or Watery substance, by
which all things are nourished.

Lastly, In this sense likewise Lucian p. 1050. edit, ut supra
plainly takes it in his Tragopodagra, where he also alludes to the Etymon of
Tithene, which seems to have been very generally received among the Greeks,
(...).

In the Latin Poets it is evermore taken in this latter sense, without any one
exception that I know of, unless it be these Two places of Ovid, both of them
to be met with in the Fifth of his Fasti, Duxerat Oceanus quondam Titanida
Tethyn.

Qui terram liquidis, qua patet, ambit aquis.

And again a little after, Pars Bacchum nutrisse putant: pars credidit esse

Tethyos has neptes Oceanique senis.

In both of which places Tethys is the Earth, as in the places of Homer and
Hesiod above produced. But otherwise it is universally taken for the Sea or the
Watery substance, as in that of Virgil, Georg. 1. Teque sibi generum Tethys
emat omnibus undis.

And Lucan, l. 1. Tethyos unda vagae.
And l. 6. Aut vaga cum Tethys, Rutupinaque littora fervent.

And Silius Italicus. l. 3. -- Luna immissis percaerula bigis, Fertque
refertque fretum, sequiturque reciproca Tethys.



Now the true reason why Tethys in these Ancient Writers is taken sometimes for
the Earth, and at others for the Sea, is because the Hebrew Tohu, or the
Egyptian Thoth from whence it was derived, did signify both of these
together, the Primigenial Mass being described by Moses as overflown with
Water, and as consisting of a poachy mixture of Earth and Water together, and
any otherwise than this it is almost impossible to conceive, how the same word,
in the usage and custom of the same Language, should come to fignifie Two
things of a Nature so different from each other, as Earth and Water.

From whence it was that the Ancient Greeks were used to ascribe the Original
of all their Gods, that is, all whether Aetherial or Aerial animated
concretions sometimes, to the chaos, or cohshek, that is, the universal Mass,
where the Aerial, Aetherial, Terrestrial and Aqueous parts were all of them
jumbled in confusion together, and wrapped up in horrid silence and darkness,
they not only affirming that Chaos was the First and Ancientest of all the
Gods, as he must needs be, if he were the Source and Fountain of them all,
according to that known Fragment of Epicharmus, (...).



But expressly asserting that all the Gods were derived from thence, so Orpheus
speaks in his Hymn of the Night, (...)



Where (...) is manifestly the same with (...), and confirms what I have
already said more than once, that (...) and choshek are the same, and there is
no other possible Etymology that I can think of, of this word, unless it be
from (...), as much as (...) or (...), or from (...), as if it were as much as
(...), which are both of them defective, the first in Analogy, though not in
Propriety of signification, but the latter in both of these respects, and that
the (...) of Orpheus is exactly the same with what other Authors call the
(...), may be proved by comparing this Orphaick fragment, with another of
Aristophanes, part of which has been already produced, where having first said
that (...) or Love in conjunction with Chaos, produced the race of Mankind and
first brought it to light, he then goes on to say further, that there were no
Gods neither, that is, no Aetherial or Aerial Animated and intelligent
concretions, till the same Love, by which we are to understand, though
Aristophanes himself does not seem to have done it, the Supreme Numen, or
Universal Mind endued with infinite goodness as well as power, produced and
begat them out of the same Chaos, (...).

(...),

(...).



And whereas, I have said above that Aristophanes makes all these words, (...)
and (...) and (...) to be in a manner Synonymous to one another, it is as much
as the thing will bear, or rather I find my self obliged to retract that
opinion, because in the words immediately following he makes (...) or Love,
though very absurdly, being as it is, a principle of understanding and
goodness, to have been the offspring of (...) and Erebus, and that by this the
separation of the Heterogeneous parts of the Universe was made, which turns
exactly to the same account, with what has been above produced out of Hesiod
and Tully, which shows plainly, notwithstanding that the Ancient Greeks were
beholden for all these things to the East, their very (...) or Love, being
nothing else but a Translation of the Hebrew Rouach with its Epithet
Merachepheth in the Writings of Moses, as well as their Chaos, their Erebus,
and their Nox, have been all of them shown to be owing to the same fountain;
yet that they did not understand their own Traditions, and were ignorant from
whence they had them.

Furthermore, Ovid likewise as well as Epicharmus affirms Chaos to have been
the Ancientest and First of all the Gods, where speaking of Janus, whom in the
foregoing Treatise, I have shown to be the same with Time, which is measured by
certain shanoth or reiterated and repeated Periods of duration, Janus thus
speaks concerning himself, Fast. l. 1.
Me Chaos Antiqui (nam sum res prisca) vocabant
Accipe quam longi temporis acta canam.


And if he be the Ancientest of all the Gods, as time is coextended to Eternity
it self, then it follows plainly according to the sense of the Ancients, who
confounded time, and the Chaos, whose duration was measured by it, together,
that all other things whether Gods or Men, or of what other sort or kind
soever, must have a dependence upon him as their first cause and principle of
existence, so that it is no wonder to hear the same Ovid soon after ascribing
omnipotence to his Chaos or Janus, for this is one sense of his words, Quicquid
ubique vides, caelum, mare, nubila, terras,
Omnia sunt nostra clausa patentque manu.


And again a little after that, Praesideo foribus caeli cum mitibus horis Et
redit officio Jupiter itque meo.



Though I confess there is also another sense of these words; in the former
distich, that, time is the measure of all things as to their duration, and in
what sense they may be said to be shut and opened by him shall be hereafter
explained. In the Second, that time is measured and distinguished by certain
seasons silently and insensibly gliding away, Praesideo foribus caeli cum
mitibus horis


And that Jupiter or the Sun by whom these seasons are distinguished, is the
Minister, and is, as it were, sent every day and hour upon the errant of time,
Et redit officio Jupiter itque meo.


Which is another confirmation of what has been already sufficiently proved,
that Jupiter among the Latins, as well as (...) among the Greeks, was
frequently taken for the body of the Sun.

To conclude this discourse concerning some of the Ancients making Chaos to
have been the first source and Origin of all things; notwithstanding the great
similitude or rather sameness of sound, between the Hebrew Hereb and the Greek
Erebus, yet when we consider that (...) in these Authors signified the most
perfect, the most black, and pitchy Darkness, whence it had the Epithet of
(...) assigned by them as (...) is for the same reason called (...) or black,
whereas Hereb signifies rather the Twilight or crepusculum than the Night,
which is most properly in Hebrew called Lajelah; this might be enough to shake
the solidity of this Etymon, not withstandit has been so generally received by
Learned Men, especially when we consider that when the Passover is commanded to
be Killed ben haharbaim between the Two Evenings, one of those Evenings begins
immediately after Twelve a Clock, upon the first declension of the Sun toward
the Horizon, and the other at Six in the Afternoon, which, at sometimes of the
Year especially, is sufficiently light; were it not in behalf of this Etymon to
be considered, First, That though Hereb do sometimes signify the first
declension of the Sun, and the first approach of that which we are used to call
the Evening, yet that sometimes Hereb was taken for the whole Night, appears by
the general division of the whole (...) in Genesis into Hereb and Boker, the
Evening and the Morning, which are said to have been the First, the Second and
the Third Day, and so on, by which it is manifest, that as by Boker or Morning
in this division of the Day, we are to understand all the time of the Suns
continuance above the Horizon, so by the Hereb or Evening, the whole time of
his continuance under it, is to be understood; and this appears further by the
Name of Horeb derived from it, by which word the Hebrews are used to signify a
Crow from its blackness, and from hence perhaps is the Latin orbus, and orbo,
and orbitas, because persons in this circumstance and condition were used to
put on Mourning or Black, though the Romans did not attend to any such
Etymology.

But admitting that Hereb does indeed signify not the pich Darkness, but the
doubtful crepusculum, or the glimmering Twilight, yet this will well enough
comport with the true and genuin notion of Erebus, though the Greeks and Latins
did not understand it, for in the Chaos the Aetherial and Volatile and the more
gross and heavy parts lay mixed and jumbled in great confusion and disorder
together, which Volatile parts neither were, nor could be so wholly separated
and disjoined from each other, but that getting sometimes together, as it
happened, by rash and uncertain motions, and in uncertain quantities and
proportions, they did all on their parts, which was requisite to produce that,
which we call a Twilight, had there been then any Animal in being, or any Eye
rightly Organized and prepared to discern it, or to be duly moved and affected
by it, but it was such a Twilight as by the uncertain motion of the other fluid
matter of a more gross and faeculent consistence, would ever and anon be
extinguished and oppressed, and by as uncertain causes revive and blaze out again,
like a Candle just upon the point of going out in the Socket, which is in a
manner extinguished, and then of a sudden recruits, and shines out again with a
fresh and Struggling Light, according as the Tallow ascending too powerfully
into the Wick, is too hard for the Aetherial matter, or as that Aetherial
matter very nigh extinguished and expelled, returns with new force, and by
attenuating and rarifying that Flood of moisture, turns it into nourishment and
fuel for the Flame, instead of destroying and oppressing it, as before --

At other times those Ancient Writers assigned the Original of all things, as
well Gods, as Men, and all other Animated concretions and substances whatever,
not to the Chaos at large, but to the Moist and Watery part of it, as the
Scripture makes the first separation of the disordered and confused parts of
the Mass, and the first vital impressions communicated to the matter, to have
happened from the Spirit v. Intell. Syst. p. 123, 124.
of Gods moving upon the face of the Waters, whence Thales, and after him
Anaxagoras derived their opinion, who affirmed the first principle of all
things to have been Water, Animated and Enlivened by a Mind or Soul, running
through and coextended to it, and to this we must refer that Verse of Homer,
which has been already produced, (...).
Upon which place the Scholiast makes this observation, that by (...), we must
understand (...), the Father of the Gods. (...). because some Physiologers have
represented Water as the First Element, from which the other Three were
derived, whence Pindar said, (...), that Water was the best, as being the First
of all things. This was the true reason why Venus, who is by the Greeks upon
that account called (...) was supposed to be born of the Spume of the Sea, for
by Venus nothing else was meant but the prolifick Life and Power of the
Universe, which by these Ancient Physiologers was supposed to arise out of the
Watery substance or the Fluid matter, which they looked upon to be the first
source and principle of Generation and Vegetation in the World, and so also
Priapus whose excessive great Pudendum was but an Emblem of the plastic
Virtue, or Generative power of Nature, was not only worshipped in Fields and
Gardens, (whence I have conjectured his Etymology to be pri ab, the Father of
Fruits, as all the productions of Nature may in some sense be called, which I
take to be much more Natural than those Etymologies which the Scholiast upon
Theocritus has presented us withal, (...). both which are manifestly very
frigid and farfecht Interpretations) but also in Ports and by the Sea side,
whence by the Greek Epigrammatists he had the Epithets given him, of (...), and
(...), and v. Dempster in Rosin. l. 2. c. 20. ut and Voss. de Idolol. l. 2. c.
7. Not. Com. l. 5. c. 20. p. 521. fuit Portus Priapi nomine prope Dardaniam,
and urbs ad mare sita, quibus in locis eximie Priapus celebratur.
(...), and (...), and the like, examples of which have been collected out of
the Anthology by Dempster upon Rosinus, which was but another Hieroglyphick
adumbration of this Ancient Tradition, that all things did at first arise and
spring from the Water.

Further yet, Venus, who at some times was said to be born out of the Water,
and for that reason was called (...), was at others affirmed to have been born
at Cyprus, and from thence had the Epithet of (...), as Jupiter was fabled to
be born at Crete, and Apollo at Delos, all Three of them Islands encompassed
by, and as it were, rising out of the Water, which was but another Emblematical
representation of the same thing that Venus or the prolifick Nature, was born
of the Moist and Watery Substance, or that all things sprang from thence, and
that Apollo and Jupiter, by both of which the Sun is understood, or the
Aetherial matter of the Heavens, were made what they are, by the separation of
those subtle particles, of which they consist, from the Moist and Watery
Substance of the Abyss or Chaos, which was overwhelmed with Waters; and for the
same reason Priapus whom I have affirmed to be another Emblem of the Prolifick
power of Nature, (and thence it was that an Ass was used to be Sacrificed to
him, as being furnished with Genitals of a more than ordinary size), was said
to have been born at Lampsacus or Lampsacum on the bank of the Hellespont, and
by the Waters side, but for Priapus being the Son of Bacchus and Venus which is
another thing that Not. Com. ubi supra. Alii Priapum, Bachi and Veneris filium
fuisse crediderunt, quia vinum propter calorem excitet libidinem. --
is Fabled concerning him, nothing else is meant by it, but that Concupisence
is provoked by Wine.

This notion seems somewhat to be favored by Macrobius, though the sense of
his words be not altogether the same, where speaking of Apollo and Diana, who
were both of them by the Poets feigned to be born at Delos, he says, propterea
in insula Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 17.
dicuntur nati, quod ex mari nobis oriri videntur, that is, Apollo and Diana,
or the Sun and Moon, are therefore said to have been born in an Island, because
they seem, to sense, to rise out of the Sea, but as for what follows, though it
be ingenious, Macrob. ubi supra.
yet I cannot altogether acquiesce in it, Haec insula ideo Delos vocatur, quia
ortus and quasi partus luminum omnia facit (...), id est, aperta, clarescere;
much less can Lloyd. Lex. Georg. and Poet. p. 354. 2. in voce.
I satisfy my self with the reason given by others, that Delos was, Sic dicta
(...), quod cum anta mari tecta esset, Latonae locum ad pariendum quaerenti,
repent se ostenderit, nor with Bochartus his account neither, who would have
it be from the Syriack, Dachal, Timor, for this far fetched reason because there
is a Poet that tells us, though that Poet himself or at least the person whom
he represents were mightily mistaken, that Primus in orb Deos fecit timor. --


But the true meaning of Delos is this, Delos is truly and properly the Sun it
self, for this is properly the signification of (...) and (...) in Greek, it is
titio, torris, lampas, to which sort of things the Sun and Moon, by reason of
their bright and shining Nature, were Anciently compared, and like to this it
is, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the first of Genesis are called Meoroth,
Luminaria, or Lucernae, Lights or Lamps, as the same word is plainly used Exodus
25. 6. and c. 35. 8. they being compared metaphorically to Candles or Lamps,
because of their shining and enlightening Nature, and from hence it was that the
Vrim which seems to have been nothing else but a certain light shining and
displaying it self upon certain emergent occasions on the Brestplate of the
High Priest, is by the Seventy rendered by (...), as much as to say, Luminaria,
Number. 27. 21. and 1 Samuel 28. 6. which thing being seriously considered and
reflected upon, will confirm what I have said concerning Vulcan, that his true
Etymology is as much as El Kanna or Deus Zelotypus, because of the Metaphorical
likeness and resemblance betwixt Fire and Jealousy or Indignation, for so it
is also in Greek, (...) and (...) or (...) are the same, as what the common
Greek calls (...), that in the Aeolian dialect is (...), and the common (...)
is the Aeolique (...), and Priscian v. Voss. de permut. lit. sub litera Z.
says that Mezentius was by the Ancient Latins called Medentius, and the same
may be seen likewise in the formation of tenses out of one into another, as
from (...) is (...), and (...), from whence are the Nouns (...), and (...), and
(...), and from (...) is (...) and the Latin Odor, and Lastly that the Zeta
does manifestly and undenyably contain in it the potestas of Delta or d, which
makes them the more easily convertible into each other, may be seen in all
those permutations in the several dialects, wherein, besides what has been
already represented, it is sometimes changed into dd, sometimes into ds, and at
others into sd, instances of which as they are obvious to all that have been
conversant in the Greek Poets, so there are many of them collected ready at
hand by Vossius in his little but excellent Tract De Permutatione Literarum.

To this purpose it is, that not only in Scripture, but even in Profane Greek
Authors Jealousy and Fire are compared together, and Plato gives (...) the
Epithet Plat. in Leg.
of (...), Jealousy or Indignation burning like Fire, or that breaths and
belches it out, and Plutarch has such an expression Plut. in Antonio.
as (...), for the vehement, or excandescent state of a Glowing Fire.

This notion that Delos is nothing else in its first and most proper
signification but a name of the Sun, though afterward it came also to signify
the Island where he N. C. Mythol. l. 5. c. 20. p. 521.
was worshipped, as Natalis Comes observes a Port and a City to have been
called Priapus, because Priapus was worshipped in them, will be still more
clear by considering two things: First, That Delos was Anciently and
Primitively represented as a Floating Island, which is plainly the case of the
Sun and Moon, which to sight are as two Floating Islands or Homogeneous, Tracts
and Continents of Light and Fire, swimming as it were in the Ocean of the
Ether; and whereas, after the Birth of Apollo and Diana, the Island of Delos,
the Terrestrial one, I mean, in the Aegean Sea, is said to have rested, whereas
before it floated to and fro: This may possibly have depended either, First,
upon a corruption of the Ancient Tradition; for in the beginning of Things, the
whole Mass of Earth may be said to have been as it were one Floating Island,
swimming in the Waters, and scarce emerging out of them, which when the Sun and
Moon and other Stars were created, that is, when the Aetherial Parts were
separated from the more Gross and Heavy, and when the Watery were derived into
their proper Cavities, Receptacles and Channels, and the Moisture of the Earth
began to be dried up by the warmth and influence of the Sun, did now begin to
cease floating and poaching any longer, and was, as we call it, terrafirma,
firm and useful Land, and considering the Sun as the Supreme Numen, as the most
Ancient Idolaters unquestionably did, the whole Earth is his Delos, or his
Temple where he is Worshipped, an Island standing in the fluid Ether, to
outward sense and vulgar opinion immovable, though in reality, if we give
credit to the best Astronomers, still floating as before, though not by such
slippery and uncertain motions; Or else it happened thus: (...), as I have
said, was an ancient Name of the Sun, being no other, as I conceive, than a
Greek corruption of the Hebrew El, from whence is the Greek (...), and thence
every thing that was either Fire or Light, or had a Metaphorical Resemblance to
them, was called by the Names of (...) and (...) and (...), but this Name in
process of Time being lost among the Greeks, only remaining still in the Name
of this Island, which had been given it from the Worship of Delus or the Sun,
it so happened by the mistake and ignorance of the Greeks, that what was
attributed in the Cabbalistical and Arcane Language of Antiquity to their Delus
or the Sun, viz, that he was as a

A second Consideration, by which this notion of the word (...), that it
Anciently, or at least in a Cabalistical and Hieroglyphic way, signified the
Sun, may be confirmed, is this, That in those Sacra or Ceremonies or Religious
Rites which were instituted in honor of Minerva, Vulcan, and Prometheus, there
were among other things, the (...) or the (...), that is, Religious Votaries,
running with Flambeaus or Torches in their Hands. So Natalis Comes observes out
of Pausanias N. C. Mythol. l. 4. c. 6. p. 314, 315.
concerning Prometheus, Scriptum est a Pausa^^ia in Atticis non solum aram illi
(Promethei) fuisse erectam in Academia, sed etiam Lampadipherorum cursus
certamen inde incepisse, qui in urbem accensas faces decurrentes deferebant, in
quo certamine studebant ut accensae faces servarentur, nam cujus fax extincta
fuisset, is victoriam succedenti concedebat, atque hic eodem modo sequenti, si
sua extingueretur, and reliqui eodem ordine, quod si nemo accensam facem,
tulisset, palma in medio relinquebatur, atque haec fiebant in honorem
Promethei, quod is omnium artium fontem and autorem ignem putabatur invenisse,
etc. And a little after what he here attributes peculiarly to Prometheus, he
ascribes in common with him to Minerva and Vulcan likewise, where he puts this
Question, Quid vero significant Ib. p. 323.
Lampadophoria, quae in honorem Minervae, Vulcanique, and Promethei
celebrabantur, in quibus cursores accensis facibus currebant? Which he thus
resolves into a Moral meaning, Nihil aliud sane quam universum praesentis vitae
cursum esse nobis molestiarum atque curarum plenum, quae ubi cessaverint, a
cursu ipsius vitae cessandum est, and succedentibus lampades, lites, morbi,
calamitates, animorumque sollicitudines in manus tradendae; atque, ut summatim
colligam significare voluerunt per haec sapientes maximam esse vitae praesentis
perturbationem, avaritiam cuncta recta subvertere: viris bonis esse semper
adversus difficultates pugnandum, omnem mortalium vitam esse curarum plenam,
neque ulli sperandam esse quietem dum vivimus. Where, though I will not deny
that this Ceremony among the Ancients was significative of the Succession of
the Human, or in general of the Animal Life, or of the departure of one
Generation to make way for another; the Lamps being so many Emblems of the
flamma vitalis, and their successive extinction of the frailty and short
duration of this mortal Life, as is sufficiently evident from the allusion of
Lucretius, which had a respect to this Rite among the Ancients. Tanquam
cursores vitalem lampada tradunt.


Yet as for the account which our Mythologist here gives, that it was an Emblem
of the trouble and vexation to which Human Life is exposed; I can by no means
bring my self to think that this is a kindly and natural Interpretation; and
then when it is said, that this Ceremony was performed in honor of Vulcan,
Minerva, and Prometheus, certainly there must something more lie hid under
this, which neither he nor I have yet explained, and it was this, That as the
successive extinction of the Lamps and Torches, did signify the successive
Courses and stated Periods of Life, which are extinguished at a certain time,
and as it were rekindled and renewed by an everlasting Course of Generation, so
that these Lights and Torches were kindled and lighted up in Honor of these
supposedly divine Persons; it had this signification, that all kind of Animal
Vitality here below, was in the Opinion of those Times and Places where this
custom was used, nothing but a ray of Heavenly Light or Aetherial Influence
from above. For Minerva, as I have said and proved already, and shall do still
further by and by, is nothing else but the Aetherial Matter, and Vulcan and
Prometheus were but two Names of the Sun, which is sometimes represented as the
Shield of Minerva, being exactly of the same sort of fluid and Aetherial
Substance, only differing in greater degrees of Purity and Tenuity, and in
greater swiftness, agitation and motion from the common Ether; so that those
Torches had a twofold respect, the First looked downwards upon the Animal World,
whose short continuance upon the Stage of Life, was signified by their swift
Motion and successive Extinction in the hands of the Cursores that held them;
the other upwards, toward the Aetherial Matter, and more particularly toward
the Sun himself, the Father and Fountain of Light, and, as it was then
believed, of all kind of Vitality, all Sense and Life, which was looked upon as
it were, but as so many temporary Candles, enlightened and set a burning for a
while by the everlasting Lamp of Heaven, the Sun, and propagated successively
by the means of Generation, as Candles and Torches upon the point of being
extinguished, may yet give new Light to others like themselves, that shall burn
for another such Period or interval of Time, as they themselves had lasted; and
if these Torches in this Hieroglyphic Pageantry of the Ancients, did signify
and represent the Sun, why then might not (...), or (...), which is the proper
word, to signify such a Flambeau or Torch in the Arcane usage of Hieroglyphic
Speech, equally denote and signify the same?

From this that has been observed concerning the Lampadophoria, that they were
Celebrated equally in honor of Pallas, Vulcan, and Prometheus, compared with
the explication of those Names which has been already given; we may be still
further convinced that Prometheus and Vulcan are the same with the Sun, and by
consequence with one another. Which is still further confirmed from what the
Scholiast upon Sophocles reports, That they had all Three of them one common
Altar in the Temple of Pallas at Athens, as I find it taken notice out of him,
First by N. Comes, and after him by our Learned Countryman Doctor Gale, in his
Notes upon Apollodorus, and this certainly is a shrewd Argument, that they are
all of them either exactly the same, or at least very nearly related to one
another; the first of which is the case of Prometheus and Vulcan, with relation
to one another; the other of Pallas, with respect to the other Two.

Furthermore, It is observable to this purpose, Apollod. Biblioth. l. 1. c. 3.
p 10.
what Apollodorus reports, that when Jupiters Head was in Labor with Minerva,
Vulcan, as some say, and as others, Prometheus cleft it with an Ax or Hatchet,
by that means to facilitate and expedite the Birth, ( Such another Error as
this it seems to have been, by which Pallas and Minerva have been by some
Authors, and particularly by Apollodorus himself, distinguished from one
another, though they are really and in truth the same. v. Apollod. Bibl. l. 3.
and N. Com. Mythol. l. 4. c. 5. p. 296. --
which difference of report in diverse and disagreeing Authors arose only from
this, that they did not understand Prometheus and Vulcan to be the same; and
this was the reason that Lysimachides, an Ancient Greek Writer, cited by
Natalis Comes, makes Prometheus to have been Senior to Vulcan, not
understanding what I have endeavored to prove, that they were indeed the same;
nor considering, that notwithstanding the sameness of the Persons, yet as to
the Names by which this Indentity was differently expressed, Vulcan as being the
Eastern Name, was much the Senior to Prometheus.

Now the true explication of this Fable in Apollodorus, that Vulcan or
Prometheus cleft the Head of Jupiter, to make a more easy passage for the
Birth of Pallas, is this, Jupiter in this case is the whole Ether, whose Head
is the Body of the Sun, whose Rays are here compared to Axes or Hatchets, by
which the Ether is pierced and cleft, as to our outward sense it seems to be;
and that from this cleaving, Pallas was born, the meaning is no other than
this, that the Sun or the Rays of the Sun, do at least enliven and invigorate,
if not create and cause that agility and motion, which is to be found in Pallas
or Jupiter; or the wide, spacious Ether, whose Parts all about, though they
are of a finer consistence and more agil Nature, than those of which this Earth
and its Atmosphere is composed, yet they themselves, as they are nearer to the
Sun, or at a farther distance from it, so they partake more or less of that
Influence, that Warmth and Heat, and briskness of Activity and Motion, which is
communicated and imparted by him, as may be seen by that part of the Ether,
which being mingled and interspersed with this Atmosphere which we inhabit, is
in the Winter comparatively stagnant, to what it is found by Experience to be
in the Summer season, when the Sun shines upon us with a directer Influence,
and with Rays more piercing and vigorous than at other times.

Lastly, This was the reason, why, when other of the Poets make the first Man
to have been formed out of the Earth by Prometheus, Hesiod ascribes the same
effect to Vulcan, because they are indeed both of them the same, the same with
the Sun, and with one another; the words of Hesiod in his (...) are, (...).

Which Grotius has thus Translated. Mulciberumque moras Jubet omnes solvere
and undas.

Commiscere solo, atque humanam imponere vocem.

Though this indeed be spoken of Hesiod, not of the making or animating
Mankind by Prometheus, but of the forming of Pandora by Vulcan, which Pandora
is nothing else but a Mythological Emblem of our First Parent Eve, or of the
mischiefs that are brought upon Mankind by the Charms and Enticements of Women,
and her being Grot. de. v. R. G. l. 1. p. 63. ed. Amstel. 1674.
formed out of Earth and Water by Prometheus, and that animated with Celestial
Fire, shows that Vulcan and Prometheus are the same, though in this Story of
Hesiod they are Mythologically opposed to one another.

And particularly as to Prometheus himself, and what has been said above
concerning him, as to the gnawing Vultur or Eagle perpetually preying upon his
Heart or Liver, which was repaired every Night proportionably to what it was
spent and wasted in the Day, which, as I have said, cannot bear any natural
Interpretation, than only by explaining it of the diurnal course and motion of
the Sun; this Story is related, and with the same circumstance that Hesiod and
Petronius above v. Phavor. in (...) and Apollod. l. 1. c. 7. p. 22.
alleged have done it, of the Nightly renewal of the consumed Heart or Liver,
by Pherecydes in Phavorinus, and by Apollodorus in his Bibliotheca.

I cannot forbear upon this occasion to confirm likewise another Notion, though
of the same nature with this, which in what has been said above, I have
endeavored to establish, viz. That the Ancient Orpheus was the same with the
Sun, by a place of Lactantius, never yet taken notice of that I know of, to
this purpose, -- where speaking of the Angels and Ministering Spirits, which are
employed upon several occasions by the Supreme and Governing Mind of the
Universe, an Opinion which not only Judaism and Christianity, but also the
Ancient Heathen Philosophy and Theology has favored, he says, Si eos
(Gentiles,) multitudo delectat, non duodecim dicimus, nec trecentos Sexaginta
quinque, ut Orpheus, sed innumerabiles, and arguimus eorum errores in diversnm,
qui tam paucos putant. The reason of which division of their Angels or
Ministering Spirits among the Pagans, sometimes into Twelve, and at others Three
hundred sixty five, was this, That the Sun was looked upon by them as the
Supreme Numen, and his annual Motion through the Zodiac, is either divided into
Twelve Parts or Sections, which we call Months, over every one of which a
particular Tutelar Genius or Subministring Spirit was supposed to preside, or
else into Three hundred sixty five, which are called Days, which space of Time
being spent by the Sun in his motion; his annual Period is complete, and he
returns again to the same point of the Zodiac from whence he set out so long
ago, and every one of these Days too, which are all of them owing to the
influence of the Sun, and are measured by his motion, for Dies is (...), had
likewise in the opinion of some of the Ancients a particular Genius or Tutelar
and Guardian Spirit presiding over it, and performing such Offices as the great
Author and Finisher of the Day, thought it fit and necessary to appoint; but
when this Opinion is ascribed by Lactantius to Orpheus as the Author, I rather
think him to have been the Subject of it, and that the geniun Tradition was
this, That Orpheus, that is, the Sun, was looked upon by the Ancients, as
having Three hundred and sixty five Ministering Spirits about him, according to
the number of the Days of the Year, both because this Opinion which depended
upon the proneness of Antiquity to Superstition, who never thought they had
Gods and Demons enough, does not seem to have been so particular as Lactantius
makes it, and because Orpheus was certainly a name of the Sun, as I have proved
already; and this corrupted Tradition in Lactantius seems to have been another
instance of it, and because Censorinus observes the Ancient Egyptian or
Eastern solar Year to have consisted of Three hundred sixty five Days without
any intercalation, which is the number here assigned.

To put an end to this Discourse concerning the Ocean or the Water, being the
first Cause and Principle of all things, as well Gods as Men, and all other
whether animate or inanimate corporeal Substances whatsoever, by this was meant
as I conceive first of all, not so much that common Water, such as we are used
to call by that Name, was really and solely the first Cause and Principle of
all things, but only as Plato expresses it in his Theaetaetus, (...), that all
things were begotten by fluidity and motion, that is, according to the present
Sentiments of the Corpuscularians, that all the several Differences, Qualities,
Appearances, and various Modifications to be met with in the material World,
were but the effects of Motion or Fluidity, variously proportioned ordered and
disposed; for this is the true and first meaning of (...), it is the fluid
Matter from (...), signifying volatile, or swift, and from the same Greek word
is the Latin Aqua and Aquila, so called from the swiftness of its Flight and
Motion, and Aquilo for the Northwind, for the same reason, which is called in
Greek (...), answering exactly to, or rather being exactly the same with the
Hebrew Boreach, from Barach, Fugit, as Daniel Heinsius in his Aristarchus has
before me observed. And from the same Greek Root is also the Latin Acus, and
Acuo, and Acies, because things that are sharp and have an Edge pass with more
ease and swiftness, and cut their way with greater speed and dispatch through
all obstacles and impediments that they meet with, and thence Acies in the
Metaphorical Sense, signifies sharpness or quickness, or subtlety and minute
perspicacity of sight, because they whose Eyes are thus happily disposed, do
easily, and clearly, and swiftly, or quickly discern things that are removed at
a great distance from them, and for the same reason it signifies also the
disposition and order of an Army drawn up in Battalia, that is, first and most
properly, as I conceive, the Cuneus or the Phalanx, where the whole Body is
terminated on all sides by an Angle or an Edge; and so also Acumen has not only
its proper and first Sense, to signify a material Edge or sharpness, but also
its Metaphorical or Derivative, to denote the intellectual quickness or
sharpness of the Mind, by which it does, as it were, cut its way through the
greatest difficulties and abstrucsities of Nature, and overtake by a swift, an
easy, and a steady slight, those Things and Notions that are the most coy and
loath to be discovered, or that escape and baffle the pursuit of common
Apprehensions by too great distance or too nimble flight. Lastly, To show the
Analogy of the word, (...) in this sense, which I have explained it, (...) by
the same way of derivation is from (...) or (...), as much as to say the Region
of Rain, whence also Orion was feighned to have his Name, as being the cause of
Tempests, and particularly of great Floods and Inundations, which by the Poets
was variously signified under the covert of Fables; and thence also the (...)
in Julius Pollux are the same with what Physicians and Anatomists otherwise
call (...), and (...) and (...), and this Etymology, to any Man that shall
consider it, is certainly preferrable to any other that has hitherto been
started, as may be seen by comparing the Etymologies of St. Ambrose, Aristotle,
and Philo, which may be found in any Lexicon, together with this; not that I
would confine the signification of the word (...) to the Region of the
Atmosphere, within which compass the Clouds and Rain are contained, but it is
enough that the most remote Antiquity looked upon the Clouds, as at a far
greater distance than we do; and therefore the Psalmist makes the Clouds to be,
as it were, the more peculiar and Beatifical Seat of him who is Omnipresent,
which is otherwise usually confined to the highest and most exalted Regions of
the Ether, when he affirms of God, as he does sometimes, that he makes the
Clouds his Chariot, and that he rides upon the Wings of the Wind, or else it
might happen that the whole Ether might be called by the Name of (...),
because the Ancient Mortals that first called it by this Name, did not
understand the Philosophy of Exhalations, but thought all Rain was dispensed
from the Treasury of Waters above the Firmament, as it is called in the First
of Genesis, not according to the truth and reality of Things, but according to
vulgar Opinion, with which the Language of the Scripture, though of divine
Inspiration, does not disdain sometimes in pity to human Infirmity to comply,
as where it intimates the Earth to stand still, the Moon to be a great Light,
and the ^^ixt Stars comparatively little; but if we Translate the Hebrew
Rakiah, not by Firmamentum, as the vulgar Latin has done, by a false
Translation of the Greek (...), which is as much as (...), or the Region of the
Stars, but only by expansum, a seeming empty space, in which we walk and breath
in this sublunary Region, it will not imply that there is indeed any such
celestial Treasury of Water beyond the Atmosphere or the Region of the Clouds.

This Notion of Thetis being nothing else but the Tohu or Universal Mass,
besides what has been already produced to that purpose, will receive further
confirmation, by reflecting a little upon the meaning and derivation of these
three words, (...), Titan, and Tithonus: I begin with the First, (...) from
(...), a word which occurs in Homer Il. (...). 747.

(...), where the Old Scholiast interprets (...), so also Eustathius upon the
same place, (...), that is, that by (...), we are to understand a certain sort
of Oyster, for (...) signifies the Earth, and Shell Fish, by reason of the
hardness of that Shell wherewith they are encompassed, are of a more earthy
Nature, than any other sort of Fish a, a, a, so Suidas expressly interprets it,
(...).
whatsoever; but it had been better to derive it from (a) (...) in its double
capacity, as it signifies both (a) Earth and (a) Water, because, by reason of
the hardness of their Shell, and the softness or fluidity of their inward Pulp
and Substance, and of their living in, and being nourished by the Water; they
are of a middle Nature betwixt these two, which was the Case of the Tohu or
Primigenial Mass, called by Hesychius with a very little alteration (...), for
so he expounds (...), that is, (...), signifies a sort of Oyster or Shell Fish,
and it is also the Slime or Dirt which Rivers in their Course throw off upon
their Banks, which is as exactly as can be the signification of the Hebrew
Tohu, which was a thin substance of Earth and Water together; and this is a
further confirmation, that by Tethys in the Mythology of the Ancients, the
Universal or Primigenial Mass was denoted, and likewise explains the reason of
those Expositions which we find in Suidas; (...), and presently after, (...),
they taking their signification from the Tohu or Primigenial Mass, which was
the Mother, or Grandmother, and First Parent of all Things, and an Aunt is so
like a Mother, so nearly related by Blood, and usually by Affection, and by all
Offices of Parental kindness, that it is no wonder to find (...) and (...) so
very little different in their Signification; and the same may be said of (...)
and (...), which are all of them owing to the same Root, the Earth or Globe of
Earth and Water, in which all sublunary Animals are bred and nourished being
truly styled the Nurse, as well as Parent of all her productions, and the
Analogy of Tithene, comes nigh to that of Tithonus, of which I shall speak in
the third place.

But Secondly, The word Titan also being from the same Root of Thoth, or Tohu,
is another confirmation of the truth of what I have said concerning Thetis,
that by her was signified the Tohu, or the Universal and Primigenial Mass, for
all these Names being probably derived from the same Root, and answering so
well as they do in their History to the same Etymology, give natural strength
and confirmation to each other. Titan signifies properly a Son of the Earth, or
of the Tohu, and so the Sun is called in the first place, according to that of
Ovid in his Metamorphoses. Nnllus adhuc mundo praebebat lumina Titan.


And in Juvenal, Prometheus whom I have more than once affirmed to be the same
with the Sun, is called by this Name, E meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan.


And so also in Sophocles, out of whom this citation is produced by N. Comes,
N. C. Myth. L. 2. c. 4. p. 150.
though he does not make this use of it. (...),
(...).


And not only the Sun was called Titan, but the Stars likewise by the Latin
Poets are sometimes called Astra Titania, as in that of Virgil in the sixth of
his Ae^eid.

Principio caelum and terras camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque Globum Lunae, Titaniaque Astra
Spiritus intus alit, totamque, infusa per artus,
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
The reason of which was either that the fluid Matter of the Ether, of which
the Sun and Stars consist, was once jumbled together with the rest of the
Chaos, and was separated from it, which was, as it were, its Birth out of the
Womb of the Chaos, or the Tohu, or else that they seem all of them, as often as
they Emerge above our Horizon, to rise out of the Earth or Sea, as if they
sprang from thence as Flowers do out of a Bed, or from their several Principles
and Seeds, and as often as they set and were submerst again under it; this was
looked upon by the Ancients as their return to their Mother, (there being
according to them but one enlightened Hemisphere, as has been already
declared,) to suck her Breasts of Consolation, and to refresh and cool
themselves in the Bath of the Ocean, after the Fatigue of a long and toilsom
Journey.

Neither can there be any other reason but this assigned, why the Earth should
be called (...) by the Greek Poets, as well as the Sun was called Titan, and
the Stars Titania; for certainly the Sun, and Stars, and the Earth, any
otherwise than some such way as this, are not any whit of kin to one another,
and yet this is the Name of the Earth in the Etymologer, who has these
remarkable words, (...), that is, that some called the whole Earth by this
Name, and some only the single Province of Attica, both of which were in the
right, for the whole Mass of Earth, and Water, and Ether, mingled together,
was called Thoth or Tohu, and this was the true Name of (...), that is, not the
single Province of Attica, as the Etymologer himself understood his own words,
but the Ancient Earth or Primigenial Mass, which was the Cabbalistical or
Traditionary signification of Attica and Attici, as has been already
frequently declared, though the latter Greeks themselves did not understand it.
(...), when it is the Epithet of (...) or the Earth, either signifies, that the
Earth was a part of the Tohu or Universal Mass, as indeed it is the most
confused and Heterogeneous part of it, Tohu and Bohu being Names in Hebrew,
that seem to signify disorder and confusion, or that the Earth was the Mother
of the Titans, which is the same thing; by the (...) nothing else being meant,
but those Winds and Vapors which are exhaled from the Earth, or the Tohu, or
being kept up and pent in subterraneous Caverns, are the natural causes of
Earthquakes, and Volcano's, and such like Eruptions of subterraneous Vapors;
so the word is explained by Eustathius upon Homer, with whom the Author of the
Allegories upon Hesiod agrees, Alleg. in Hesiod. p. 244. Ed. Heins.
in these words, (...) (...), that is, they are called Titans, for as much as
they dispense and are the Authors and Occasions of Damage and Detriment to Men;
for by Earthquakes Houses are overturned, and the Earth is broken up or cleft
in sunder, and Men are overwhelmed and immerst in Waters, and many other
Calamities there are that happen upon the same account; and as I have said
formerly of Juno, that the reason of the many Quarrels that happen between her
and Jupiter in the Poets, is to be taken without all question, from the
Phisiology or natural Philosophy of the Ancients, Juno being the Air or
Atmosphere, or the Region of Storms and Tempests, by which Jupiter or the pure
Ether is troubled and disturbed; the same is true likewise of the Wars betwixt
the Titans or the Giants, that is, the (...), the Sons of the Earth and the
Gods, for by the Gods was meant, as has been already observed from Plato and
Macrobius, the Sun and Stars, the pure Ether, and all sorts of Aetherial
Concretions, which Ether by the Titans, that is, by Storms and Tempests, is,
as it were, assaulted and invaded, and a War seems to be threatened against the
Sun and the Stars themselves, to which purpose it is remarkable what the
Etymologer says, in the words immediately following those I have last produced
out of him. I will repeat those words again, that you may see the connection:
(...), that is, that the Earth was called (...) from Titanus, one of the
Titans, who of all the number was the only Person that did not make War against
the Gods; which, though it be plainly false and clean contrary to the truth,
yet by what we may learn from this place, what I have said already may be
confirmed: It is false that the Earth was called (...) from Titanus, for by
Titanus or Titan, as has been showed already, was meant the Sun, and he was so
called from the Tohu, or the Earth, not the Earth so called from him, the
reason of which has been already explained; and whereas, I have said, that the
Earth in a Mythological way, may be said so often to be the Mother of Titan, or
the Sun, as often as he Emerges above the sensible Horizon, and seems as it
were, to be renewed and born again; this seems to be confirmed by a Passage of
Aeschylus concerning Prometheus, who is the Eschyl. ed. Stanl. p. 26.
same with Titan or the Sun; in his Prometheus Vinctus, which I will here
produce, it is Prometheus himself that speaks, (...),
(...),
(...).


Which is thus rendered by the Learned Interpreter. Sed mihi matter, non semel
tantum, Themis,

Quae and terra (multarum appellationum una forma.)

Vt res eventura esset, praedixerat.



Where if we refer (...), non semel tantum, to (...) or Matter, the sense is
according to what I have said, that Prometheus or Titan was born of the Earth
more than once, and so he must needs, if he be born every day; but if we refer
those words to (...), or praedixerat, then it bears clear another sense, which
I need not explain; and to any Man that understands the Greek Language, and
considers the order of the words, both these Interpretations are so natural,
that I know not which to prefer, only (...), being nigher in place to (...),
then to (...), this if any thing, may seem to favor the former Interpretation,
for, I confess, to me, the Construction seems equally natural both ways, and
therefore I shall determine for neither.

But there is one thing somewhat strange in this place of Aeschylus, which I
cannot pass by without some notice, and that is, that he calls the Earth by the
Name of Themis. (...),
(...).


For they interpret that (...), as if it had been said, (...), and so our
Learned Stanly Translates it, Quae and terra, and so the Scholiast (...), my
Mother is equally called (...) and (...), and it is a sign it is really so,
because of the singular Verb, (...), which belongs to them both, and should
have been put in the plural Number, had these two been several and distinct
from one another, besides that (...), is a Parenthesis that would in this place
be impertinent, and would signify just nothing; upon supposition that these
two, the Earth and Themis were not the fame, and were not intended by these
very words to be declared as such. Lastly, This is put out of all doubt by a
place of John Tzetzes upon Hesiod, which I will transcribe Io. Tzetzes in
Hesiod. p. 26. 1. ed. Heins.
hither, and it is concerning Prometheus, that he speaks, (...) (Legendum
(...)) (...), etc. that is, Prometheus is either taken in a more gross and
practical sense, for one that tamed and humaniz'd Men, and made them from
barbarous to become courteous and civil, or else more spiritually or
speculatively; Prometheus, is Human Providence and Foresight, the Son of
Japetus, or inward Ratiocinatian; and of Clymene, that is, outward, sensible
and practical Wisdom; for Themis or the Earth, is the Mother of the Elementary
Prometheus, that is, as I conceive of Prometheus in the first sense, otherwise
I know not what he means, is, though I rely not much upon his Allegorical
Interpretations, having shown, as I think, that the Physiological is more
natural, and certainly the only true Interpretation of Prometheus, as has been
already largely proved, but all that I observe is, that he makes Themis and the
Earth to have been the same, which though it startled me at first, yet now I
think I have found the reason of it, and the reason is Hieroglyphical, and this
it is: Tamam or Tam in Hebrew, has the signification of Vprightness and
Integrity, and Themis among the Ancients was the Goddess or President of
Justice, of which the Earth, by reason of its anciently supposed Stability and
Permanency, (while the Air, the Water, the Ether, and all the heavenly Bodies
were thought to be always in perpetual motion,) was a very natural and proper
Symbol; for it is the nature of Error and Falsehood, which proceeds by no
certain Rule, to be Fleeting and Inconstant, but Justice and Integrity are
always the same, constant, and steady, and immovable, as the Foundations of the
Earth were supposed to be

But to return to the Etymologist, he tells us, as has been already observed,
that the Titans were so called, (...), from Titanus, one of the Titans, who, it
seems, was the only Person among them, that did not make War against the Gods,
where it is ridiculous to say, that the Titans were so called from Titanus, one
of the Titans; for if he himself were one of the number, and if it be asked why
he was so called? All the reason that this place will afford, will be, that he
took his Name from himself; but when he says that he was the only Person of all
the Titans, that did not make War upon the Gods; from this there are two things
to be observed, First, That there was such a War betwixt the Titans and the
Gods, as the Poets have described; and Secondly, We have here a very broad
intimation what kind of War that was; for if by Titan or Titanus, be meant the
Sun, as I have already declared, then he could not be one of those Titans that
were engaged in this Rebellion, because it was indeed made against himself, and
against the pure Ether; and the Stars that Inhabit it by the rarefied and
exalted Vapors and Exhalations, which this Earth and its Atmosphaere affords,
and that Titan was anciently one of the Names of the Sun: Besides the
Testimonies already produced, I will here allege a Fragment of Orpheus,
produced by the Writer of the Allegories upon Hesiod, wherein Titan, Hyperion,
Phosphorus, Paean and Zeus, are all of them V. Alleg. in Hesiod, in Theog. p.
268. 1. v. et H. Steph. in Thesauro L. G. Vol. 3. p. 1580.
represented as one and the same.

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
But when the Etymologer tells us, that this Titan or Titanus was the only
Person of all the Titans that did not make War upon the Gods; this is another
palpable mistake of his, or of the Author, whoever he be, from whom he borrows
it; for I have shown that all the Stars, against whom this War was made, as
well as against the Sun, are called actually by the Poets Astra Titania, and
might as well have been called (...) or Titanes, as the Sun, for the reasons
already given, and the Greek Proverb (...), and (...), which is proverbially
used for sharpness of Sight, may refer as well to the Stars as the Sun, they
all being supposed to have a piercing Eysight, and to discern all things that
were Transacted upon Earth, though this indeed did more peculiarly and
eminently belong to the Sun; and this was one reason, besides what has been
already said of the Serpents biting it self by the Tail, why the Sun was
anciently Worshipped in the Form of a Serpent? Because this sort of Animals is
found to be endued with so sharp, and vigorous, and piercing a Sight; and from
this it was that the Greek (...), and the Latin Draco, took their Names from
the Aorist of (...), signifying to see which is (...), and quickness of Sight
is peculiarly attributed by Horace to the Epidaurian Serpent, which was the
same with the Sun.

Cum tua pervideas oculis mala lippus inunctis,
Cur in amicorum vitiis tam cernis acutum
Quam aut Aquila aut Serpens Epidaurius?
And this was the reason why the Eagle above all other Birds, was dedicated to
the Honor and Service of the Sun, not only because of the swiftness and
loftiness of its Flight and Motion, but also because of the extreme sharpness
and piercingness of its Sight.

But besides all this, not only the Sun is called Titan, and the Stars Titania,
but also the Moon by Nicander, in Theriacis is called (...), in these words,
(...). --



Where (...), is rightly interpreted by the Scholiast upon the place of (...)
or Diana, or the Moon, but not for the reason which the same Scholiast assigns,
because Diana was the Daughter of Caeus, the Titan and Latona; but because all
the Stars are rightly called Titans, as arising from the Tohu or the Earth, or
from the Primigenial Mass, from whence they were separated and disjoined in the
beginning of Things, and assigned each of them to the several Orbs and Regions
which they now inhabit; or else according to the Scholiast himself, if she be
called the Daughter of Caeus the Titan and Latona, it is only for this reason,
Because Caeus the Titan, was but one of the Names of the Earth, as Latona was
another, though here they are put both together, as different and distinct; the
Form and Fashion of the Fable requiring it, there being no Generation without a
Male and a Female; and this together with that Notion which I have endeavored
to establish, that the Stars were called Titans, because of their separation in
the beginning of Things from the Primigenial Mass, may be excellently confirmed
by a Passage of Macrobius, concerning Latona and Apollo, which is very well
worth setting down. Saturnal. L. 1. c. 17.
which is very well worth setting down. Latonae Apollinem Dianamque pariturae
Juno dicitur obstetisse, sed ubi quandoque partus effusus est, draconem ferunt,
qui (...) vocitabatur, invasisse cunas Deorum; Apollinemque in prima infantia
sagittis belluam confecisse. Quod ita intelligendum naturalis ratio demonstrat,
namque post Chaos, ubi primum cepit confusa deformitas in rerum Formas and in
Elementa nitescere, terraque adhuc humida substantia molli atque instabili sede
nutaret, convalescente paulatim aetherio calore, atque inde seminibus in eam
igneis defluentibus haec sidera edita esse creduntur, and solemn quidem maxima
vi caloris in superna raptum, lunam vero humidiore and velut Faemineo sexu,
naturali quodam pressam tepore inferiora tenuisse; tanquam ille magis
substantia patris constet, haec matris, siquidem Latonam Physici volunt terram
videri; cui diu intervenit Juno, ne numina quae diximus ederentur; hoc est, aer
qui tunc humidus adhuc gravisque obstabat Aetheri, ne fulgor luminum per humosi
aeris densitatem, tanquam e cujusdam partus progressione, fulgeret. And with
this Notion of Latona, that nothing else was meant by her but the Earth; it
agrees very well that Ovid in the Sixth of his Metamorphoses, gives her also
the Epithet of Titanis, which we have seen above by the same Poet in his Fasti,
to have been bestowed upon Tethys for the same reason, because Tethys and the
Earth, or the Primigenial Mass, were the same. The words of Ovid are, --
Genitam Titanida Caeo
Latonam. --


Where he makes (...) by a K, is the same with (...) by a (...) which is as
much (...) or (...), the Earth See what follows presently concerning (...) and
(...).
Caeus to be the Father of Latona, as others represent him as her Husband; but,
as I have said, when these things are stripped of their Mythological disguise, I
rather conceive them both to have been the same.

Furthermore, not only the Moon is called (...), as has been showed by this
last produced Testimony of Nicander, but also the Sun and all the Planets in
common are sometimes found to be called by the same Name, as appears by a
Testimony of Eusebius Eusebius. praep. Evang. L. 1^.
in his Evangelical Preparation, which I will here set down, his words are
these, (...), that is, that Cronus and Astarte had seven Daughters called
Titanides or Artemides, in which citation by (...), is meant Time, according to
that of Macrobius. Saturnus ipse qui Auctor est temporum, and Saturnal, L. 1.
c. 22. so also Dionys, Halicarnass, Antique Romans L. 1. speaking of Saturn,
says, (...) v. and Macrob. ^bi supra. c. 8^ ut and Arnob. L. 3. and Ib.
Elmenhorst. p. 120.
ideo a Graecis immutata litera (...) quasi (...) vocatur; and by Astarte, If I
am not mistaken the Aetherial Region is signified, or the Body of the Ether,
of whose Substance the Planets, whose opaque and gloomy Consistence, was not so
anciently discovered and reflected upon, were thought to be composed, the Stars
differing, as I have said, from the rest of the Ether, only in greater degrees
of Motion and Fluidity; but yet I am not ignorant that there are other, and
those very different Interpretations of Astarte: (...). I am of Opinion that
Astarte is the same with the Moon, says Lucian in his de Dea Syria, and so I
conceive it is to be understood in that place of the Kings, L. 1. c. 11. v. 5.
Where it is said of Solomon, that he went after Ashtoreth the Goddess of the
Sidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites. For there is
nothing more certain than that by Moloc and Milcom, the Sun was understood, to
whom, as to the Supreme Lord and Sovereign of all things, the Ancient Heathens
gave the Title of King, which is the true signification of these two words, as
(...) and (...), two Names of the Sun, have both of the Epithet of (...) in
Homer; and therefore it is the more probable, since Moloc is so plainly the
Sun, that Ashtoreth, which the seventy Interpreters in this place, have rendered
by (...), is the Moon, as Lucian would have it; but it is easy to discern,
that this Interpretation will not at all comport with this place of Eusebius,
and therefore another must be sought for, and another Interpretation of
Astarte, if I am not very much mistaken, is, that it signifies any Star in
general, as when it is said of the Children of Israel, Iud. 2. 13. That they
forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth; which the seventy have rendered
by (...). Where Baal without all question is the Sun, (as also Chemosh of the
Moabites was but a corruption of the Hebrew Shemesh,) he being in the Opinion
of his Worshipers, the Supreme Lord and Governor of all Things, and the
Ashtaroth or the (...), are the Stars or the Host of Heaven. For Esther in
Chalday, signifies a Star, and thence with the Addition of Shour, which
signifies to contemplate; Zoroaster is supposed to have had his Name from his
Study of Astronomy, or his Contemplation of the Stars; and there is no
difference between these words, Esther, and Ashtoreth, or Ashtaroth, but that
the first of them is written with an Aleph, the two latter with an Hajin, but
the Potestas of these two Letters is much what the same, being both of them in
a manner perfectly quiescent; and of this, as I conceive, we have an instance
in Baal himself, the second Syllable of which begins with an Hajin, answering
to the Hebrew Aleph. For El or Al with an Aleph, was the Eastern Name of God,
and by this the Pagans called the Sun, and from it are derived the Latin Sol,
and the Greek (...), and (...), so that Baal was nothing else but the
Acclamation of the Pagans wellcoming, saluting, and adoring the Morning Sun,
with this Ingemination frequently, and joyfully, and loudly repeated, Ba Al, Ba
Al, that is, Dominus venit, Dominus venit, as one of the ancient forms of
Excommunication was called Maranatha, or Dominus venit, with joy to his
faithful Worshipers and Servants, and to the destruction and excision of his
Enemies; and this heavy sort of Excommunication, is otherwise called by the
Hebrews, Chereth or Excision; and by the Assyrians, or Syrochaldaeans Shamta,
as much as to say, Shem Atha, or Nomen venit, understanding by Shem or Nomen,
very frequently in the Rabbinical Language, the Nomen (...), the most Sacred
and Essential Name of God, and from thence proceeded that Rabbinical Effatum,
Hou Shmo, Veshmo Hou. He is his Name, and his Name is He; alluding to the
constant practice and custom of the Rabbius, who almost every where call God by
the Name of Hashem, or the Name. And such another Acclamation as this, was that
of Lea^, when she was safely delivered of her Son Gad, Bagad, a Troop comes,
where the Aleph is left out in the Masorethical Bibles, as well as in the
instance of Bahal, and perhaps there being two Alephs in these two words, Ba
and Al, an Hajin which is a Letter, somewhat the harder and harsher of the two,
was the most proper to express the Coalition of them both, running and
dissolving into one another; and if from this morning salutation of the Rising
Sun, he came at last to be called by the Name of Bahal, which seems to me a
very natural Conjecture; then the Sun being the Sovereign and Lord of all in
the sense of the Ancient Pagans, and this Dominion of his being properly
expressed and denoted in the latter part of his Name, This gives an easy account
of all those Expositions which we meet with in our Lexicons, and how they came
to signify what they do; such as Bahal, Dominari, Maritum, (hoc est, Dominum
uxoris) esse. Bohel, Conjux, Maritus, and Bahal Dominus; Maritus, Conjux, and
Bahala Domina. But neither will this way of explaining the word Astarte, afford
a genuin Interpretation of this place of Eusebius, as may be easily discerned
by any one that shall apply the one to the other: It is necessary therefore
that we interpret Astarte in this place, either of the Ether or Starry Region
in general, of whose Substance the Stars and the very Planets themselves, in
this remote Antiquity were supposed to be made; or that we take refuge in the
Exposition of Suidas, (...), Astarte is the same that the Greeks call Venus,
which if we understand, not of the Star or Planet of Venus, but of the
Universal Nature, as I have already explained it, then the sense of this place
of Eusebius, (...), will be this, that there was a time when those seven
Titanides or Artemides, that is, as I interpret it, the seven Planets were not,
but that in time they were produced by the Universal Nature, or Demiurgique
Power of the Universe, and they are called Titanides, because of their
separation from the Tohu, or of their daily emerging above the Horizon, and
seeming as it were to spring out of the Earth; and for that other Name of
Artemides, though the word (...), in the common usage of the Greek Language, be
peculiar to Diana or the Moon; yet if that Etymon of this word, which I have
elsewhere given, be true, as I do verily believe it is, that (...) is so
called, (...), because the Moon in its Passage cuts and divides the Air or
Ether, in so much, that to sense, in a Moonshiny Night it seems to make holes
in the Clouds, and as it were to force its Passage through them, though indeed
her Orb be far superior to the highest Clouds; then this belongs equally to all
the Planets, for they do all by their Motion divide and cut the Ether in their
Passage through it; but because this was most plainly and sensibly the Case of
the Moon, and because the Region of the Clouds or the Atmosphaere through which
she seems to pass, is that which is most properly called the Airy Region, in
opposition to the pure Ether above it, which is of a ^iner Consistence;
therefore the Name (...), in the common usage of the Greek Language, was more
peculiarly attributed to the Moon.

And because I have said above concerning Venus or the Universally Prolifique
and Architectionique Nature, that the reason why she was said at sometimes to
be born from the Sea, and at others in an Island, as likewise Jupiter and
Apollo were, and Priapus by the Seaside, was to signify that Opinion which
the Ancients received by Tradition, that all things at first sprang out of the
Waters, or out of that Chaos or Primigen^al Mass, which was overwhelmed with
them. This Notion may be still further confirmed by reflecting upon the Worship
of Derceto or Atergatis, for they are both conceived to have been the same,
whose Statue and Image among the Assyrians had the upper Parts of a beautiful
Woman, but from the Thighs downwards, she had the Appearance of a larger sort
of Fish; for this Atergatis was no other than the Prolifique or Demiurgique
Nature of the Universe; and the Beauty of her upper Part, was to denote that
exquisite symmetry and proportion of the Universe, which was of her
contrivance; the lower which had the resemblance of a Fish, was to signify
from whence this Digestion and Separation was made, which had afterward so
beautiful and lovely an Appearance, viz. out of the Chaos or that Mass of
Waters, with which the confused Seeds and Principles of Things were Anciently
and Originally over whelmed; and that this Adargatis was no other than the
Universal Nature, called at other times Pan, and Venus, and Priapus, and
Proteus, and Thetis, and Tethys, and Jupiter, and Isis; and if there be any
other Names by which the same thing is expressed, is evident from a Passage of
Macrobius, where he expressly makes her, if not to be all in all, yet at least
to be that Mass of Earth and Water, which perhaps was another reason of her
Amphibious Image, from whence the Separation Saturn. L. 1. c. 23.
was Originally made. His words are these, where speaking of the Sun, he says,
Accipe quid Assyrii de Solis potentia opinentur. Deo enim quem summum
maximumque venerantur, Adad nomen dederunt, ejus nominis interpretatio
significat, Idem quod Hebreum Echad vel Achad.
unus, hunc ergo ut potentissimum adorant Deum. Sed subjungunt eidem Deam
nomine Adargatin, omnemque potestatem cunctarum rerum his duobus attribuunt,
Solemn terramque intelligentes, nec multitudine nominum enuntiantes diversam
eorum per omnes species potestatem, sed Argumentis, quibus ornantur,
significantes multiplicem praestantiam duplicis numinis. Ipsa autem Argumenta
Sol^s rationem loquuntur. Namque simulachrum Adad insig^e cernitur radiis
inclinatis. Quibus monstratur vim Caeli in Radiis esse Solis, qui demittuntur
in terram. Adargatis simulachrum sursum Versum reclinatis Radiis insigne est;
monstrando Radiorum vi superne missorum, enasci quaecunque terra progenerat.
Sub eodem simulachro species leonum sunt, eadem ratione terram esse
monstrantes, qua Phryges ^inxere matrem Deum, id est, terram leonibus vehi. But
now if Adargatis, according to Macrobius himself, be the same with the Matter
Deum, the Mother of the Gods, then is she neither the Earth nor the Sun, in
distinction from each other; but both of these and all things else together,
she is the Mother of the Gods, that is, the Primigenial Mass from whence the
Separation of Aetherial and Starry Concretions was made, which are here called
Gods; and the Beauty of her upper Parts considered together, with the deformity
of those underneath, was but a symbolical Confusion of the Efficient and the
Material Cause together. To the first of which the Symmetry of the World was
owing; and the latter, that is, the Fish or the Mass of Waters, or the Chaos
covered with them, out of which the Separation was made, supplied the great
Artificer with subject Matter for his great Skill and Wisdom, to exercise and
to exert it self upon. And so also it is in the Fable of Proteus, for he is
properly the Efficient Cause, as is plainly discernible in his Name; but yet
when the Poets represent him as a Sea God, this was only for that reason,
because all things were Originally supposed to have sprung out of the Waters,
and was a plain confusion of the Efficient and the Material Cause together.

So likewise in the Story of Isis, whose signification is by Macrobius confined
to V Macrob. Satur. L. 1. c. 20. in fine. ^t and c. 21. circa Med. Cap.
the Earth, or to the Natura rerum subjace^s Soli, which he confirms by this
observation, Hinc est quod continuatis uberibus corpus Deae omne densetur, quod
terrae vel rerrum Naturae altu nutritur Vniversitas. And this was the reason
why Isis or Io, by the Egyptians, was Worshipped in the Form of an Ox; that
Animal among them being a Symbolical Emblem of that Fruitfulness and Plenty
which the And to which the Ox contributes by its Labor in the Field, and which
is fed and sustained, as all other Animals are by its productions.
Earth produces, as appears by the fat and lean Kine in Pharaoh's Dream, which
was interpreted by Joseph, of the Barrenness and Fertility of the Earth; and
perhaps from that Interpretation of his, this Symbolism which had divine
Authority to make it Sacred, began, as perhaps also the Worship of Apis, which
with a little mutation, was as much as Alphis, from the Hebrew Eleph,
signifying an Ox; and thence also was the Greek and Latin Elephas, and
Elephantus, as being looked upon only as a larger sort of Ox or Bufaloe in the
East.

But this is further confirmed by what Macrobius says in another place, where
among other Arguments, by which he learnedly and plainly proves, that Mercury
and the Sun were sometimes anciently taken for the same, he uses this,

Argiphontes praeterea cognominatur, Macrob. Satur. L. 1. c. 19
(Mercurius) non quod Argum peremerit, quem ferunt per ambitum capitis multorum
Oculorum luminibus ornatum, custodisse Junonis Imperio Inachi filiam Io ejus
deae pellicem conversam in bovis Formam: Sed sub hujus modi Fabula Argus est
Caelum stellarum luce distinctum; quibus inesse quaedam species Caelestium
videtur Oculorum. Caelum autem Argum vocitari placuit a candore and velocitate,
(...), and videtur terram desuper observare, quam Aegyptii Hieroglyphicis
literis c^m signare volunt, ponunt bovis Figuram; is ergo ambitus Caeli,
stellarum luminibus ornatus, tunc aestimatur enectus a Mercurio, cum Sol diurno
tempore obscurando sidera, velut enecat, vi luminis sui conspectum eorum
auferendo mortalibus.

But yet there are some that will needs Intel. Syst. c. 4. p. 350. falsely
marked 410.
have Isis to be the Supreme Numen, or the Eternal and Omnipresent Mind, by
whose Providence all things are forecast and contrived, and by his Power and
Will concurring, reduced into Act, to which purpose they allege the Capuan
Inscription.

TIBI. VNA. QVAE. ES. OMNIA. DEA. ISIS.

But by their leave, this does not prove any more than that by this Isis, was
meant the Universal Matter or Primigenial Mass, which in some sense may be said
to be una or one, considered all together, and omnia or all, with respect to
the infinite variety of the material or aspectable World, which is all of it
composed out of several Modifications of this Primigenial Mass. And so also
Thetis in what has been said before; which is sometimes taken strictly for the
Watery Mass, or the Genius, Nymph, or Demon appertaining to it, is also, and
that most properly, as has been showed, taken for the whole Chaos or Universal
Mass, consisting of Earth and Water; and She was therefore by the Greek and
Latin Poets, appropriated to the Water, because the Chaos was anciently over
whelmed with them; and all things were supposed, in the beginning of Things, to
have arisen and sprung from thence; and the Earth and Water having at first
been mingled together, and never yet so wholly separated, but that they are
still contiguous, so that they still contribute each of them their quota or
proportion, to the making up an entire Globe; and that they are still not only
by Showrs, but by subterraneous Springs, and by the secret Passages both of the
Seas and Rivers into the Caverns of the Earth, incorporated into one another;
And lastly, Being of a weight and consistence, not so much differing as is
usually supposed, which is the reason the same Station in the Universe is
assigned them; for all these Reasons, it is almost indifferent whether you say
that all things sprang at first from the Earth, which is called Isis, or from
the Sea, which the Poets call Thetis, or from both of these, as Homer does,
when he makes the Ocean to have been the Father, and the Earth the Mother of
all the Gods, that is, of all kind of Starry or Aetherial Concretions, of a
more fine, and minute Consistence, which were at first mingled and jumbled with
these grosser Parts, and in process of Time were separated from them.

Neither am I at all moved from my Sentiments by the Authority of Plutarch,
who, Intel. Syst. p 349. falsely marked 409.
as the same learned Writer tells us, affirms that Isis and Neith, were really
one and the same God among the Egyptians, and therefore the Temple of Neith or
Minerva at Sais, is called by him, (that is, Plutarch,) the Temple of Isis. For
that the Egyptian Neith or Neithas, the Latin Minerva, and the Greek Pallas or
Athena are the same, is that which I should have easily granted, and this
Learned Author himself has sufficiently proved it. First, From the Testimony
of Proclus upon the Timaeus, who says that the Grecian Athens and the Egyptian
Sais had but one and the same Tutelar presiding over it. Secondly, By comparing
a place of Athenagoras, and another of Jamblichus together, the former of which
interprets (...), or Minerva, to be (...), that Wisdom or Providence which
pervades or passes through all things; and the latter says of the Egyptian
Deity, that it was (...), the Name of a God penetrating and insinuating himself
through the whole World; to which he adds likewise a Passage of Horapollo, who
says of God according to the Egyptians, That he was a Spirit diffusing it
self through the World, and intimately pervading all things; that is, both the
Egyptians by their Neith or Neithas, the Latins by their Minerva, and the
Greeks by their Pallas and their Athene, understood an Omnipresent divine Mind
or Understanding united to a certain Subtle or Aetherial Matter, of which it
makes great use in its external Operations. Thirdly, He proves the same by
comparing the Inscription upon the Temple of Sais, concerning Neith or Neithas,
(...). I am all that was, is, and shall be, and my Peplum or Vail no mortal
has ever yet uncovered, with a place of Servius concerning Minerva. Peplum est
proprie palla picta Feminea Minervae consecrata; in both which places the
Peplum or Vail is the subtle Matter of the Universe, which was looked upon as
the Clothing or Body of the Deity; as in what has been said above, it was
called the Skin of the Amalthean Goat, the Reasons of which have been already
assigned, and Pherecydes by another word, but still pointing and aiming at the
same Notion, that the Ether was the Garment or Covering, or Body of the
Divinity, calls it the (...), or Cloak of Jupiter.

(...),
(...),
(...).
That is, Jupiter makes himself a large and beautiful Cloak, and in it he
Paints or Weaves the Ocean, and the Habitations thereof, that is, the Islands,
and the greater Continents that are to be met with in it; and so the sense of
this Egyptian Monument, (...). And my Vail no mortal Man has ever uncovered,
will be this, My Vail it self which is, as it were, my Body composed of Subtle
and Aetherial Matter; this, as being a sensible Object, you may behold with
mortal and material Eyes, but my immortal and immaterial Part in which my
Understanding, my Will, my Power, my Goodness, my Justice, and all my
Perfections and Attributes reside; this no mortal, no material Eye can see, nor
any finite Understanding comprehend; so then, this being the true Notion of
Neith or Minerva, that it is the Subtle or Aetherial Matter of the Universe,
actuated and animated by a divine Mind, very different from the dull, stupid,
gross and unactive Earth; it would be very strange if Isis, who is without
question, the same with the Earth, should be the same with Neith or Minerva
also; besides, that when Pherecydes compares this Globe of Earth and Water,
with its Ornaments of Trees, Flowers, and Inhabitants, to the Painting or
Weaving of a Device upon a Garment, or to the Badge upon it, and if we consider
the infinite disproportion which there is betwixt this little inconsiderable
Mass, and the vast Circumference of the spacious Ether, we may as well say,
not only that a Watermans, a Porters, or a Bedles Badge, is the Coat or Cloak
upon which it is found; but that even a Button or Shoulderknot upon a Coat, are
the Coat or Garment it self upon which it is worn, as that Neith, or Minerva,
and Isis, are the same.

But, because the Authority of Plutarch, which is deservedly Great, is not for
that reason slightly to be rejected, therefore I shall show that he is not so
much to be reli'd upon in these Matters, by considering and exposing some other
of his Egyptian Mistakes: Of Serapis, he says that he was so called from the
Egyptian word (...), which he renders by (...), signifying a Feast of Joy and
Gladness for the return of the Sun out of the Winter Signs, to bring a new
Spring, a new Summer, new Plenty, and a new Harvest into Egypt, and thus much
is true. First, That (...) might very well signify this in the Egyptian
Language, which was very nigh of kin to the Hebrew. For in Hebrew Shour is
Cantavit, Cecinit, and Shir is Canticum, and the Song of Solomon is called in
Hebrew by the Name of Shir ha shirim, the Song of Songs, and Songs were always
a principal Expression of the Joy and Gladness of such Festival Solemnities.

Secondly, It is true that there was such a Feast as he speaks of, which
Macrobius calls Hilaria, and points us to the very day upon which it was used
to be Celebrated in these words, where speaking of the Names and Ceremonies
belonging to the Sun among the Phrygians, Egyptians and others, he says,
Praecipuam autem Solis in his Ceremoniis verti rationem, hinc etiam potest
colligi, quod ritu eorum (Aegyptiorum) catabasi finit a simulationeque luctus
peracta, celebratur laetitiae exordium ad octavum Kalendas Aprilis, quem diem
Hilaria appellant, quo primum tempore Sol diem longiorem nocte protendit. And
what he means by the Catabasis or Descent of the Sun, he sufficiently explains
in several places of this Chapter, where he divides the Signs af the Zodiac
into Superiora and Inferiora, by the former understanding the Summer, and by
the latter the Winter Signs of every respective place; so in the beginning of
the Chapter, Sol annuo gressu per duodecim signorum ordinem pergens, partem
quoque Hemispherii inferioris ingreditur, quia de duodecim signis Zodiaci sex
Superiora, sex Inferiora censentur; and again a little after, Cum Solemersit ab
Inferioribus partibus terrae, vernalisque aequinoctii transgreditur fines
augendo diem tunc est and Venus laeta, etc. And other Expressions there are to
the same purpose, which it is needless to Transcribe.

But now in the first place, This Etymon from the Egyptian (...), or the Hebrew
Shir, by the Addition of an Aleph, which I have shown already to be
indifferently added or omitted, in the instances of Aram, Armenia, Assyria,
Acheron, Orpheus, and others, had been a much more tolerable account of Osiris
than Serapis.

Secondly, It would be a puzling Question, if Plutarch had been alive, and a
Man should have put it to him, why had he not his Name from Grief as well as
Joy? or indeed rather from the former than the latter. For they mourned for his
absence six Months together; but this Festivity which was called (...), was as
has been proved, but of one days continuance.

Thirdly, The Egyptians did not rejoice for the return of the Sun, under the
name of Serapis, but Osiris, as is evident from Macrobius, who tells us
expressly, that the Phrygians performed this Ceremony to A^^imes, and the
Egyptians to Osiris; for so having said what was last before cited concerning
the Phrygians wellcoming their Attines, by which Name they call the Sun; after
a six Months Period of Lamentation, he adds, Idem sub diversis nominibus
Religionis effectus est apud Aegyptios cum Isis Osirin luget; where, what he
says, sub diversis nominibus, is not so to be understood, as if the Egyptians
in the performance of this Religious Custom, were used to invoke the Sun by
diverse Names, who in the Celebration of this Mystery was never called by any
other Name than Osiris, according to that of the Satyrist. Exclamare libet
populus quod clamat Osiri Invento.


But only that whereas, the Phrygians welcomed the returning Sun under the name
of Attines, and the Earth was represented as mourning for his absence, under
the Name of Matter Deum; the Egyptians meaning the same thing, and using the
same Ceremony, and at the same time that the Phrygians did, yet had different
Names for the Objects of their Devotion, calling the Earth Isis, and the Sun
Osiris.

Lastly, The true and unquestionable Etymology of Serapis, is from the Hebrew
Saraph, signifying to burn, in which all the Radicals of this Name Serapis, are
evidently contained, and the scortching Heat and fiery Nature of the Sun, is
also very aptly expressed and signified by it, and from hence the Seraphim had
their Names, being not Aerial Demons, but an Order of Spirits, whose Vehicles
were of an Aetherial Consistence, consisting of igneous or lucid Parts, as the
Cherub at the Entrance of Paradise, is described, holding a Flaming Sword in
his hand; and according to what the Psalmist says of God in a very known
place, That he makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a Flame of Fire.

Secondly, Another instance which I shall give of Plutarchs unskilfulness in
these Matters, shall be taken from what he says concerning Osiris; of which he
gives two several Interpretations, First, That it is as much as (...); Os, as
he says, among the Egyptians, De Is. and Osir.
signifying many, and Irin an Eye. Secondly, That it is as much as (...), an
active and beneficent Power; and in another place, it is (...), The first and
highest of all things, the same with the Tagathon or supreme Good; which is
also confirmed by a Passage of Jamblichus, (...), V. Intel. Sys. p 151 falsely
marked 411.
that the supreme Numen from its beneficent Nature, or from its Attribute of
Goodness, is called Osiris. Now in the first place, it may seem very strange
that the same word in the same Language, should signify two things so
different from one another, as that which has many Eyes, and that which has
abundance of goodness and beneficence in its Nature, though indeed in a
symbolical way such a thing might be, in as much as many Eyes may be a pretty
natural symbol of Care and Circumspection, but then this Care so far as it
depends upon this Symbol, is perfectly indifferent either to Good or Evil, and
there is no reason why it should be restrained to one, rather than the other,
for Watchfulness and Circumspection may be to bad purposes as well as to good.
But Secondly, If by Osiris be meant the Sun, as there is no manner of question
but that was the meaning, why should he be called (...), who had but one Eye,
as has been already discoursed in what has been said above concerning the
Cyclops, nay, whose Hieroglyphic and Symbol was not many Eyes, as this
Interpretation of Plutarch may seem to insinuate but one, they are the express
words of Macrob. concerning him. Satur. l. 1. c. 21.
Osirin Aegyp^ ut Solemn esse asserant, quotiens Hieroglyphicis literis suis
exprimere volunt, insculpunt sceptrum, ^nque eo speciem oculi exprimunt, and
hoc signo Osirin monstrant; significantes hunc Deum Solemn esse, regalique
potestate su^limem cuncta despicere: Quia Solemn Jovis, (i. e. Aetheris,) oculum
app^llat antiquitas. Thirdly, It is to be observed, that there was anciently a
very great Affinity betwixt the Egyptian, Chaldean, Persian, and Hebrew
Tongues. Now there is nothing in Hebrew to make up the Name of Osiris, that
signifies either (...) or (...). For taking for granted what Plutarch tells us
that Irin in the Egyptian, signifies an Eye, which I believe to have been a
mistake, and that this Irin of his was nothing but a corruption of the Hebrew
Hajin, which signifies an Eye, but will not do his business for want of an^
there is no word in Hebrew that comes any thing nigh the other part of the
composition, unless it be Hatsam, multum, numerorum esse, and at that rate it
should be Ots^^^ris, not Osiris, without the Elision of the M. which is in this
case very uncouth and hard; or from Phoush, Abundare, Augescere, Multiplicare,
and so it should be Phosiris; besides, that these two Significations assigned
by Plutarch, are therefore inconsistent with each other, because the former of
them supposes the word Osiris to be a compound, but the latter a simple, as
shall be hereafter declared; in the mean time, to show the validity of this
Argument, which is drawn from the great likeness of the Egyptian and Hebrew,
and other Oriental T^ng^es. I will instance in all the Persian and Egyptian
Gods that came to my mind, most of which were but so many Names of the Sun, and
show plainly that they are all of them as to their signification agreeable to
the Hebrew, though as to their particular Application to the Sun or the Earth,
they were peculiar to the Persian or Egyptian Soil.

FINIS.
The INDEX.
A.
APpeals in case of Murder in the Law of England taken, though imperfectly
from a custom of like Nature among the Jews. p. 9. 10. Astarte, Ashtoreth,
Ashtaroth. See the various acceptations, from p. 263 to 269. Egyptians, the
Law of the Leviratus obtained among them. p. 10. 11. Egypt. why supposed
anciently to have been recovered out of the Water. p. 93. Avus. Avunculus from
the Hebrew. Ab. p. 24. Aventinus Mons, whence so called. p. 23. Acheron, what
and whence so called. p. 27. Armenus, Armenia, whence so called. p. 28. v. and
p. 126. Aleph and Hajin, Hebrew Letters of much the same potestas. p. 29. 30.
Agag v. Og, Agagite v. Haman. Attica, what it signifies in the ancient
Mythology, and why? p. 36. See also from p. 119. to p. 126. in which much of
the Scripture History is vindicated and confirmed. Astrology, its rise and
vanity. p. 61. 62. (...), v. (...). Alah, see Elon, Adonis, from the Hebrew or
Phaenician Adon, or Adonai. p. 85. Amarus, from the Hebrew Mar, by the addition
of an Aleph. p. 127. Amphion, a Name of the Sun. p. 130, 131. Apollo, why said
to preside over Herbs? And why over Music and Medicine? from p. 129, to 131.
Why called (...), etc. p. 133. Apollo, whence so called, p. 164. Why appeased
with white Sacrifices. p. 18^. Why born in Delos. p. 224, 225. (...), Minervae
scutum, the Body of the Sun, as Minerva her self was the whole Ether. p. 194,
to 197. Aurora, (...), Why so called. p. 199, 200. qu. aurea hora. p. 200.
Aqua, Aquila, Aquilo, Acus, Acuo, Acies, Acumen, whence and what. p. 242, 243.
Atergatis, v. Derceto.
B.
(...), from the Hebrew Bier. p. 16. Benus, Been, Benignus, Bonus, whence. p.
16. (...). emendati. p. 41, 42. (...), Glans, whence. p. 77. Brontes, the same
with the Sun. p. 172. Bachus, a Name of the Sun. p. 191. Boreas, from the
Hebrew, Barach. p. 243. Baal, the same with the Sun. p. 265. whence so called.
p. 266, 267. Bohel, Bahala. ib.
C.
Cornu, from the Hebrew Keren. Kalabra, curia Kalabra, why so called. p. 16.
Charon, whence so called p. 27. Cocytus, (...). p. 28. 29, 30. (...), Cam^lus,
from the Hebrew Gamal. p. 52. Ceritus, actus a Cerere, Lymphatious p. 70.
Cecrops, the first King of Athens, according to the Greeks, who did not
understand their own Mythology. The same with Adam, and why called (...),
Geminus, Biformis, see largely from p. 145, to 163. Candeo, Candens, Candidus,
Candor, Candela, Cicindela, Excandesco, ^ncendo, Succendo, Succensus,
Succenseo, all from the Hebrew Kanna, Zelotypum esse, Zelo Flagrare. p. 163.
Cyclops, the Cyclops, the same with the Sun, being but three several partial
considerations of his Influence and Virtue, from p. 168, to 173. (...), the
Ether, and why so called. p. 192. to 194. Chaos, from the Hebrew Choshek; and
from Chaos were descended Erebus, Nox, Ether, Dies, Amor, Dolus, Metus, Labor,
etc. and the meaning of all this from p. 207. to 209. the Etymon defended, and
Chaos shown according to some of the Ancients, to have been the Original and
Sourse of all things, as well Gods as Men. p. 215. to 222. Caeus the Titan, the
same with the Earth. p. 261. v. p. 263. Chemosh, of the Moabites, the same with
the Sun. p. 265.
D.
Divan, vox Turcica, what and whence. p 15. Dey, the chief Magistrate of Tunis,
why so called. p. 15. Drogerman interpres, vox Turcica, unde. p. 28. Deucalion,
his Flood, the same with Noah's, from p. 54, to 117. etc. See Pyrrha. Divine
Nature, v. Eternity. Dodona, (...), the place where the Ark rested, ^and where
Noah offered his first Sacrifice, as is probably made out, and a probable
reason from Etymology assigned, from p. 79, to 90. (...), its most ancient and
proper sense. p. 90. Dam, Sanguis, why in Hebrew so called. p. 126, 127. (...),
Aerial Demons, hovering about the Earth. p. 186. by Plato taken for the
Aetherial also. p. 184, to 186. (...) p. 188. (...), a Name of the Sun. p. 191.
Diana, why said to be born in Delos. p. 224, 225. Delus, a Name of the Sun, p.
226. to p. 235. The whole Earth in some sense may be called Delos. p. 230. as
well as that particular Island where Apollo was Worshipped and said to be Born.
ib. (...), whence derived. ib. Dies, (...). p. 241. Draco, from (...). p. 259.
Derceto, the Tohu or Universal Mass; sometimes it seems to comprehend the
efficient and material Cause together, her Statute explained. p. 270. to 273.
E.
Eternity, successive according to Antiquity, and the divine Nature extended.
p. 59 (...), usually signfies the (...). p. 66. Elon, Elan, Alah, Helion, an
account given of the Fable of Men's being Born, ex rupto robore, from p. 74. to
77. Eurydice, a Name of the Moon, and why so called? And the Fable concerning
Her and Orpheus explained. p. 139, 140. Eurymedon, a Name of the Sun. p. 140.
(...), see Juno. (...), see Aurora. Erebus, from the Hebrew Hereb, and that
Etymon defended. p. 219. to 222. Expansum, v. (...). Eagles, why dedicated to
the Honor and Service of the Sun. p. 260.
F.
Fathers, their power absolute ever their Children, as well by the Roman as the
Jewish Law. p. 7. Facio, for Macto, whence. p. 17. Flamen Dialis, wore a white
Hat, and why. p. 182. Firmamentum, v. (...).
G.
Gyges, the same with Ogyges. p. 46. why Centimanus, and why Semibos. p. 47.
his Ring and Brazen Horse explained. p. 47, 48, 49 to 53. The Description of
Gyges his Flood, very agreeable to that of Noah, ib. (...), Gigas, whence so
called. p. 53. (...), Glans, v. (...).
H.
Husbands, their Power absolute over their Wives as well by the Roman as the
Jewish Law. p. 7, 8. Hasah, in Hebrew what, and Hostia, Hostis, Hostimentum,
Hostire, whence. p. 17. Her, in Hebrew what. p. 21. Haman, the Agagite, and why
so called. v. p. 41. etc. Hereb in Hebrew, what. p. 61. Helion, see Elon.
Hephaestus, ab Eshta, a Name of Vulcan, the same with the Sun. p. 163, 164.
I.
Jupiter, Lapis, where probably worshipped. p. 23. Inachus, the same with Noah,
p. 34. Jupiter, the same with the Sun. p. 169. or with the pure Ether. p. 171
which two things are likewise largely proved in several other places, see
particularly p. 191. etc. why called (...). p. 169. why called (...). p. 179.
p. 191, etc. why' (...). p. 180. Why appeased with the Sacrifice of a white
Lamb upon the Ides of every Mouth. p. 182. see Juno. Jupiter, a Name of the
Universal Nature, or of the Universal Efficient Cause in Conjunction with the
Material. p. 204, 205. Why born at Crete. p. 224, 225. Juno, the Atmosphere or
the Airy Region. p. 169. v. p. 175. sometimes taken for the Moon. p. 181. The
Quarrels between Her and Jupiter, in the Poets Physiologically solved. p. 182.
why called (...). by Homer. p. 198. to 202. why said to be the Wife of Jupiter.
p. 201. 202. Isis, the Mass of Earth and Water, or the passive Principle of
Nature. p. 204. v. and p. 273. to 275. Why worshipped in the form of an Ox. p.
273.
L.
(...), what and whence. p. 55, 56. Linus, a Name of the Sun, from p. 135, to
138. (...), a Feast in honor of Minerva, Vulcan and Prometheus, what it meant.
from p. 229 to 235. Latona, a Name of the Earth. p. 261, 262, 263.
M.
Mola, from the Hebrew Melach, Sal, p. 15, 16. Mezentius, from the Hebrew Maas
sprevit. p. 27, 28. Musleman, Fidelis, Perfectus, vox Turcica, unde. p. 28.
(...). p. 70. v. and p. 109. Minos, a Name of the supreme Numen, the same in
signification with Prometheus, and the Father of Deucalion, as the other was;
see this largely insisted upon, and Objections answered; and the true Etymon of
Minos assigned, from p. 108, to 112. (...), Mina, Minerva, (...). p. 108, 109.
Minerva, see Neptune, her Aegis. or Shield, or Target, the same with the Body
of the Sun. p. 179. why called by Homer (...). p. 197, 198. the same with the
Aetherial or Subtle Matter of the Universe. ib. see also p. 231, 232, 233, 234.
see Pallas. Mulciber, Melec Abir, the same with Vulcan and the Sun. p. 173.
Mythology of Antiquity to be Physiologically explained, according to the
Opinion of Praetextatus i^ Macrobius. p. 178. Maranatha, whence so called. p.
266.
N.
Nox, from the Hebrew Nous, Fugit, p. 15. Noah, see Ogyges, and Inachus, and
Deucalion. Neptune, the watery Substance of the Universe. p. 155, 156. Why
called (...). p. 157, 158. The Contention between him and Minerva, in
Apollodorus explained, and Objections answered, from p. 155, to 161. Neith. p.
276.
O.
Og, Ochus, Agag, Ogyges, from p. 29, to 31. (...). p. 31. and 35. Ogyges and
Noah's Flood, the same. p. 33, etc. Ogyges and Inachus, the same with one
another, and with Noah. p. 34. Ogygus or Ogyges, why said by Cedrenus to be of
the Seed of Japheth. p. 44, 45. see Gyges. v. and p. 117, 118. Orpheus, (...),
in Plato, what. p. 126, 127, 131. Orpheus, the same with the Sun, proved
largely from p. 127, to 130. The Fables concerning him explained. ib. and p.
138, 139, 140. v. and p. 239, 240, 241. Oeager or Oeagrus, the same with the
Sun. p. 132, 133. Oceanus, whence so called. p. 242. (...), Orion, (...), what
and whence. p. 244.
P.
Pontifex, whence. p. 13, 14. Pomerium, what and why so called. p. 22. (...),
for, (...). p. 22. Proavus, whence. p. 24. Pignus, (...), Paena, Pawn, whence.
p. 25. Pario, Partus, whence. p. 27. Prometheus, the supreme Nature, and the
same with the Sun amongst the ancient Greeks, proved largely from p. 56, to 63.
see also from p. 229, to p. 235. see Pallas. v. p. 248, 249. Pyrrha, the Fable
of Deucalion and Pyrrha explained, and a way found out to explain many other
things in the Fabulous Antiquity that lie as yet undiscovered, from p. 63, to
65. Places dedicated to the service and honor of God, were used to retain their
Sanctity for a long time, from p. 81, to 85. Priapus, a Name of the Sun, whence
so called, p. 164. Why painted and graven with a great Pudendum? Why worshipped
by the Seaside, and called (...), etc. Why Sacrificed to with an Ass? Why said
to be born at Lampsacum? from p. 224, 225. Pyracmion, the same with the Sun. p.
172. Pan, the Universal Nature. p. 202. Proteus, the Universal Nature, in what
sense. p. 202, 203, 205. A confusion of the efficient and material Cause of the
World. p. 272, 273. (...), as much as (...), Primus Existens, in a Fragment of
Orpheus. p. 205. Priapus, why feigned by some to be the Son of Bachus and
Venus. p. 225. a Port and a City so called from the Worship of Priapus in them.
p. 229. Pallas, see Minerva, born of Jupiters Head cleft in sunder by Vulcan or
Prometheus, the meaning of that Fable. p. 236, 237. Phosphorus, see Titan,
Paean, so Titan, Pandora, the same with our First Mother Eve; the Fable
concerning her explained. p. 238, 239.
R.
Romans, a Colony from the East. p. 12, 13. Rex, unde. p. 14. Resh Gabbaci. p.
15. Riseffendi, Turcica vox, unde. p. 15. Rebis, vox Arabica, quid. p. 15.
Redhostire, what, and whence. p. 17. Ruo, whence. p. 25. Rakia, v. (...).
S.
Sacrifices of Animals before the Flood, from p. 1. to p. 6. see also from p.
141, to 145. Sex. unde. p. 14. Suffetes, vox Punica, quid. p. 15. Stella, qu.
Sterula, from (...). p. 85. Steropes, the same with the Sun. p. 172. Sun, The
Sun according to the Ancients, the Fountain of Vitality, the Author and Sourse
of Animality or Life. p. 60, etc. and in many other places more particularly
from p. 233, to 236, etc. Why worshipped in the form of a Serpent. p. 259.
(...), Firmamentum, Rakiah, Expansum, Vulgatus interpres notatus. p. 245, 246.
Shamta, what and whence. p. 266.
T.
Tabanus, whence. p. 23. Turtur, from the Hebrew Tor, p. 80. Tubalcain, not the
same with Vulcan. p. 163. (...), the Stars or lucid Bodies of an Aetherial
Consistence. p. 183, to p. 185. Tartarus, the situation and extent of it. p.
189, 190. Thetis, (...), why so called. p. 198. The Name of the Tohu or
Universal material Nature. p. 205, 206. which is afterward largely proved. --
Why appropriated to the watery part of the Universe. p. 275, 276. (...). what.
p. 206. Tethys, the same with Tohu or the Primigenial Mass, p. 209, to 214.
(...), what and whence so called. p. 246, to 248. Titan, for the Sun, Astra
Titania. (...), the Earth. (...), Vapors and Exhalations. The War betwixt the
Titans and the Gods explained. p. 248, to 253. Titan, Hyperion, Phosporus,
Paean, Zeus, all of them the same. p. 258. (...). what. p. 259. Themis, why
taken for the Earth. p. 254, to 257. Titan, (...), the Moon, p. 260. the Sun
and all the Planets called by this Name. p. 263, etc.
V.
Venus, whence. p. 16. Victima, whence. p. 16. (...), a Name of the Sun. (...),
as Amphion, (...). p. 131. see Titan. Vulcan, whence so called. p. 163, 227. a
Name of the Sun, and some Fables concerning him explained, from p. 163, to 167,
Why said to be the Son of Jupiter and Juno. p. 169. Why all Workmanship as
well in VVood as Iron, was by the Poets attributed to Vulcan. p. 173, 174. Arma
Vulcania. ib. Vulcan, why made to wait at the Feast of the Gods. p. 175, 176.
Why called (...), and why (...). p. 176, 177. see also concerning the
Lampadophoria, from. p. 229, to 235. see Pallas.
W.
Water, the first Principle of all things, according to Thales, Anaxagoras, and
others. p. 222, etc. Venus, why said to be born of the spum^ of the Sea, and
for that reason called (...); why said by others to be born in an Island, and
thence called (...). p. 223, 224.
Z.
(...), so Jupiter and Titan. Zoroaster, whence so called. p. 265.
ERRATA.
Page. 6. line 5. for sum read tum. p. 25. l. 20 r. (...). p. 26. l. 7, r.
comitio. p. 33. l. 19. r. Ogyges. p. 35. l. 10. r. (...). p. 47. l. 10. r.
Dele, of. p. 64. l. 1. for Capius r. Lapis. p. 67. l. 21. r. (...) p. 78. l.
12. r. so as. p. 85. l. 10. r. Saros, and in the Margin Hasar. ib. l. 21.
Adonai. p. 89. l. 10. r. as a fifth, and in the Margin r. Suasor 1. p. 90. in
the Margin, l. 1. r. so, l. 8. r. that he. p. 92. l. 8. r. no violent VVind. p.
101. in the Margin, l. 1. r. Jaiin. l. 3. Jonah. l. ult. Bachus. p. 132. in the
Margin, r. (...). p. 132. l. 19. (...). l. 20. (...). p. 136. in the Margin, l.
3, 4. Bellerophon. l. ^. (...). p. 138. l. 17. r. at others. l. 27. r. so this.
p. 142. l. 13. r. it depended. p. 143. l. 9. r. rectangular. l. ult. r. are not
to be heard. p. 14. l. 2. for least, r. less. l. 22. r. Minervae. p. 148. l.
26. r. this ancient. p. 158. l. 14. r. and she. p. 203. l. 14. r. who that. in
the Margin ib. r. of the same, etc. p, 264. l. 24. Dele, of.

Other Errata there are, and some of these of lit^^e consequence, which are
left to the correction of judicious Readers.


