A DISCOURSE OF THE Divine Omnipresence AND ITS CONSEQUENCES, Delivered in a
SERMON BEFORE The Honorable SOCIETY of Lincolnes-Inn, upon the first Sunday of
this Michaelmas Term.

By JOHN TURNER, late Fellow of Christs-College in Cambridge.

Sic vive cum hominibus tanquam Deus videat, sic loquere cum Deo tanquam
homines audiant. LONDON, Printed by R. E. for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir George Ieffryes. Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief
Justice of England, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
My Lord,
THis little Performance, which would have courted you for a Patron had you
still continued at the Bar, one of the best Advocates that ever pleaded there,
now dreads and fears you sitting upon the Bench, where you have approved your
self, by the extorted confession of your Enemies themselves, to be so just, and
so impartial a Judge. But, my Lord, I know the obligingness and goodness of
your Nature to be such, that you can pardon, what you will not defend, and
therefore I could not forbear taking this first occasion, after having received
so great a mark of your Favor, to lay my self humbly at your Lordships feet,
to pay my hearty and affectionate Acknowledgments for the great Obligation and
Honor you have done me. It was an Obligation of the highest nature, because I
wanted a subsistence so much, and was in danger every day of encountering with
greater difficulties than before: And it was an Honor so extraordinary, that
nothing could be more; that your self, and those other Lords and Gentlemen in
Commission with you, should give me so desirable a Character, and so good a
Preferment together; for it is plain, it was for my Loyalty and Affection to my
Prince and Country, two Interests that are inseparable from each other, that I
was made the Object of your Choice, and therefore it would be very incongruous
in me, if having withstood the shock of the most miserable Circumstances, in a
firm adherence to my Allegiance and Duty, I should not now continue to the end,
a perpetual Example of the most constant and entire Obedience, when Interest,
Gratitude, and Inclination are in a triple League and Confederacy together.

I owed my Fellowship at Christ-College, to the Kings Royal Prerogative and
Princely Favor, and it is to the same Royal Goodness, reflected from those
that act in Commission from it, that I am now proud and safe in the Title and
Advantage of Hospitaller of St. Thomas; so that the King has now a double
Title to my Studies and my Life, beside that of my being his natural Subject
and Servant, and it is still a further Obligation upon me to conform to all the
Instances of Loyalty and Obedience, that I may not disappoint your Lordship and
the rest of the Commissioners, who have reposed a confidence and expectation in
me.

The Subject here treated of, the Omnipresence of God, is of that universal
influence upon all the Actions and Affairs of Humane Life, that if it were but
duly and frequently attended to, there would be no need of the Pulpit or the
Bar, and though there may be defects in the management and method, yet it
happens very luckily in my discourse upon it, which was uttered when I did not
think of that good Fortune which has since befallen me, that it will appear you
have preferred a Protestant Divine, at a time when every thing but a Protestant
Dissenter, that is, a Dissenter from the Established Protestant Religion, is by
some branded with the Character of a Papist.

But, my Lord, you are wanted at Westminster Hall, and I do rudely to detain
your Lordship thus long, therefore I shall conclude with my Prayers to Almighty
God, whose Providence, in so necessary a Juncture, has placed a person of so
much Prudence, Learning, Integrity, and Courage, in so high a Station, that he
would assist and guide you by his wise and good Spirit in your great and
difficult Affairs, and that you may go on with continuance and increase of
Honor, to be eminently serviceable and useful to your Country, till you
arrive, after a peaceful and vigorous Old Age, at those blessed Mansions of
Eternal light, and rest, and peace, which God has prepared, as an
encouragement and reward of Virtue, for all those that Fear him, and Honor the
King. I am, may it please Your Lordship,

Your Lordships, Most Humble, Obliged, and Obedient Servant. John Turner.

ERRATA, disturbing the Sense.
Page 27, for employed read enslaved. p. 32. for seasonable r. reasonable.

Psalm. CXXXIX. 7, 8, 9, 10. Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither
shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven thou art there: if I
make my bed in hell, behold thou art there: If I take the wings of the morning,
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me,
and thy right hand shall hold me.


AS there has never yet been any Nation so barbarous, nor any People so
stupid, as not to acknowledge the Existence of a God, a Truth that shines with
so much Evidence and Demonstration, that blindness it self can hardly be
insensible of so glareing Brightness, and so piercing Light; so the great
reason upon which all Ages have all along proceeded, in their acknowledgment of
the Divine Existence, has been evermore taken from the consideration of the
works of Nature, and the Phoenomena that were about them. For they considered,
that the far greatest part of this Universe being stupid and insensible, was in
no capacity to order and dispose it self after so comely and regular a manner,
nor to preserve it self in so magnificent and beautiful a Structure, for so
many Ages; and what was true of the whole Universe taken together, the same was
true likewise of its several parts. Plants and Animals, and Minerals and
Metals, could not frame or organize themselves, or one another; neither could
the same Seed, by Virtue of any Power, or Wisdom, or Contrivance which it had
in it self, be able so constantly to produce the same sort of Herb, or Tree, or
Flower. And as the observation of the whole Universe together, and of every
part of it considered by it self, did undeniably argue that there was some
infinitely wise and understanding Nature, endued with Power and Goodness equal
to his Wisdom, by whom the whole Universe, and every part of it, was so
strangely, so wisely, and so graciously contrived, or in the Language of the
Royal Psalmist, so fearfully and so wonderfully made; so the usefulness and
Friendly Conspiracy of the several parts, for the support and maintenance of
each other, though in themselves they were destitute of Counsel, and were
incapable of any such contrivance, was still a further Evidence, a most
unquestionable, invincible, and irrefragable demonstration of an invisible and
immortal Being, by which all these things were administered and governed.

For to say that all these things came to be thus by chance, by the Epicurean
jumbling of a rash and inconsiderate Chaos; and that by the same Chance, by
which they were first disposed into so wise and orderly a Frame, they have
continued as they are for so long a succession of time, ever since before the
Theban and the Trojan War; to affirm, as Lucippus, Democritus, Epicurus, and
Lucretius, and the rest of those absurd and ridiculous Philosophasters have
done; that the Ear was not made for hearing, nor the Eye for seeing, nor the
Nose for smelling, nor the Feet for walking, nor any part or vessel of the
Humane Body, which are so vastly numerous, for the uses for which they are so
exquisitely fitted, and that as they were made at first by chance, so they
continue still to be propagated by it, is to ascribe not only Wisdom but
Constancy to Chance, both of which are perfectly incompetible, and inconsistent
with its Nature.

And for the same reason that they concluded there was indeed such a Being, as
an Invisible and Immortal God, they did likewise conclude him to be
Omnipresent, or infinitely extended over all his Works: For this is certain,
that nothing can operate by any Power or Efficiency which is properly its own,
where it is not present it self; and therefore if the Divine Power, the Divine
Goodness, the Divine Wisdom be extended over all things, it follows
unavoidably, that the Divine Substance, in which these Attributes have their
perpetual residence and abode, must be coextended to the Attributes themselves,
which is all that is meant by the Divine Omnipresence; and to say that God can
be present by any Virtue, or Power, or Efficacy of the Divine Nature, where the
real and local substance of the Divinity is not, is to affirm
Transubstantiation with the Papists, or to deny motion with Zeno, or to say any
thing which is never so absurd with any other of the Philosophers; as Cicero
tells us, there is nothing so absurd, which some Philosopher or other has not
owned; and therefore when Aristodemus in Xenophon urged Socrates with this
Objection, how it was possible for God, being but one, to manage and order all
things both in Heaven and Earth; the Answer of Socrates to the Objection was
this, (...). That God was so large and spacious a Being, that he could hear and
see all things, and be present every where, and order every thing at the same
time: And it was the inward sense and apprehension of this Divine Amplitude,
and Omnipresent Extention; an Extention not only of Attributes, but of
Substance and of Nature, That made David utter such Expressions as these, That
he covers himself with Light as with a Garment, and stretches out the
heavens like a Curtain; That he lays the beams of his Chambers in the Waters,
and makes the Clouds his Chariot, and walks upon the wings of the wind; That
his way is in the Sea, and his paths in the great Waters, and his footsteps are
not known; that is, his Immensity is unbounded, and his Extention infinite; or
in the words of my Text: Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I
flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make
my bed in hell, behold thou art there; if I take the wings of the morning, and
dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and
thy right hand shall hold me.

From which words I shall not enter upon a Discourse of the Divine Omnipresence
it self, of which all that is fit for a Sermon has been already spoken, and
which cannot easily be called in question, without questioning at the same time
the Existence of a God, which has a necessary connection with it; but I shall
choose rather to entertain your attention at this time, with an Enquiry into the
natural Results and Consequences of this Doctrine, which if they had been
either so thoroughly understood, or so heedfully regarded as they ought to be,
the manners of the world would always have been better, than ever yet they have
been known to be, and the Religion more pure and reasonable than it is even at
present, I do not say in some parts of the world, but in some parts of
Christendom it self, which is so far from being truly Christian, that setting
aside that light which the Gospel has afforded, it falls very short of the
Religion of Nature.

And the first Consequence which I shall mention shall be this, That if it be
true that God is a Substance infinitely extended, that he is present to all
things, and that in him, to use the language of the Apostle, that is, in the
large comprehension of the Divine Space or Substance, we live and move, and
have our being, then this ought to be a most powerful Argument and Motive to
us, to behave our selves always as if we were truly sensible of his presence in
the midst of us, with reverence, and sobriety, and godly fear, with a dutiful
regard both of him and of our selves; to live so as if we were always
immediately to dye, as if we believed, what is so plainly, so demonstrably
true, that the Judge is always at the door, and that he may immediately place
himself upon his dreadful Tribunal, to summon us before him to give an account
of our selves.

And indeed, what can be more impious, more impudently wicked, than for us to
abuse our selves, or one another, in the presence of him that made us, to
corrupt and debauch our Faculties and our Natures, in the presence of him that
gave them, and intended them for better uses? What more ungrateful than to
disoblige him, as it were before his Face, with all the aggravating
Circumstances of Defiance and Contempt, who is so kind, so merciful, and so
gracious to us, that we are upheld by his Mercy, and supported by his Arm,
which is mighty to save, at that very time when we offend against him? What
more foolish, than to provoke him who is so Powerful and so Just, so able to
execute the utmost Vengeance, and so concerned for the happiness of Mankind,
and for the good Order and Government of the World, that he must needs have a
very deep, and a very affecting resentment of all our Personal and Political
Vices, of the Offenses which we commit against our selves, and of those acts of
Injustice, Treachery, Cruelty, or Disobedience, which are committed against the
Peace and Quiet of the World? His Goodness appears so plainly in all the parts
of the sensible Creation, and it is so evident to Sense, that his mercy is over
all his works, that he must degenerate very much from himself, and must lay by
his Care and Concern for the Happiness of his Creatures, before he can suffer
any wicked Action, or any bad Example, which is not heartily Repented of, to go
unpunished; and therefore it is a very foolish and inconsiderate Practice of
the Sons of Men, to set themselves so fully to do Evil, because sentence
against an evil work is not speedily executed; For the Wise man assures us in
the very next words, That though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his
days be prolonged, that though he be not immediately taken off in the midst of
his sins, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, but
it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which
are as a shadow, because he fears not before God; that is, being in his
presence he fears him not.

It is indeed an Argument of a merciful and compassionate Being, that he spares
when he might punish, and that he gives us further opportunities of Repentance
and Amendment, when he might immediately take the forfeiture of our Sins; but
either we must think that there is no such thing as Justice in his Nature,
which yet discovers it self by a thousand remarkable instances of his
Providence, in the Government of the World, as clearly and as fully as his
Goodness does; or else we must unavoidably conclude, that the longer we
continue in the willful practice of any known sin, the greater is the
Provocation which is given to it, to exert it self with Usury and Increase of
Vengeance, to make up what was wanting in the speed of Punishment, by the
severity of it.

Nay, in truth, if he were not Just he could not be Good; for the punishment of
Offenders is a warning to Repentance, and an exhortation to Virtue; it is
intended for the good of those that are spared, and is in some sense the
greatest instance of Mercy that can possibly be given, whereas to let the World
run at sixes and sevens, to make no distinction betwixt the Innocent and the
Guilty, is but to give a public License to Mankind, to destroy and ruin
themselves and one another, which is the greatest Cruelty that can be
conceived; therefore God Almighty, as he has annexed Natural Punishments of
Poverty, Diseases and Disgrace to every thing that has the Nature or the
Notion of sin, so he does sometimes visit us by a particular Judgment, and
makes it plain to all the World, by an unexpected turn of his Providence, that
his hand is upon us, and that his Almighty Arm is stretched out against us; for
which reason it was that David, though at sometimes his Faith were shocked and
startled; his Feet were almost gone, his steps had well nigh slipped; and he was
envious at the foolish, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked; yet at other
times when he considered more maturely, when he laid all things together, and
weighed the whole Circumference of things in a Just and Impartial Balance, he
could pronounce with abundance of Confidence, and with a well grounded
Certainty and Assurance, That God shall wound the head of his Enemies, and the
hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his wickedness.

And this has been in all Ages so generally observed, and so constantly
believed by wise men, that God does sometimes interpose himself by a particular
Judgment, for the punishment of sinful men, and that the slowness of his
Justice is not to be interpreted as an Argument of the uncertainty of it, or of
his disregard of Humane Actions and Affairs, that their Writings are full of
Expressions to this purpose: Plutarch has written an entire Treatise upon this
Argument, which he styles De Sera Numinis Vindicta: And Horace makes it a
general Observation which seldom or never fails,

-- Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claudo.
And Claudian in his Invective against Rufinus, introduces himself at first
questioning the Providence of God, and his Care of Humane Affairs, because he
saw such Miscreants as Rufinus was living in so great prosperity and splendor.

Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sententia mentem,
Curarent superi terras, an nullus inesset
Rector, and incerto fluerent mortalia casu.
And then he gives the Reasons of his doubt, that on the one hand he was
tempted to believe a Providence, because of the regular and orderly motions of
the Stars, the constant return of the Seasons of the year, and such other
things as seem to look as if they were managed by an orderly, wise, and
understanding Nature, but then when he considered the prosperity of wicked men,
and the afflictions and calamities to which the good and virtuous were
frequently exposed, he then began to waver in his Opinion, and to incline to
the Sentiments of the Epicureans, who affirmed all things to have come by
Chance.

-- Rursum labefacta cadebat
Religio, causaeque viam non sponte sequebar
Alterius, vacue quae currere semina motu
Affirmat, magnu^que novas per inane figuras
Fortuna non art regi.
But then when at last he saw Rufinus punished, and that Justice had overtaken
him, and called him to account for all the Oppression and Villainy of his wicked
life, he then cries out in a triumphant manner, that now indeed he did in good
earnest believe there were such Beings as the Immortal Gods, and that they had
a tender and compassionate regard to the happiness of men.

Abstulit hunc tandem Rufini poena tumultum,
Absolvitque Does --
And to this purpose it is what Serapis in the Epigram is represented, as
discoursing to a Murderer in his Dream.

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
He was advised by his Dream to remove from the place where he lay asleep, for
that the wall he lay under was rotten, and would immediately fall upon him; at
which the man smiling, and pleased within himself, began to applaud himself in
the memory of his wickedness, as thinking the Gods were pleased with
Murderers, and had a kindness for Cruelty and Bloodshed. No, said Serapis, you
are mistaken for that, it is not out of kindness to you, but to the world, that
this warning was given, that you may be made a more public and notorious
Example.

Neither was it only the opinion of the wiser sort, but all the world have
generally believed, that great Offenders have ever been punished by a Divine
Justice, which will at length infallibly overtake them, as the Inhabitants of
Melita or Malta, when the Viper came out of the fire and fastened upon St.
Paul's hand, they said among themselves, Acts 28. 4. no doubt this man is a
Murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance suffers not to
live. And it was with allusion to this received Opinion among the Jews and
other Nations, that our Savior expostulates with those that brought him the
news of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices,
suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because
they suffered such things? I tell you nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish: Or those eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, and ^^^w
them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I
tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

This was the Reason of the Disciples Question concerning the man that was born
blind: Master, who did sin, this man, or his Parents, that he was born blind?
And so in the great Tempest when Jonah was on board the Ship, the Mariners
presently concluded that there was some grievous sinner on board their Vessel,
who was the cause of the danger they were in, and therefore they said every one
unto his fellow, come and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause
this evil is upon us. Which they had no sooner done, but the lot fell upon
Jonah, and it appeared plainly by the sequel of the story, that it was for his
sake the Tempest was raised: And upon the same account it is that Horace
declares that he did not think it safe to go in the same Ship with a profane
or sacrilegious person.

-- Vetabo qui cereris sacrum
Vulgarit Arcanae sub iisdem
Sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum
Solvat Phaselum.
To conclude, they did not only believe that God by his Judgments did pursue
the wicked, and at some time or other certainly overtake them, but also that by
a like miraculous Power he did sometimes interpose himself for the preservation
of Innocence in the midst of danger. So Martial said very wittily and very
wisely of an House that fell down after so strange a manner, that a person who
then happened to be in it got no harm, and was not buried in its ruins, stantia
non poterant, tecta probare Deum, an House that had stood firm, with the same
person in it, would not have proved the existence of a God.

And this is the first thing, that the Consideration of the Divine Omnipresence
should put us in mind of his Providence and of his Justice which are founded
upon it; and that it should make us the more careful to please him, and to obey
his Laws, who is present to all our actions, and intimately twisted into all
our thoughts, who is a perpetual witness of our behavior here, and will be the
terrible Judge of it hereafter. Neither ought it only to deter us from public
and open transgressions, such as are committed in the view of the world, and in
the face of the Sun, but we ought also to remember, in the language of the
Psalmist, that he has set our secret sins in the light of his countenance; or
in that of the Author to the Hebrews, that he is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart, neither is there any creature that is not manifest in
his sight: but all things are naked and open in the eyes of him with whom we
have to do. And therefore we ought to pray with holy David, that God would keep
us from secret, as well as from presumptuous sins: Nay, indeed if in this case
there were to be any difference in the zeal and fervency of our Prayer to God,
it ought rather to be greater that he would preserve us from the former, than
the latter, because by being concealed from the notice of the world, there is
the less danger of any temporal disadvantage from them, and so the temptation
to commit them is the stronger; and another thing that is to be considered, is,
that though it may be thought a sign of some Grace, a symptom of Modesty, and a
token of Shame, for a man to manage his wickedness in the dark; and indeed
there is this to be said for him, that he is not so hurtful to the world by his
Example, yet this must be acknowledged as an aggravating Circumstance of the
most private sensuality, and of the most secret and undiscerned injustice, that
it proceeds upon an Atheistical Principle, such a man has not God always
before his Eyes, or else he says in his heart there is no God, he wishes there
were none, and he is willing to believe there is none; otherwise certainly he
would consider with himself, that the presence of God, and of an accusing
Conscience, that are Witnesses to his action, is more than that of an hundred
thousand Spectators; he would consider that to do an unreasonable or a sinful
thing, is either to act upon supposition that God is not by, which is the next
thing to the denial of his Existence; or upon supposition that he will pardon
it, which is to sin against him, and reproach him to his face, for a too easy
and good natured Being at the same time, or it includes an utter and an
absolute denial of the Divine Existence, and a defiance to his Power and
Justice, than which no greater, nor more unpardonable or provoking sin can
possibly be committed.

And certainly, if we shrink away, and are ashamed of our selves, when we are
taken napping by a mortal man like our selves, a man whose breath is in his
nostrils, who carries the same appetites, the same desires, the same
infirmities about him that we do, and who may possibly be guilty of the same or
a like wickedness which he has detected and discovered in us; a man against
whom our Offense is not committed, a man who seeing our frailty ought to
reflect upon his own, and who cannot punish our wickedness as it deserves, how
much more ought we to dread the presence of the most high God, who is
immediately affronted by us, whose Majesty is so great, and his Justice so
impartial, and his Power so irresistible?

But secondly, The Consideration of the Divine Omnipresence or Infinite
Extention, ought to fill us with such awful and majestic Notions of God, with
such large and spacious apprehensions of his nature, as are not only the most
noble Object of Humane Contemplation that it can possibly pitch upon, but will,
when duly attended to, create in us a suitable love of his immense goodness,
and fear of his uncontrollable power, and admiration of his infinite wisdom,
and veneration for his unbiased and impartial Justice. We ought always to
behave our selves like virtuous and good men, because we are always in the
Divine Presence; and it is certain we shall behave our selves so much the
better, if we consider distinctly whose presence that is, it is the presence of
him that is all in all, that fills all things, and is present to all the
possibilities of the most unbounded space; it is he, who being every where,
governs all things after a strange and incomprehensible manner, he that is as
good as he is great, as wise as he is good, as just as he is wise, as powerful
as he is just, he whose infinity discovers an amazing deal, but hides a much
greater part of his immense Majesty, his vast, unlimited, and unbounded Nature.

It is impossible for us when we consider these things with a wistly and
attentive mind, not to love and fear him, not to praise, magnify, worship and
adore him, not to humble our selves before his mighty Throne, and fall down low
on our knees before his Footstool. And it was this immense amplitude of the
Divine Extension, which Aratus made to be the very reason and ground of all
Religious Worship, as indeed it is,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Let us begin with God, said he, whom we mortals ought never to forget, for all
the Streets and Markets, all the passages and avenues of Cities, the Sea and
the Sea Ports, are all of them filled with God, and we stand in need of him
every moment: And then follows that passage which St Paul has cited out of
him, (...). for we also are his offspring: And in imitation of Aratus, a Latin
Poet has expressed himself in the same manner,

A Jove principium Musae, Jovis omnia plena. But, Thirdly, a third practical
Inference which may be deducible from the Consideration of the Divine
Extension, is, that we are not to make our application to Angels or to Saints,
as Mediators or Intercessors with God on our behalf; for what need we any such
to deliver our Message, when he who alone is able to grant our Petition is
united and twisted into our very thoughts at the same time when we ask it; and
how incongruous would it be, when we are in the Kings presence, and in his
hearing, to entreat another to supplicate in our behalfs, when we are there our
selves, which is as much as to intimate that his Majesty would have more regard
to the person of the Petitioner, than to the reasonableness of the Petition, or
to the Circumstances of the person in whose behalf it was made; besides that,
we have no reason to believe that either the Angels or the Saints departed are
privy to our thoughts, or that they concern themselves (any otherwise than as
the first of these are sometimes employed by God to be his ministering Spirits)
about any Humane Affairs. We are sure they are but finite Spirits, and
consequently they cannot be present at all places at once, and this makes it
very suspicious, considering the immensity of the Universal Space, besides that
the Seat of all the glorified Spirits is generally agreed to be at so great a
distance, that for both of these reasons they are too far from us to be able to
hear what we say, or to be present to our thoughts and wishes, in order to
present them before the Throne of God.

Neither does it help the matter, what some of the Schoolmen have been pleased
to tell us, that the Saints behold the Prayers and the Necessities of their
Votaries below in the Beatifical Vision, or in the face of the Divine Glory,
which they fancy like a Glass wherein the Wants and Miseries of the Creatures
may be seen, for it is plain that this is a very dull and heavy Imagination,
and very unworthy the Majesty of God; besides that if he did not only know, as
he does, the wants of all his Creatures, but if they had made such deep
impressions and signatures upon his Nature, it would be great impiety to urge
him any further, when of himself he had taken such particular cognizance of the
desires and wants of all his Creatures; but it is still more detestable, in the
Practice of the Church of Rome, that so long a Beadroll of Saints shall be
invoked by a Rabble of Worshippers in a solemn Procession, as if neither they
nor God could be prevailed upon without abundance of importunity and clamor.

A man would think that place of the Colossians might have been a sufficient
Antidote, for the Church of Rome, to preserve her from the poison of this
foolish Heresy; Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility
and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly pufft up in his fleshly mind. For if the worship of Angels be forbidden,
who are a Superior sort of Creatures, that are supposed to have a more
familiar correspondence and a nigher access to their Maker, then certainly that
of Saints or Souls departed is much more, especially if we consider, that the
Angels being sent so frequently, as they are in Scripture, upon a Divine
Message, they might be thought the fitter Instruments to convey a Message back
again from whence they came; nay, the Christian Religion allows us, to believe
that men have their Angels in heaven, that do in general intercede for them at
the Throne of God, though it is still to be doubted, whether they have any
particular knowledge of of our wants. For so our Savior tells us, Matthew. 18.
10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little Ones; For, I say unto
you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold the Face of my Father which
is in Heaven. And the Cherubims in the Sanctuary being placed upon the Ark of
the Testimony, and looking upon the Divine Glory and Majesty that sat between
them, is an Argument that the Jews had an opinion, and such an opinion as was
authorized by God himself, that the Angels did make intercession in the
presence of God on the behalf of men.

But yet it is true, that we are not to apply our selves to the Angels, though
they should be allowed to intercede for us; it is true likewise that they are
not made miserable by a particular view of our Calamities and Misfortunes,
neither do they make any particular Intercession, but they are kind and
charitable Spirits that wish well to all mankind, and that Intercession which
they make is only a general thing, that God would hasten to accomplish the
number of his Elect, and that his Kingdom may come, and his Will be done in
Earth as it is in Heaven. Lastly, it is still true, that there is but one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, that is, he is the proper
Object of our Prayers and Intercessions, and it is he alone that Mediates in
Virtue of that Sacrifice which he has made of himself, as the High Priest did
in the most Holy Place for all the Congregation of Israel upon the solemn day
of Expiation.

Nay, perhaps after all, by Angels in that place of the Colossians, the
departed Spirits of the Saints may be understood; for in this Sense the word
seems to be understood, Acts 12. 15. Where Peter being loosed out of Prison,
knocked at the door of Mary the Mother of John, and when the Maid went in and
told how Peter stood at the Gate, they said unto her, thou art mad, because
they knew Peter was in Prison, and therefore they looked upon it as an
impossible thing: But when she constantly affirmed that it was he, then said
they, it is his Angel, that is, as I suppose, his Ghost, or his departed
Spirit, concluding that Peter had died, or had been put to death in Prison. So
also, Acts 23. 8. The Sadduces say, that there is no Resurrection, neither
Angel nor Spirit; but the Pharisees confess both: By which it is plain, that
there are but two things mentioned, for the word both cannot be extended to
more, one of them is the Resurrection, and the other is the Angel or Spirit,
which in this place it seems are Synonymous terms to signify the same thing,
and comprehending at once both the Angelick Forms and the Spirits of men
departed out of this mortal Life.

I know indeeed that there is another possible exposition of this place, which
has not yet been hit upon by any Interpreter, no more than this which I have
last mentioned concerning the Souls of men departed, but at present it is not
for my purpose to insist upon it; and it is certain that the Council of
Laodicea, who, as Theodoret informs us, condemned the Worship of Angels from
the authority of this place, understood it in the most plain and obvious sense
in which we usually understand the word, and in this sense it proves with a
still greater force and evidence against the Romish Superstition, Angels being
still a more noble Order of Beings; and if it be not lawful to worship them, it
is much less lawful to pay our Devotions to any Saints departed, however pious
and exemplary they may have been, and much less to those that have been
Canonized for Money, or for Treason, and owe their Saintship to their Friends
on the one hand, and which is still more horrid and detestable, to their Crimes
and Villainies on the other, who are preferred to Heaven for disturbing the
Earth, and mounted into the blessed Regions of light, and peace, and love, as
the reward of strife, disobedience, hatred and contention, and every evil work.

But without being beholding to the testimony of this place, which yet may
serve for a sufficient proof against the Romish Idolatry and Superstition, we
may appeal to that passage of Peter with respect to Cornelius, and of Paul and
Barnabas with relation to the Inhabitants of Lystra, who would not suffer
themselves by any means to be worshipped, merely for that reason, because they
were men; so that it seems, unless they lay down their humane nature at the
time of their departure, that is, unless the Saints departed cease to be
themselves, they cannot be Objects of Divine Worship. But we are sure that God
hears our Prayers, and that he is able to answer them, and that he is every
where present, as it were on purpose that he might first know our wants and
then relieve them, and we may approach his presence with confidence in the
Language of the Prophet, whatever becomes of that gainful Hierarchy of the
Romish Saints and Angels, who pay the Priests well, for the worship of the
People, Doubtless, thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us and
Israel acknowledge us not; thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer; thy Name
is from Everlasting.

Fourthly; by a reflection upon this universal Extension of the Divine Nature,
the worship of Images representing God the Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, or the
Blessed Trinity taken together, which has been practiced frequently in the
Church of Rome, is manifestly condemned: For besides the meanness of the
Representation, that he that made all things should be represented by an Image
made with hands; that he whose Nature is invisible, should be represented by a
Carved Image, or a Painted Resemblance of that which the Scripture declares to
have no Shape nor Appearance; that he who is Infinite should be drawn in little
upon a Wall or a Window; that he who is all Life, and Power, and Wisdom, should
be represented by that which is senseless, dull, and unactive, by that which
knows nothing, and is next kin to nothing; I say, besides this, it is absurd to
represent him as it were by Proxy, who is present and in the midst of us
himself; neither is it sufficient to say in this case, that his Substance being
invisible, and not to be discerned by mortal Eyes, or humane Senses, there is
therefore need of a sensible Memorandum, although the Worship be terminated in
himself; for at this rate all the Idolatry of the Heathen World may be excused,
for no man is so senseless to believe their Worship was terminated in a Stick
or a Stone, at least we ought not to believe it without very good Proof, and if
it could be proved, yet even this would be paralleled in the Church of Rome,
where they pray to the Crucifix of Wood or Stone as well as to Christ himself,
and attribute as much satisfaction and expiation to it, as they do to the blood
of their crucified Redeemer as appears undeniably from the Romish Missals which
are extant at this day, and may at any time be produced against them.

Fifthly, upon the same account of the Divine Extension, we are excused from
all the Romish Pilgrimages to Jerusalem, and Loretto, and Canterbury, and
Compostella, and other places, for as to the Sepulcher of out Savior at
Jerusalem, if they could certainly assign the place where he lay, which it is
more than probable they cannot do, yet what signifies the Sepulcher when the
body is not there? or if it were; yet I hope, a dead Carcass is not a fit
Object of Divine Worship and Honor; and as for the Shrines and Relics of the
Saints, certainly it must needs be gross Idolatry to worship them, when it is
so plainly unlawful to do it to the glorified Spirits of the Saints themselves.

The Saints cannot be worshipped without dishonor to God, who challenges all
our Worship and Adoration, and God is always present with us, so we need not
undertake a long and costly that Journey to find him out; and wherever God is,
there Christ is also; he is in the Father, and the Father in him, and they two
are one and the same; and this is the great mischief which Idolatry and
Superstition do, they take our minds off from him who is the only true Object
of Worship, in the contemplation of whose Nature there is the most perfect
satisfaction, and the truest pleasure, who is the most suitable and worthy
Object of our fear and hope, our love, and admiration, and desire, and who is
infinitely the most noble, and the most perfect Pattern of our Imitation; and
instead of this, our minds are employed to a few ridiculous Rites, and
imaginary Expiations, as if any thing but a sight and sense of our sin, a
dutiful and awful apprehension of that Majesty and Goodness which we have
offended, were able to reconcile us to God, or to reinstate us in his Grace and
Favor, who will not accept the Sacrifice of Fools, and the vain shows of
bigotry and superstition, without the obedience of a reasonable, and the
repentance of an humble and a contrite soul.

Sixthly, by a due and serious reflection upon this Doctrine, we may absolve our
selves from any obligation to the Romish Austerities and Mortifications,
because as the Divine Substance, so also are his Attributes, his Mercy, and his
Goodness extended over all his Works: And it appears plainly, not only by the
appetites, which we find about us, which may be innocently gratified, as well
as from the provision which is made for their enjoyment, that God did not
expect we should make our selves miserable by a perpetual abstinence and
self-denial, but we are to make the interest of Virtue and the honor of
Religion, the measure of our abstinence and enjoyment in these Cases. There
must be a prudence and a temperance in all things, and so St. Paul tells us,
Every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things; and that he
kept under his body, and brought it into subjection: lest that by any means
when he had preached to others he himself should be a cast away. But in another
place he tells us expressly, speaking of the painful and unnatural
mortifications of some in those times, such as were some among the Pharisees,
and the Essenes, and such as followed the severe Discipline of the Sons of
Jonadab the Son of Recab, and some no doubt, that pretended to be Christians
likewise, that bodily exercise profits nothing, but godliness is profitable
unto all things, having the promise of the Life that now is, that is, it is
consistent with a sober and moderate enjoyment of our selves, and of that which
is to come: And in the beginning of that Chapter, he tells us, that the Spirit
spoke expressly, that in the latter times some should depart from the Faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, that is, Doctrines
exhorting to the Worship of Demons, or Angels, or departed Spirits, speaking
Lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron: The very
Picture of the Jesuits at this day, who do not only practice, but defend in
their Writings, the Doctrine of Equivocation; and then it follows, Forbidding
to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats: And who they are that do both
of those things at this time of the day, we understand very well. And indeed if
we consider the unreasonable Austerities of some of the Religious, as they are
called, abroad, a man would be inclined to think they were not the Disciples of
Jesus, but of John; and that they took part with the Baptist against the
Messiah, accusing him, as his Enemies the Jews were wont to do, that he was a
glutton and a wine-bibber, and a friend of Publicans and sinners: And it is
observable, that though John the Baptist were a great Example of Abstinence
himself, yet it does not appear that he enjoined any such thing to his
Followers and Disciples; but on the contrary, every man was admitted to the
Baptism of John, upon the sole and only Condition of Repentance, and was as to
other things, so far as was consistent with Virtue and with Prudence, left to
be guided by his Constitution, and by the Circumstances of his Life and Fortune.

Seventhly, By a due Reflection upon the Divine Extension, we shall be excused
from the shame and inconvenience of auricular Confession, as it is practiced in
the Church of Rome at this day, for God does not expect that we should make a
particular confession of our sins to men, the consequence of which is only to
make our selves uneasy in the company of those to whom we have confessed; to
run an apparent hazard of being undone in many cases, by Knaves for interest,
or by Fools out of levity, inconstancy, and a blabbing humor; and indeed I
know nothing that it can be good for, but to let men, that have nothing to do
to pry into such matters, into the secrets of Families, and to put our selves
perfectly at the Mercy of a Priest, who will sometimes be treacherous as well
as other men; besides, that instead of keeping up a wholesome Discipline, it is
the way to corrupt it, and tends to the debauching both Layety and Clergy, in
as many ways as there are sins to be committed, when the Confessor and the
Penitent begin to discover and understand one another: But we are obliged in
the presence of men to make a general Confession, and we are in our thoughts,
as we go along, to apply that general Confession to our particular sins; and
before God, who is a Witness and a Spectator of our evil ways, who is so
intimately present to all our thoughts and actions, that it is to no purpose to
think of concealing any thing from him, we are to bewail and bemoan our selves
in a most particular manner, we must humble our selves before him in sackcloth
and ashes, by laying our sins at the Footstool of his Mercy, with all their
aggravations, beseeching him most humbly, with a sorrowful and broken heart, to
pardon us for what is past, and to assist us with his preventing Grace for the
time to come; that we may no longer abuse our selves, and do despite to so
merciful and so gracious a God.

In the Eighth place, The Consideration of the Divine Omnipresence and
Extension, ought to fill us with cheerfulness and courage in all our troubles
and adversities whenever they oppress us; it ought to give us a full
confidence and assurance in his Providence, which where ever we are is always
hovering with wings of mercy and compassion over us, that is, always at hand,
and is a ready help in the needful time of trouble, that is never far off in a
day of adversity, or in a time of danger, but is always nigh to them that call
upon him, yea to all such as call upon him faithfully.

Or if he do not see it fit or expedient to remove our trouble, to ease us of
our pain, to prevent our danger, and to instate us in a full possession of
peace, and rest, and safety, we are then in the Ninth and last place, to
Consider, That a Being of so great Goodness, and so tender Mercies, as all his
Works discover him to be, would not suffer us to be tormented, when we are not
conscious to our selves of any heinous Guilt, or when we are, after an hearty
and sincere Repentance, but that there is a Scene of Happiness behind, which as
yet we do not see; that he designs by this Calamity, compared with the
innocence of our lives, or the sincerity of our repentance, and the goodness of
his Nature, to give us a seasonable prospect of a blessed Immortality in
another and a better state, wherein these light afflictions that are but for a
moment, shall be made sufficient recompense and amends for, by a far more
exceeding and Eternal weight of glory.

FINIS.

