The PROTESTANT Martyrs: OR, THE Bloody Assizes, Giving an Account of the
Lives, Trials, and Dying Speeches, of all those Eminent Protestants that
suffered in the West of England, by the Sentence of that Bloody and cruel Judge
Jefferies; being in all 251 Persons, besides what were Hanged and destroyed in
cold Blood. CONTAINING ALSO, The Life and Death of James Duke of Monmouth; His
Birth and Education; his Actions both at Home and Abroad; his Unfortunate
Adventure in the West; his Letter to King James; his Sentence, Execution and
Dying-Words upon the Scaffold: With a true Copy of the Paper he left behind
him. And many other curious Remarks worth the Reader's Observation.

portraits of the executed

LONDON: Printed by J. Bradford, at the Bible in Fetter-Lane,

The Protestant Martyrs Or, The Bloody Assizes, etc.
THE most Illustrious Prince James Duke of Monmouth is not, for the
Illustriousness of his Descent, inferior unto any Prince in Europe, being
descended from the Loins of the most Renowned Monarch, King Charles the Second;
and also his Eldest Son: By which Royal Extraction he is descended from the
incomparably wise and virtuous Prince, the Royal Martyr Charles the first and
his Illustrious Consort Henrietta Maria de Bourbon Daughter of the Great King
Henry the Fourth of France: From which two ancient and Illustrious stocks, he
was ingrafted into all the Royal Families of Europe, and has concentred in his
Princely Veins some of their Royal Blood; being thereby allied to all those
great Personages that are of the most high and Illustrious Quality in Europe;
viz. James Duke of York, William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, the Lady
Mademoiselle Queen of Spain, and her Sister Madame de Valois, Daughter of the
Duke of Oleance, and the late Princess Henrietta; also to Charles Prince
Elector Palatine of the Rhine: His Highness Rupert, Lewis the fourteenth King
of France, now reigning; and many other Princes and Potentates of Europe; which
is abundantly sufficient to demonstrate the Nobility of his Birth, and the
Illustriousness of his Extraction. But to render him yet more Eminent, it
pleased his Royal Father to dignifie him with severel Magnificient Titles, and
to confer upon him the several Great Offices following, vz. Duke of Monmouth
and Bucclugh, Earl of Doucaster and Dalkeith. Lord Scott of Tindale,
Whinchester and Askdale, Lord Great Chamberlain of Scotland, Lord Lieutenant of
the East Riding of Yorkshire, Governor of his Majesty's Town and Citadel of
Kingstone upon Hull, Chief Justice in Air, of all his Majesty's Forests,
Chaces, Parks and Warrens on the South Side of the River of Trent. Lord General
of all his Majesty's Landforces, Captain of his Majesty's Life-Guards of
Horse, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, Master of the Horse to his
Majesty, one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and
Knight of the most noble Oder of the Garter. All which Places he discharged
with so much Honor and Fidelity, that the most inveterare and implacable of
his Enemies notwithstanding all their noise and clamor against him, were not
able to produce one single instance wherein he acted otherwise. Besides his
honor at home, he had likewise been highly honored abroad, by having the
Honor to command an Army in Flanders as Lieutenant General under the French
King, whose continual success and numerous Victories in Flanders may be chiefly
attributed to the Conduct and Valor of the Great Monmouth. He was born at
Rotterdam, April 9. in the year 1649. in the very heat of our unnatural Broils.
About the year 1656. his Mother was sent a Prisoner to the Tower of London, as
appears by a Warrant from the Protector, July 12. 1656. to Barkstead, then
Lieutenant of the Tower, whereby he discharged Mrs. Lucy Barlow from her
Imprisonment. The Officers found a Grant when she was apprehended, signed
Charlet R. by which she had an Anuity or yearly Pensiod of five thousand Livres
granted to her for her Life, with an Assurance to better the same when it
should please God to restore him to his Kingdom, and it was subscribed by his
Majesty's command Edward Nicholas. During her abode about London, the Cavilears
as the Loyalists were then called, carried themselves toward her with a
profound Reverence and awful Respect, treating her (...) Person serving her on
the Knee. An English Nurse was provided (...) and both for privacy, Lodged at
the House of Mr. Claes Ghysen a Merchant living at Schiedam about a Mile from
Rotterdam, his Mother lodging at the same time at the House of Mrs. Harvey,
Mother to the famous Doctor Harvey, and lived in abundance of Pomp and
Splendour, having a Gentleman and other Servants to attend her. Some time after
he had been there at Nurse, his Mother being desirous to see him, took her
Gentleman with her, who at a place where she called by the Way to, to pay a
Visit, desired to be excused for some small time, from attending on her, till
he had dispatched some extraordinary Business which he pretended, promising to
return again immediately, and having obtained her Permission, away he went; but
like an ungrateful and treacherous Villain, repaired immediately to Mr. Ghysens
at Schiedam, where the Princely Babe was nursed, and pretending to be sent for
that purpose to his Mother, carried him and the Nurse both away. His Lady
waited his coming with abundance of patience, but at length Night drawing on,
and no Gentleman appearing, she began to suspect her self to be abused,
whereupon a Gentleman offering to wait on her thither, she presently posted
away, and being arrived, and finding her Son gone, I want Words wherewith to
express her grief, and surprise; she rent her Apparel, tore the Hair from off
her Head, and with whole showers of Tears bewailed the greatness of her Loss,
and the deplorableness of her Condition, yet suffered not Grief to prevail so
far, as to make her incapable of endeavoring to Right her self; whereupon she
presently gave order for the providing Horses, which being ready, she presently
posted away to Maesland-Sluce, riding all Night, she suspected that he was
carried thither, in order to be transported to England, there having been some
inquiry made after him, she arrived there early in the Morning, just as the
Sieur Newport, one of the Lords of the State, and the Maesland were taking Boat
for the Hague, those that were with her, advised her to make her Application to
him as the likelieft Person to assist her, telling her that he could English,
whereupon she addressed her self to him in that Languish, discovering to him
the Condition of her self and Son, and the Relation they stood in to the King
of England, with the Circumstances of his stealing away, and pulling out a
handful of Gold, If Money will do it, said she, I will spare for no Charges;
imploring his help and assistance for the recovery of that Royal Treasure; this
occasioned abundance of People flocking about them to learn the occasion of her
Address, wherefore he advised her to go into some House and make no noise about
it, lest she thereby prevent the accomplishing her desire, which she did, and
he presently ordered a general search to be made, and that no Ships should go
off till they were searched, notwithstanding which they could make no discovery
of him till about 10 or 12 days after, when he was found at Loesdymen, where he
had been all that time concealed, and having to her inexpressible Joy recovered
him, she took a stately House at Boscal, where they resided for some time.

Upon his Majesty's going for Scotland, in June 1650. he was committed by his
Majesty to the care of his Illustrious Grandmother, who lived then at the
Par-le-Roy in Paris, and was by her committed to the care of one Goff belonging
to her Majesty, charging him to provide a good careful Nurse for him, which he
did accordingly, commending to her Majesty one Mrs. Miles* a Gentlewoman that
belonged likewise to her Majesty.

The Beauty and Make of his Person, and the Majesty of his Port and Cerriage,
even whilst an Infant, plainly discovered the Greatness of his Birth, and the
largeness of his Soul, and every succeeding Year of his Childhood, and afforded
new Promises and Hopes that he would prove an Illustrious Branch of growing
Honor; making an Early Discovery even at that tender Age, not only of a Great
and Princely Spirit but also of an extraordinary Goodness and Sweetness of
Nature, seeming to have that even and well-biassed Temper of Mind radicated in
his very Nature, which other Men with extraordinary Industry and help of
Philosophy and Religion hardly acquire, when arrived at Years of Maturity.

Nor were his Inclinations to Virtue more admirable than the desire he had to
learn useful and solid Arts, his Genius rendering the Study and Exercises
thereof, far more acceptable to him, than the Vanity of the most exquisite
Divertisements. Wherefore when he was about 8 or 9 Years of Age, he was taken
from Goff, and committed to the Care of Mr. Ross, a Gentleman, who after His
Majesty's Restoration, went Secretary to the Honorable Henry Coventry
Esquire, (in his Embassy to Sweden) and sent to Julen, a Place about 7 Leagues
from Paris, there to be accommodated with Learning, and fitted for those great
Employments which God and Nature as well as His Majesty had designed him for,
in the future part of his Life. He went there by the Name of Mr. Crossts

Soon after His Majesty's happy Restoration* he commanded Mr. Ross to turn
away all his former Servants, and entertain new ones more suitable to his
Quality; and to demonstrate his Paternal Love, and to render his own Happiness
the more complete, ordered him to be brought to Court, that so he might always
have him in his Royal Presence; whereupon he was provided with Gentlemen and
Pages to wait on him, together with a rich Coach and 6 stately Horses, a
Coachman, Postillion, Groom, and Footmen in good Liveries, wherewith he set
forward toward England.

About July, 1662. he came to Calis, where he embarked for England; he Landed
at Dover from whence he came by Land to London, and not finding his Majesty
there, he presently repaired to Hampton Court, where His Mejesty then resided,
by whom he was received and embraced with all the Demonstrations of Joy
imaginable; and about the middle of August, he came with the Court to
White Hall, where His Majesty was pleased to appoint him his Lodgings in the
Privy Gallery.

Soon after His Majesty was pleased to make him a Peer of this Realm, by
Creating him Duke of Arkeny, which Title was after changed for that of
Monmouth; and the Cap and Robes being presented to him, in the ensuing
Parliament he took his Seat in the House of Peers.

In April, 1663. he was with the usual Solemnity installed Knight of the Garter
at Windsor.

This was followed by that which made his Happiness yet more full and complete,
His Majesty being pleased to consent to a Contract of Marriage between his
Grace and the only surviving Child, and sole Heir of the late Earl of Bucclugh,
a Lady reputed to be the greatest Fortune, and to have the largest Dowery in
the Three Kingdoms, her incomparable Virtues, and surprising Beauty, being no
way inferior to (but rather exceeding) her Portion; her Mother, the Countess of
Wembs, being consulted about the Match, having received satisfaction from His
Majesty in whatsoever she proposed, she willingly gave her Consent, and the
Marriage was speedily Celebrated with extraordinary Pomp and Splendour, to the
great Content of His Majesty, the Queen's Mother, and the whole Court.

Soon after this, upon the Resignation of the Lord Brandon Gerard, his Father
King Charles, created him Captain of his Lifeguard, and admitted one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. In the Year 1672. the French King
Lewis XIVth. made great Preparations for a War against the Datch, in which King
Charles engaging, the Duke was sent to Command the English, whose Gallantry and
Bravery was sufficiently admired by all present, where was the French King
himself. He was attended by a numerous Train of English Volunteer Gentlemen.
With this vast Army the French sat down before Orsoy and Rhinberg, which
presently surrendered: From thence they marched to Wisel, accounted an
Invincible City, which after 4 Days Siege was delivered up; also Duysbury
surrendered, without venturing the Brunt of a Storm. This Success of the Fren^h
so terrified the Hollanders, that they abandoned their Towns as fast as the
Enemy approached to take Possession of them; nay, and of some they invite them
to be Masters; for the City Vtrecht, with the whole Province, in which were
Nine Fine Cities besides Vtrecht it self, received a French Garrison: Zutphen
and Arnheim followed the same Fate; and such a rapid Progress was made by the
Arms of France, that by the 28th of June, they were advanced within 4 Leagues
of Rotterdam, and the same distance from Amsterdam. Never was any State nearer
Ruin than that of Holland at this time; and where the Policy of England could
be to assist them in such an Expedition, has I believe been dearly experienced
since; for it was no small Assistance they received from the Succors under the
D. of Monmouth, which will more particularly appear in another Campaign; for
this being ended, the Duke took his Leave of the French King, who highly
extolled his Conduct and Personal Bravery, and passing through Flanders,
arrived safely in England, and was joyfully received, especially at Court; but
he was in solemn manner welcomed home by his Duchess, who was soon after,
August 26^h. happily brought to Bed of a Son, which was Christened Charles, and
died soon after.

About November following, having taken Leave of the King, he set out again for
France, where he was received in a very splendid manner by the French King and
the Nobility; and being arrived at Calais, Dec. 18 th. he sent an Express to
his Majesty, to acquaint him that the Prince of Orange was on the 15th sat down
with his Army before Char eroy, and that there was great Expectation in those
Parts, what would be the Issue of that Enterprise.

The Duke was highly welcomed in all the Places through which he passed, and
returned to England again before the opening of the Campaign; at what time he
attended the King of France into the Field, and is remarkably distinguished in
History for his Conduct and Valor at the Siege of Maestrich, and came into
England afterward with great Applause. But the next Year the Scale turned, and
the Duke (as General of his Father 's Forces) commanded against the French in
Conjunction with the Dutch, always behaving himself with singular Conduct and
Personal Bravery. What happened otherwise concerning him, is hardly Material.
He grew into Love and Favor with the People, which appeared in the Business of
the Walisea Race, for which he was taken into Custody; he was also Banished;
but we shall pass over all these things, and come nearer to the Design in hand,
which is the Business of the West, in which we shall comprehend his Death.

King James IId. being ascended the Throne, and the Duke of Monmouth then
abroad, and being sufficiently stunned with the unexpected News of the Death of
King Charles, having entered into a League with the Earl of Argyle, putting
great Confidence in his own Courage, and a vain Assurance of a Popular
Affection and Assistance, bore up himself against all pretended Difficulties,
and with three small Ships, and between Threescore and Fourscore Men, landed
about the 12th of June at Lyme in the West of England, while the Parliament was
sitting: A Romantic kind of Invasion, and scarce paralleled in History; yet
with this handful of Men, and afterward with the common People that joined him,
without Arms, Provisions, Martial Discipline, Money, or any one place to retire
to in case of Accidents, did this Brave unfortunate Man bid fair for a Crown.
He landed, as was said before, at Lyme in Dorsetshire, where he increased his
Number to One hundred and Fifty, from thence he marched to Taunton, where he
was Proclaimed King, and Men flocked to him, and Listed under him as fast, as
if he had already been Master of the whole Country. After staying there a
while, he marched in some kind of Order to Bridgwater, still increasing his
Numbers; from thence to Bath, where he was denied Entrance, the Train'd-Bands
still flying two Days March before him, by Order from the Court, to give
pretense to the King to raise more Forces. At Philips Norton, by a Surprise or
Ambush, he cut off the best part of a Troop of Horse, the Duke of Grafton
narrowly escaping with his Life. With this Success he marched within 2 Miles of
Bristol, where a Consult being held, he was advised not to enter that City, but
to retreat back to Bridgwater; which was the first thing that disheartened his
Party, and hindered many from joining with him: Whereas if he had entered
Bristol, where there was no Force to oppose him but the Train'd-Bands, and the
generality of them for him, not only in their Hearts, but in open Discourses
and drinking his Health, he might have furnished himself with Men, Arms and
Money, to have enabled him to march into Gloucestershire among the Clothiers,
where great Numbers, and some of Quality, waited to join him, and by this means
might have kept up the War till he had shak'd King James's Throne, if not
overturned it.

In this time the King had sent an Army into the West against Monmouth, under
the Command of the Earl of Feversham as General, who encamped upon Sedgmore,
not far from Bridgwater, where the Duke of Monmouth and his Party were
Quartered; and the Duke seeing his Men daily Desert in great Numbers, it was
agreed to make one Push for all, and to that purpose issued out of Bridgwater
by Night; but his Guide mistaking his way in the Dark, the Duke's Ill Fate lead
him upon a Battallion of Dumbarton's Regiment placed in his way; who
encountering him, alarmed King James's whole Army, with whom engaging he was
Routed; or in all probability he had surpised the King's Army in their Camp,
and perhaps at that single Blow decided the Fortune of England for once. Yet
however, though he came too soon, before Matters were Ripe, by King James's
setting up for the open Establishment of Popery and Arbitrary Power, yet he may
be said to have paved the Way for a Nobler Change in the Throne, by leaving
King James at Liberty through this success, to act without Control, which at
length made him Abdicate the Government. Monmouth paid the Price of his
Rebellion with his Blood, being on the 15th of July, 1685. Beheaded on
Tower Hill, by virtue of an Attainder passed upon him in Parliament soon after
his Landing.

An Account of what passed at the Execution of the late Duke of Monmouth, on
Wednesday the 15th. of July, 1685. on Tower Hill.
THE Duke of Monmouth came from the Tower to the Scaffold, attended by the
Bishop of Ely, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, Dr. Tenison, and Dr. Hooper; which
four the King sent him, as his Assistants, to prepare him for Death: The Duke
himself entreated all four of them to accompany him a the Place of Execution,
and to cantinue with him to the last. The two Bishops going in the Lieutenant's
Coach with him to the Bars, made Seasonable and Devont Applications to him all
the way; and one of them desired him not to be surprised, if they to the very
last upon the Scaffold, renewed those Exhortations to a particular Repentance,
which they had so often repeated before.

At his first coming upon the Scaffold, he looked for the Executioner; and
seeing him, said, Is this the Man to do the Business? Do your Work well.

Then the Duke of Monmouth began to speak, some one or other of the Assistants
during the whole time, applying themselves to him.

Monmouth. I shall say but very little; I come to die; I die a Protestant of
the Church of England.


Assistants. My Lord, if you be of the Church of England, you must acknowledge
the Doctrine of Non-Resistance to be true.


Mon. If I acknowledge the Doctrine of the Church of England in general, that
includes all.


Assist. Sir, it is fit to own that Doctrine particularly, which respects your
Case.

Here he was much urged about that Doctrine of Non-resistance; but he repeated
in effect his first Answer. Then he began as if he was about to make a
premeditated Speech, in this manner.


Mon. I have had a Scandal raised upon me about a Woman, a Lady of Virtue and
Honor. I will name her; the Lady Henrietta Wentworth. I declare, That she is a
very Virtuous and Godly Woman. I have committed no Sin with her; and that which
has passed betwixt us, was very Honest and Innocent in the sight of God.


Assist. In your Opiuion, perhaps, Sir, as you have been often told; (i. e. in
the Tower) but this is not fit Discourse in this Place.


Mr. Sheriff Gostlin. Sir, were you ever Married to her?


Mon. This is not a time to Answer that Question.


Sher. Gostlin. Sir, I hoped to have heard of your Repentance for the Treason
and Bloodshed which has been committed.


Mon. I die very Penitent.


Assist. My Lord, it is fit to be particular; and considering the Public Evil
you have done, you ought to do as much Good now as possibly you can, by a
Public Acknowledgment.


Mon. What I have thought fit to say of Public Affairs, is in a Paper which I
have Signed; I refer to my Paper.


Assist. My Lord, there is nothing in that Paper about Resistance; and you
ought to be particular in your Repentance, and to have it well grounded. God
give you True Repentance.


Mon. I die very Penitent, and die with great Cheerfulness, for I know I shall
go to God.


Assist. My Lord, you must go to God in his own way. Sir, be sure you be truly
Penitent, and ask Forgiveness of God, for the many you have wronged.


Mon. I am sorry for every one I have wronged, I forgive every Body; I have had
many Enemies, I forgive them all.


Assist. Sir, your Acknowledgment ought to be particular.


Mon. I am to die; pray, my Lord -- I refer to my Paper.


Assist. They are but a few Words that we desire: We only desire an Answer to
this Point.


Mon. I can Bless God, that he has given me so much Grace, that for these two
Years last past, I have had a Life unlike to my former Course, and in which I
have been happy.


Assist. Sir, was there no Ill in these two Years? In these Years, these great
Evils have happened; and the giving Public Satisfaction is a necessary part of
Repentance; be pleased to own a Detestation of your REBELLION.


Mon. I beg your Lordship that you would stick to my Paper.


Assist. My Lord, as I said before, there is nothing in your Paper about the
Doctrine of Non-resistance,


Mon. I Repent of all things that a true Christian ought to Repent of. I am to
die; pray, my Lord --


Assist. Then, my Lord, we can only recommend you to the Mercy of God; but we
cannot Pray with that Cheerfulness and Encouragement, as we should if you had
made a particular Acknowledgment.


Mon. God be praised, I have Encouragement enough in my self; I die with a
clear Conscience, I have wronged no Man.


Assist. How, Sir, no Man! Have you not been Guilty of Invasion, and of much
Blood, which has been shed, and it may be, of the Loss of many Souls that
followed you? You must needs have wronged a great many.


Mon. I do, Sir, own that, and am sorry for it.


Ass. Give it the true Name, Sir, and call it Rebellion.


Mon. What Name you please, Sir; I am sorry for Invading the Kingdom, and for
the Blood that has been shed, and for the Souls which may have been lost by my
means; I am sorry it ever happened.


Mr. Sher. Vandeput. He says, he is sorry for Invading the Kingdom.


Ass. We have nothing to add, but to renew the frequent Exhortations we have
made to you, to give some Satisfaction for the Public Injuries to the Kingdom.
There have been a great many Lives lost by this Resistance of your Lawful
Prince.


Mon. What I have done, has been very ill; and I wish with all my Heart it had
never been: I never was a Man that delighted in Blood; I was very far from it;
I was as cautious in this as any Man was; the Almighty God knows how I now die,
with all the Joyfulness in the World.


Ass. God grant you may, Sir; God give you true Repentance.


Mon. If I had not True Repentance, I shonld not so easily have been without
the sear of Dying: I shall die like a Lamb.


Ass. Much may come from Natural Courage.


Mon. I do not attribute it to my own Nature, for I am fearful as other Men
are; but I have now no fear, as you may see by my Face; but there is something
within me that does it, for I am sure I shall go to God.


Ass. My Lord, be sure upon good Grounds; do you Repent you of all your Sins,
known, or unknown; confessed, or not confessed; of all the Sins which might
proceed from Error in Judgment?


Mon. In general for all, I do with all my Soul.


Ass. God Almighty of his Infinite Mercy forgive you. Here are great Numbers of
Spectators, here are the Sheriffs, they represent the Great City, and in
speaking to them, you speak to the Great City; make some Satisfaction by owning
your Crime before them -- He was exhorted to Pray for the King; and was asked,
whether he did not desire to send some Dutiful Message to His Majesty, and to
recommend his Wife and Children to His Maiesty's Favor.


Mon. What harm have they done? Do it if you please: I pray for him, and for
all Men.


Ass. (At his Undressing) My Lord, you have been bred a Soldier; you will do a
generous Christian thing, if you please to speak to the Soldiers, and say, That
here you stand a sad Example of Rebellion, and en reat them and the People to
be Loyal and Obedient to the King.


Mon. I have said, I will make no Speeches; I will make no Speeches; I am come
to die.


Ass. My Lord, Ten Words will be enough.


M. (Then calling his Servant, and giving him something like a Tooth-pick Case)
Here, said he, give this to the Person to whom you are to deliver the other
things. (To the Executioner:) Here are six Guinea's for you; pray do your
Business well: Don't serve me as you did my Lord Russel. I have heard, you
struck him three or four times. Here (to his Servant) take these remaining
Guinea's, and give them to him if he does his Work well.


Exec. I hope I shall.


Mon. If you strike me twice, I cannot promise you, not to stir.


During his Undressing, and standing toward the Block, were used diverse
Ejaculations, and much of the 51st Psalm, and particularly, Deliver me from
Blood-guiltiness, O God, Thou God, etc. Then he lay down; and soon after he
raised himself upon his Elbow, and said to the Executioner,

Prithee let me feel the Ax. He felt the Edge, and said, I fear it is not sharp
enough.


Execut. It is sharp enough, and heavy enough.


Then he lay down again. During this space, many pious Ejaculatious were used
by those who assisted him, with great Fervency.

God accept your Repentance, God accept your Repentance, God accept your
imperfect Repentance; My Lord, God accept your Repentance; God Almighty show
his Omnipotent Mercy up on you: Father, into thy Hands we commend his Spirit,
etc. Lord Jesus receive his Soul.


A Brief Abstract of the Paper left behind him.
I Repent in general of all my Sins, and am more particularly concerned for
what Blood has been spilt on my Account, and the rather, seeing the issue is
such as I sear will prove of Fatal Consequence to the Reformed Protestant
Religion. Instead of being counted Factious and Rebellious, the very opposing
of Popery and Arbitrary Power, now arising and appearing plain enough, would
sufficiently have protected my Cause; besides, several other most heinous and
notorious Crimes (such as the unhappy Fate of the Earl of Essex, and my Father
of ever blessed Memory, and others now covered over with Jesuitical Policy)
should have been detected and avenged. I have lived, and shall now die in the
Faith of this, That God will work a Deliverance for his People; and then will
be discovered the great, and horrid, and scarcely to be paralleled Villainies
our Enemies have heen guilty of; but now you see my Case is desperate, yet
know, that I die a Martyr for the People, and shall rather pity the State, that
their false and covetous Minds have brought themselves and me to, than discover
who are the Persons concerned in my Overthrow; and I heartily forgive all that
have wronged me, even those that have been Instrumental in my Fall, earnestly
praying for their Souls. And I hope King James will show himself to be of his
Brother's Blood, and extend his Mercy to my Children, even as he was wont to
his greatest Enemies, they being not capable to Act, and therefore not
conscious of any Offense against the Government.

A Copy of the Duke of Monmouth's LETTER to the King, Dated from Ringwood the
8th of July, 1685.
YOUR Majesty may think, it is the Misfortune I now lie under, makes me make
this Application to you; but I do assure your Majesty it is the Remorse I now
have in me, of the Wrongs I have done you in several things, and now, in taking
up Arms against you. For my taking up Arms, it never was in my Thoughts since
the King died. The Prince and Princess of Orange will be Witness for me, of the
Assurance I gave them, That I would never stir against you; but my Misfortune
was such, as to meet with some Horrid People, that made me believe things of
your Majesty, and gave me so many false Arguments, that I was fully led away,
to believe* That it was a Shame and a Sin before God not to do it. But, Sir, I
will not trouble your Majesty at present with many things that I could say for
my self, that I am sure would move your Compassion; the chief end of this
Letter, being only to beg of you, That I may have that Happiness, as to speak
to your Majesty: For I have that to say to you, Sir, that I hope may give you a
long and happy Reign. I am sure, Sir, when you hear me, you will be convinced
of the Zeal I have for your Preservation, and how heartily I repent of what I
have done. I can say no more to your Majesty now, being this Letter must be
seen by those that keep me. Therefore, Sir, I shall make an end, in begging of
your Majesty to believe so well of me, That I would rather die a thousand
Deaths, than excuse any thing I have done, if I did not really think my self
the most in the wrong, that ever any Man was, and had not from the bottom of my
Heart an abhorrence for those that put him upon it, and for the Action it self.
I hope, Sir, God Almighty will strike your Heart with Mercy and Compassion for
me, as he has done mine with the Abhorrence of what I have done. Therefore I
hope, Sir, I may live to show you how Zealous I shall ever be for your Service;
and could I say but one Word in this Letter, you would be convinced of it; but
it is of that Consequence, That I dare not do it. Therefore, Sir, I do beg of
you once more, to let me speak to you, for then you will be convinced how much
I shall ever be Your Majesty's most Humble and Dutiful.

MONMOUTH.


There was also a short Paper Printed at that time with his Speech wherein he
declares, That his Father had told him in his Lifetime, that he was never
Married lo his Mother; which he hoped would be a means for King James to use
his Children with the more tenderness. We shall now proceed to give an Account
of the Persons that suffered for the sime Cause, some of the more principal of
which (whose Essigies are hereunto affixed) it is thought worth the while to
Treat distinctly of; giving an Exact List of the other, and the Places where
they suffered; and First, of those remarkable Brothers, Mr. Benjamin, and Mr.
William Hewling; the Elder was a Captain of Horse, and the Younger a Lieutenant
of Foot in the Duke of Monmouth's Service: They got on Shipboard after the
Defeat at Sedgmore, but were Cast away on the Coast again, and so taken: The
last, William, was Executed at Lyme, where just before he went to die, he said
to one of his Fellow Sufferers, Here is a sweet Promise for us; I will not
leave you comfortless. I will come unto you. One taking Leave of him, he said,
Farewell till we meet in Heaven; presently I shall be with Christ, O! I would
not change Conditions with any that stay behind for ten thousand Worlds: Pray
remember my Dear Love to my Brother and Sister, and tell them I desire they
would comfort themselves that I am gone to Christ, and we shall quickly meet at
the Glorious Mount Sion above. Afterward he Prayed for near half an Hour with
great Fervency, Blessing God earnestly for the Blood of Jesus Christ, Praying
for the Peace of the Church of God, and of these Nations in particular. When he
was going out of the World, with a Joyful Countenance he said, Oh! now my Joy
and Comfort is, that I have a Christ to go to; and so gently resigned his
Spirit to God the 12th of Sept. 1685.

As to the Elder Brother, when he had received the News of his Brother's Death,
and that he died with so much Comfort and Joy, he replied, We have no cause to
fear Death, if the Presence of God be with us; and added, Perhaps my Friends
may think this Summer the saddest Time of my Life; but, I Bless God, it has
been the sweetest and most happy time of all. Speaking of the Disappointment of
their Expectations in the Work they had undertaken, he said, With reference to
the Glory of God, the Prosperity of the Gospel, and the Delivery of the People
of God, We have great cause to lament it, but for that outward Prosperity that
have attended it, it is but of small Moment, and Death would have ended i^. The
Day of his Execution, with others, being come, it is remarkable that they sat
in the Sledge near half an Hour before the Officers could make the Horses draw:
at which they were greatly enraged, there being no visible Obstruction from
either Weight or Way; but at last the Mayor and Sheriffs hawl'd them forward
themselves, Baalam like, driving the Horses. Being come to the Place of
Execution, and having embraced his Fellow Sufferers, he desired of the Sheriff
that he might Pray particularly, but he could not grant it; only asked him, if
he would Pray for the King? He answered, I Pray for all Men. He then desired he
might sing a Psalm; but the Sheriff told him, it must be with the Halters about
their Necks: To which he replied, With all his Heart; and then Sung with such
Heavealy Joy, that many present said, it both broke and rejoiced their Hearts.
In the midst of which he closed his Eyes on a vain World Sept. 30th. 1685.

The next was one William Jenkin, Condemned at the Bloody Assize at Dorchester,
Sept. the 29th, at Night. After he had heard he must die the next Day, he was
exceedingly composed and cheerful, expressing his Satisfaction in the Will of
God. He used many Excellent Speeches before, and at his Death: Among the rest
he said, This manner of Death has been the most terrible thing in the World to
my Thoughts, but I bess God, now am I neither afraid nor ashamed to die. When
the Sheriff came to perform his Execution, he was still as Compo^'d as ever,
and had the same Cheerfulness and Serenity of Mind in taking Leave of his
Friends; and likewise in the Sledge; insomuch that some of his Friends, who had
before Censured him, thinking he had been unmindful of his Death, by being so
Cheerful, now professed they were rather Astonished to see so young a Man leave
the World, and go through Death as he did.

We come now to the most moving Scene of this horrid and barbarous Tragedy, in
the Death of the Lady Lisle, above 80 Years of Age, for only Corresponding with
one Nelthrope, and Dr. Hicks; for which she was Beheaded at Winchester. Her
Speech made at her Execution is as follows.

The Last Speech of the Lady Alicia Lisle.
GEntlemen, Friends and Neighbors, it may be expected that I should say
something at my Death; and in order thereunto, I shall acquaint you, That my
Birth and Education was both near this Place, and that my Parents instructed me
in the Fear of God, and I now die of the Reformed Protestant Religion; That if
ever Popery should return into this Nation, it would be a very great and severe
Judgment; That I die in Expectation of the Pardon of all my Sins, and of
Acceptance with God the Father, by the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
he being the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes: I
thank God, through Jesus Christ, that I do depart unto the Blood of Sprinkling,
which speaks better things than that of Abel; God hav^ng made this
Chastisement an Ordinance to my Soul. I did once as little expect to come to
this Place on this Occasion, as any Person in this Place, or Nation; therefore
let all learn not to be High-minded, but fear. The Lord is a Sovereign, and
will take what way he sees best to glorify himself in, and by his poor
Creatures; and I do humbly desire to submit to his Will, praying to him, That I
may possess my Soul in Patience. The Crime that was laid to my Charge, was for
Entertaining a Nonconformist Minister and others i^ my House; the said Minister
being sworn to have been in the late Duke of Monmouth's Army; but I have been
told, That if I had de^ied them, it would not at all have affected me; I have
no Excuse but Surprise and Fear, which I believe my Jury must make use of to
excuse their Verdict to the World. I have been also told, That the Court did
use to be of Counsel for the Prisoner; but instead of Advice, I had Evidence
against me from thence; which though it were only by hearsay, might possibly
affect my Jury; my Defense being but such, as might be expected from a weak
Woman; but such as it was, I did not bear it repeated again to the Jury; which,
as I have been informed, is usual in such C^ses. However, I forgive all the
World, and therein all those that have done me wrong; and in ^^^ticular, I
forgive Colonel Penruddock, although he told me, that he could have taken these
Men before they come to my House. And I do likewise forgive him, who desired to
be taken away from the Grand Jury to the Petty Jury, that he might be the more
nearly concerned in my Death. As to what may be objected in reference to my
Conviction, that I gave it under my Hand, that I had Discoursed with Nelthrop;
that could be no Evidence against me, being after my Conviction and Sentence. I
do acknowledge His Majesty's Favor, in Revoking my Sentence; I pray God to
preserve him, that he may long Reign in Mercy, as well as Justice, and that he
may Reign in Peace; and that the Protestant Religion may flourish under him. I
also return Thanks to Gd and the Reverend Clergy, that assisted me in my
Imprisonment.

ALICIA LISLE.

One Mrs. Grant was the next that suffered in this Cause; it was for
harboring one Burton, his Wife and Family, for which she was Sentenced to be
Burnt, and was accordingly so Executed on the 23d of October, 1685. at which
time she left her Murderers the following Memorial.

Mrs. Graunt's Speech, written the Day before her Sufferings.
NOT knowing whether I should be suffered or able, because of Weaknesses that
are upon me through my hard and close Imprisonment, to speak at the Place of
Execution; I writ these few Lines to signify, That I am well reconciled to the
Way of my God toward me, though it be in Ways I looked not for; and by
terrible Things, yet in Righteousness; having given me Life, he ought to have
the disposing of it, when and how he pleases to call for it; and I desire to
offer up my All to him, it being but my reasonable Service; and also the first
Terms that Jesus Christ offers, that he that will be his Disciple, must forsake
all and follow him; and therefore let none think hard, or be discouraged at
what has happened unto me; for he does nothing without Cause, in all he has
done to us, he being holy in all his Ways, and righteous in all his Works; and
it is but my Lot in common with poor desolate Sion at this Day. Neither do I
find in my Heart the least Regret for what I have done in the Service of my
Lord and Master Jesus Christ, in succouring and securing any of his poor
Sufferers, that have showed Favor in his righteous Cause: Which Cause, though
now it be fallen and trampled upon, as if it had not been anointed, yet it
shall revive, and God will plead it at another Rate than ever he has done yet,
and reckon with all its Opposers and malicious Haters; and therefore let all
that love and fear him, not omit the least Duty that comes to Hand, or lies
before them, knowing that now it has need of them, and expects they shall
serve him. And I desire to bless his holy Name, that he has made me useful in
my Generation to the Comfort and Relief of many Desolate Ones, and the Blessing
of those that are ready to perish has come upon me, and being helped to make the
Heart of the Widow to sing. And I bless his holy Name, that in all this,
together with what I was charged with, I can approve my Heart to him, that I
have done his Will; though it does cross Man's Will, and the Scriptures that
satisfy me are, Isa. 16. 4. Hide the Outcasts, bexray not him that wandereth.
And Obad. 13, 14. Thou should not have given up those of his that escape in
the Day of his Distress. But Man says, You shall give them up, or you shall dye
for it. Now who to obey, judge ye. So that I have Cause to rejoice and be
exceeding glad, in that I suffer for Righteousness sake, and that I am
accounted worthy to suffer for Well doing, and that God has accepted any
Service from me, which has been done in Sincerity, though mixed with manifold
Infirmities, which he has been pleased for Christ's sake to cover and forgive.
And now as concerning my Fact, as it is called, alas it was but a little one,
and might well become a Prince to forgive; but he that sh ws no Mercy, shall
find none: And I may say of it in the Language of Jonathan, I did but taste a
little Honey, and lo I must die for it. I d^d but relieve an unworthy, poor,
distressed Family, and lo I must dye for it. Well, I desire in the Lamb-like
Gospel Spirit to forgive all that are concerned, and to say, Lord, lay it not
their Charge; but I fear he will not: Nay, I believe when he comes to make
Inquisition for Blood, it will be found at the Door of the furious Judge; who,
because I could not remember Things through my Dauntedness at Burton's Wife's
and Daughter's Vileness and my Ignorance, took Advantage thereat, and would not
hear me, when I had called to mind that which I am sure would have invalidated
their Evidence; though he granted something of the same Nature to another, yet
denied it to me. My Blood will also be found at the Door of the unrighteous
Jury, who found me Guilty upon the single Oath of an outlawed Man; for there
was none but his Oath about the Money, who is no legal Witness, though he be
pardoned, his Out-lawry cannot be recalled; and also the Law requires two
Witnesses in point of Life: And then about my going with him to the Place
mentioned, 'twas by his own Words, before he was Outlawed, for 'twas two
Months after his absconding; and though in a Proclamation, yet not High Treason,
as I have heard; so that I am clearly murdered by you. And also Bloody Mr. A.
who has so insatiably hunted after my Life; and though it is no Profit tlo him,
through the ill Will he bore me, left no Stone unturned, as I have ground to
believe, till he brought it to this; and showed favor to Burton, who ought to
have dyed for his own Fault, and not bought his Life with mine; and Capt. R.
who is cruel and severe to all under my Circumstances, and did at that time,
without all Mercy or Pity, hasten my Sentence, and held up my Hand, that it
might be given, all which, together with the Great One of all, by whose Power
all these, and a Multitude more of Cruelties are done, I do heartily and freely
forgive, as against me; but as it is done in an implacable Mind agaigst the
Lord Christ, and his righteous Cause and Followers, I leave it to him who is
the Avenger of all such Wrongs, who will tread upon Princes as upon Mortar, and
be terrible to the Kings of the Earth: And know this also, that though ye are
seemingly fixed, and because of the Power in your Hand, are writing out your
Violence, and dealing with a despight^ul Hand, because of the old and new
Hatrred; by impovering and every way distressing those you have got under you;
yet unless you can secure Jesus Christ, and all his Holy Angels, you shall
never do your Business, nor your Hands accomplish your Enterprises; for he will
be upon you ever you are aware; and therefore, O that you would be wise,
instructect and learn, is the Desire of her that finds no Mercy from you,

Elizabeth Grant.

The Earl of Argyle.
WE must now take a Step over into Scotland, that poor Country, which has been
harassed and tired for these many Years, to render them perfect Slaves, that
they might help to enslave England, to prevent which, and secure the Protestant
Religion, which 'twas grown impossible to do, but by Arms; this good Lord
embarkt from Holland about the same Time with the Duke, and arrived in Scotland
with what Forces he could make; to which were added some others who joined him;
which after several Marches and Counter-marches, were at length led into a
Boggy sort of a Place, on Pretense, or with Intention to bring him off from the
other Army then upon the Heels of 'em, where they lost one another, dispersed
and shifted for themselves; the Earl being taken by a Countryman, and brought
to Edinburgh, where he suffered for his former unpardondable Crime -- requiring
Care should be taken of the Protestant Religion, and explaining his taking the
Test conformable thereto; for the Legality of which he ha^ the Hands of the
most eminent Lawyers about the City. He suffered at Edinburgh the 30th of June,
1685. His Speech has a great deal of Piety and Religion, nor will it be any
Disgrace to say, 'twas more like a Sermon. -- It Is as follows.

The Earl of Argyle's last Speech, June 30. 1685.
JOB tells us, Man that is born of a Woman, is of few Days, and full of
Trouble; and I am a clear instance of it. I shall not say thing of my Sentence,
or Escape about three years and a half ago; nor of my Return, lest I may
thereby give Offense, or be too tedious: Only being to end my Days in your
Presence, I shall, as some of my last Words, assert the Truth of the Matter of
Fact, and the Sincerity of my Intentions, and Professions that are published.

That which I intend mainly now to say, is, To express my humble, and (I thank
God) cheerful Submission to his Divine Will; and my Willingness to forgive all
Men, even my Enemies; and I am heartily well sati^fied there is no more Blood
spilt, and I shall wish the Stream may stop at me: And that (if it please God)
as to Zerubbabel, Zech. 4. 6. Not by Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit,
says the Lord of Hosts. I know Afflictions spring not out of the Dust: God did
wonderfully deliver and provide for me, and has now by his special Providence
brought me to this Place; and I hope none will either insult or stumble at it,
seeing they ought not; for God Almighty does all Things well, for Good and holy
Ends, though we not always understand it. Love and Hatred is not known by what is
before us, Eccles. 9. 1. and 8. 11, 12, 13. Afflictions are not only foretold,
but promised to Christians; and are not only tolerable, but desirable. We ought
to have a deep Reverence and Fear of God's Displeasure; but withal, a Hope and
Dependence on him for a blessed Issue, in Compliance with his Will; for God
chastens his own, to refine them, and not to ruin them, whatever the World may
think, Heb. 12. 3. to 12. Prev. 3. 11, 12. Mat. 10. 18. to 40. Mat. 16. 24. to
28. We are to imitate our Savior in his Sufferings, as x Pet. 2. 23. and 1
Pet. 16. to 20. We are neither to despise our Afflictions, nor to faint under
them; both are Extremes. We are not to suffer our Spirits to be exasperated
against the Instruments of our Trouble; for the same Affliction may be an
Effect of their Passion, and yet sent to God to punish us for our Sin: Though
it is a Comfort when we may say to them with David, Psalm. 59. 3. Not for my
Transgressio, nor for my Sin, O Lord. Nor are we, by fraudulent, pusillanimous
Compliances in wicked Courses, to bring Sin upon our selves: Faint Hearts are
ordinary false Hearts; choosing Sin rather than Sufferings, and a short Life
with eternal Death, before temporal Death and a Crown of Glory. Such seeking to
save a little, loses all; and God readily hardens them to proceed to their own
Destruction. How many, like Hazael, 2 Kings 8. 13. run to Excesses they never
thought they were capable of! Let Rulers and others read seriously, and weigh
Prove. 1. 10. to 20. 2 Chr. 28. 6. to 17. Prove. 24. 11, 12. and Prove. 28. 10.
and avoid what is bad, and follow what is good.

For me, I hope by God's Strength to join with Job, Chap. 13. 15. and the
Psalmist, Psalm. 22. 4. and 16. 7. and shall pray, as Psalm. 74. 19. to 24. and
Psalm. 122. 6. to 9. and Luke 1. 74. 75. and shall hope, as Psalm. 94. 14, 15. I
do freely forgive all that directly or indirectly have been the Cause of my
being brought to this Place, first or last; and I pray God forgive them. I pray
God send Truth and Peace in these Three Kingdoms; and continue and increase the
Glorious Light of the Gospel, and restrain the Spirit of Prophanity, Atheism,
Superstition, Popery and Persecution, and restore all that have back slidden
from the Purity of their Life or Principles; and bless his whole People with
all Blessings, spiritual and temporal, and pnt an End to their present Trials.
And I entreat all People to forgive me wherein I have offended, and concur with
me to pray, Toat the great, good, and merciful God would sanctify my present
Lot, and for Jesus Christ his sake pardon all my Sins, and receive me to his
Eternal Glory. It is suggested to me, That I have said nothing of the Royal
Family; and it remembers me, that before the Justices at my Trial about the
Test, I said, That at my Death I would pray, That there should never want one
of the Royal Family to be a Defender of the True, Ancient, Apostolic,
Catholic, Protestant Faith, which I do now: And that GOD would enlighten and
forgive all of them that are either lukewarm, or have shrunk from the
Profession of it. And in all Events, I pray GOD may provide for the Security of
his Church, that Antichrist, nor the Gates of Hell may never prevail against it.



Colonel RVMBOLD.
AT the same place died Colonel Richard Rumbold, June 26, 1685. most of what
occurred considerable in his Defense and Speech, you have had already in the
Business of the Assassination. Two or three Passages more there are worth
Remarks in the same, as Arguments of his Sense and Courage. For this Cause, he
says, we^e every Hair of his Head and Beard a Life, he would joyfully sacrifice 'em
all. That he was never Antimonarchical in his Principles, but for a King and
Free Parliament: the King having Power enough to make him great, and the people
to make 'em happy. [That he died in the Defense of the just Laws and Lib rties
of the Nations.] [That none was marks by God above another; for no Man came
into the World with a Saddle on their Backs, nor others booted and spurred to
ride upon it.] And being asked if he thought not his Sentence dreadful? Answered,
[He wished he had a Limb for every Town in Christendom.]

The next Place was Lyme, where many of Note died, particularly Col. Holmes,
who was the first of those there executed, near the same place where they
landed, when they came a-Shoar with the Duke of Monmouth, being brought to the
Place after some Difficulty; for the Horses that were first put into the Stedge
would not stir, which obliged those concerned to get others, which they did
from the Coachman, who had that Morning brought them to Town; when they were
put into the Sledge, they broke it in pieces, which caused the Prisoners to go
on Foot to the place of Execution; where being come, as I told you before, the
Colonel began thus at the Foot of the Ladder; He sat down with an Aspect
altogether void of Fear, but on the contrary with a kind of smilin^
countenance, so began to speak to the Spectators to this purpose. That he would
give them an Account of his first Undertaking in the Design, which was long
before in London; for there he agreed to stand by, and assist the Duke of
Monmouth, when Opportunity offered; in order to which, he went to Holland with
him, and there continued until this Expedition, in which God had thought fit to
frustrate his and other good Men's Expectations: He believed the Protestant
Religion was bleeding, and in a Step toward Extirpation, and therefore he with
these his Brethren that were to suffer with him, and thousands more, had
adventured their Lives and their All to save it; but God Almighty had not
appointed 'em to be the Instruments in so glorious a Work; yet notwithstanding
he did verily believe, and doubted not, but that God would make use of others,
that should meet with better success, though the Way or Means was not yet
visible* but of this he did not doubt: He also was satisfied of the Duke's
Title, so that Matter did not afflict him on account of his engaging on his
Score: And going on further with a Discourse of this Nature, he was asked by a
Person, Why he did not pray for the King? He with a smiling Countenance
answered, I am sorry you do not yet understand the Difference between speaking
and praying. And having ended his Discourse, he then prepared himself by prayer
for his Dissolution, which was very devout and pious for half an hour.

Col. Holmes in his Prayer not mentioning the King, he was charged as before;
to which he replied, He prayed for him in general, praying for all Mankind.
Thus fell the valiant and good Christian, Col. Holmes; his dying Words we have
now found come to pass, he was much lamented by all that saw him, except by
some, that it is feared, are delivered up to a feared Conscience.



The Last Speech of Dr. Hicks.
I am now going into that World, where many dark Things shall be made perfectly
manifest and clear, and many doubtful Things fully resolved, and a plenary
Satisfaction given concerning them; all Disputes and Mistakes concerning
Treason, Rebellion, and Schism, shall be at an End, and cease for ever: Many
Things that are innocent, lawful, and laudable, which have soul Marks and black
Characters stamped and fix upon 'em here, they shall be perfectly purified, and
fully cleansed from there; where at one View more shall be known of them, than
by all wrangling Debates and eager Disputes, or by reading all Polemical Books
concerning them here. I greatly deplore and bewail the greedy Appetite and
insatiable Thirst, that professing Protestants have after the Blood of their
Brethren, and the high pleasure they take in the Effusion thereof. But what
will not Men do, when they are either judicially blinded, or their secular
worldly Interest insensibly insinuates and winds it self into their Religion,
is so twisted and incorporated with it, that it animates and acts it, is the
Life and Soul, the vital Form and Power, and made wholly subservient thereunto.

My Lord Jefferies, after he had left Bristol, being come to the King to give
an Account of his Affairs in the West, the Great Seal being to be disposed of,
by the Death of the late Keeper, he kissed the King's Hand for it, and was made
Lord Chancellor, which was only an Earnest of his Desert for so eminent and
extraordinary a piece of Service; so now that which remains, is to give an
Account of diverse that had fled, and hid themselves up and down in Holes and
Privacies, whose Friends made all Application to some great Men or other to
procure their Pardons; some to this, and others to such as they thought
Favorites of the King; but the Rewards must be ascertained before any
Application could be made: Diverse Lists being sent up, and the Rewards
ascertained, which amongst many of them put together, did amount to
considerable; so that it was now who could find a Friend to relieve his
distressed Relations, which were forced to wander up and down in Caves and
Deserts for fear of being taken: But this Misfortune attended the Agents, that
unless my Lord Chancellor were used, by his Creatures, that were allowed by
him so to do; other Applications commonly met with Disappointments, which
caused an Emulation among the great Men; one supposing to have deserted the
King's Ear as well as the other, which caused other Measures to be taken,
though some were wheedled out of their Money. At last came out a General
Pardon, with Exceptions, very few, if any of those that were solicited for,
not being excepted, were of Course pardoned; but however, diverse Sums of Money
having been paid, no Restitution to be had, for from Hell is no Redemption. A
Western Gentleman's Purchase came to fifteen or sixteen hundred Guineas, which
my Lord Chancellor had. Amongst the Exceptions were a Parcel of Yaunton Girls,
some of which were Children of eight or ten Years old; however something was to
be made of them, if these Ladies were judged guilty of Treason, for presenting
the Duke of Monmouth with Colors, etc. and for to preserve these from Trial,
they were given to Maids of Honor to make up their Christmas*Box; so that an
Agent of theirs was sent down into the Country to compound with their Parents,
to preserve them from what might after follow, if taken; so that some,
according to Ability, gave 100 l. others 50 l. all which however did not answer
the Ladies first Expectations; yet it did satisfy, and they were accordingly
pardoned. Thus we have given you an Account of what has happened on this
Occasion, being in every Point Truth: We might have farther enlarged, but that
would have spoiled the Design, and swollen our Pocket-Companion to a Volume too
big.

We shall therefore next proceed to give you a true and exact List of all them
that were condemned, and suffered in the West, and the Year 1685. under the
Sentence of my Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys, with the Names of the Towns where
every Man was executed.

Lyme 12. COl. Holmes, Mr. Batiscomb, Mr. William Hewling, Mr. Sampson Lark,
Dr. Temple, Capt. Madders, Capt. Matthews, Mr. Joseph Tyler, Mr. William Cox,
etc. Bath 6. Walter Baker, Henry Body, Gerrard Bryant, Thomas Clotworthy,
Thomas Collins, John Carter. Philipsnorton 12. Robert Cook, Edward Creaves,
John Caswell, Thomas Hayward, John Hellier, Edward Beer, Henry Portridge,
George Pether, Thomas Pierce, John Richards, John Staple, John Smith. Froome
12. Francis Smith, Samuel Vill, alias Vile, Thomas Star, Philip Usher, Robert
Beamant, William Clement, John Humphrey, George Hasty, Robert Man, Thomas
Pearl, Laurence Lot, Thomas Lot. Bruton 3. James Feildsen, Humphrey Braden,
Richard Bole. Wincanton 6. John Howel, Richard Harvey, John Tucker, William
Holland, Hugh Holland, Thomas Bowden. Shepton-Mallet 13. Stephen Mallet, Joseph
Smith, John Gilham, Jun. Giles Bramble, Richard Chinn, William Cruise, George
Pavier, John Hildworth, John Ashwood, Thomas Smith, John Dorchester, Sen. John
Comb, John Groves. Hensford 12. Roger Cornelius, John Starr, Humphrey Edwards,
William Pierce, Arthur Sullway, George Adams, Henry Russel, George Knight,
Robert Wine, William Clerk, alias Chick, Preston Bevis, Richard Finier.
Wrington 3. Alexander Key, David Boyss, Joshua French. Wells 8. William Mead,
Thomas Cade, Robert Doleman, Thomas Durston, John Sheperd, Abraham Bend,
William Durston, William Plumley. Ulvelscomb 3. William Ruscomb, Thomas Pierce,
Robert Comb. Tuton upon Mendip 2. Peter Prance, William Watkins. Chard 12.
Edward Foot, John Knight, William Williams, John Jervis, Humphrey Hitchcook,
William Godfrey, Abraham Pill, William Davy, Henry Easterbrook, James Dennett,
Edward Warren, Simon Cross. Creokern 10. John Spore, Roger Burnoll, William
Pether, James Evory, Robert Hill, Nicholas Adams, Richard Stephens, Robert
Halfwell, John Bushel, William Lashly. Somerton 7. William Gillet, Thomas
Lissant, William Pocock, Christopher Stephens, George Cantick, Robert Allen,
Joseph Kelloway. Yeovil 8. Francis Foxwell, George Pitcher, Bernard Devereux,
Bernard Thatcher for concealing Bovet, William Johnson, Thomas Hurford, Edward
Gillard, Oliver Powel. Netherstoe 3. Humphrey Mitchel, Richard Culverell,
Merrick Thomas. Dunster 3. Henry Lackwell, John Geanes, William Sully.
Dulverton 3. John Basely, John Lloyd, Henry Thompson. Bridgewater 12. Robert
Fraunces, Nicholas Stodgell, Joshua Bellamy, William Meggeridge, John Hurman,
Robert Roper, Richard Harris, Richard Engram, John Trott, Roger Guppey, Roger
Hoar, Isaiah Davis. Ratcliffe-Hall at Bristol 6. Richard Evans, John Tinckwell,
Christopher Clerk, Edward Tippot, Philip Cumbridge, John Tucker, alias Clover.
Ilminster 12. Nicholas Collins, Sen. Stephen Newman, Robert Luckis, William
Kitch, Thomas Burnard, William Wellen, John Parsons, Thomas Trooke, Robert
Fawn, Western Hillary, John Burgen, Charles Speak. Stogersey 2. Hugh Ashley,
John Herring. Wellington 3. Francis Priest, Philip Bovet, Robert Reed.
South-petherton 3. Cornelius Furfurd, John Parsons, Thomas Davis. Porlock 2.
James Gale, Henry Edny. Glasendury 6. John Hicks, Richard Pearce, Israel
Briant, William Mead. James Pyes, John Broom. Taunton 19. Robert Perrot,
Abraham Ansley, Benjamin Hewling, Pierce Murren, John Freake, John Savage,
Abraham Matthews, William Jenkyns, Henry Lisle, John Dryer, John Hucker,
Jonathan England, John Sharp, William Deverson, John Williams, John Patrum,
James Whittom, William Satchel, John Trickey. Langport 3. Humphrey Pierce,
Nicholas Venton, John Shellwood. Arbridg 6. Isaac Tripp, Thomas Burnell, Thomas
Hillary, John Gill, Senior. Thomas Monday, John Butcher. Cutherston 2. Richard
Bovet, Thomas Blackmore. Minehead 6. John Jones, alias Evens, Hugh Stark,
Francis Bartlet, Peter Warren, Samuel Hawkins, Richard Sweet. Evilchester 12.
Hugh Goodenough, Samuel Cox, William Somerton, John Masters, John Walrand,
David Langwell, Osmond Barret, Matthew Cross, Edward Burford, John Mortimer,
John Stevens, Robert Townsden. Stogummer 3. George Hillard, John Lockstone,
Arthur Williams. Castlecary 3. Richard Ash, Samuel Garnish, Robert Hind.
Milton-port 2. Archibald Johnson, James Maxwel. Reinsham 11. Charles Chapman,
Richard Bowden, Thomas Trock, Lewis Harris, Edward Halswell, Howel Thomas,
George Badol, Richard Evans, John Winter, Andrew Rownsden, John Phillebey.
Suffered in all 251.

Besides those Hanged and Destroyed in cold Blood.

This Bloody Tragedy in the West being over, our Protestant Judge returns for
London; soon after which Alderman Cornish felt the Anger of some Body behind
the Curtain.

FINIS.

