A BRIEF ENQUIRY INTO THE Ancient CONSTITUTION AND Government of England.

As well in respect of the Administration, as Succession thereof.

Set forth by way of Dialogue, and fitted for Men of Ordinary Learning and
Capacities.

By a True Lover of his Country.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1695.

THE Publisher's PREFACE TO THE READER.
THERE being many Treatises already Published upon the Subjects handled in this
ensuing Discourse, you may think it needless to trouble the World with more of
this kind; but those who think so, may be of another Opinion when they have
considered, not only the Design of this Treatise, which is to Abridge into a
small Manual what others have writ in many Volumes; but also the manner of
handling the Matters herein treated of, which you will find to differ very much
from most of the Books written before upon this Subject: some Writers having
screwed up the King's Prerogative to so extravagant a height, as to place the
whole Essential Frame of the Government in the King's Sole Will and Pleasure,
not considering the Fundamental Rights and Liberties of a Freeborn Nation,
more than as the forced Concessions of some Weak Princes, not otherwise able to
appease an Angry People; and which they may therefore contract, or wholly
abrogate, as their Power or Opportunities may either dictate, or permit.

Whilst on the other side, there are some who have too much debased the Royal
Prenogative, by placing all Power immediately in the People, and supposing the
King accountable to their Representatives for every small Miscarriage in
Government. There is without doubt an Error in both these Extremes; since as
the King can have no Prerogative which is inconsistent with the Ancient Rights
and Liberties of the Subject, set down in Magna Charta, and other Ancient
Statutes, which were only declarative of the Common Law of England; So
likewise, if the King be the Supreme Magistrate of the Nation, he cannot
without a Soloecism in Government, be rendered accountable to any Power superior
to his own; these things considered, has induced the Author to choose a middle,
and more moderate Course, by preserving to the King all such Prerogatives as
are inseparable from the Supreme Executive Power, and which are necessary for
the Common Safety; yet, without leaving the King absolutely irresistible in all
Cases whatsoever, and without a supposed impossibility of his falling from his
Royal Dignity, in case of the highest Breaches of his Coronation Oath, and the
utmost Violations of that Usual and Ancient Contract, which his Predecessors
have so often renewed with the People of this Nation, upon their Succession to
the Throne.

For the proving of which the Author has made use of the best Authorities he
could collect either from our ancient Histories, Records, or Law Books,
beginning with the Grounds and Institution of Civil Government in general, and
ending with that of England in particular. And though he has so far adapted
this Discourse for men of ordinary Learning and Capacities, as not to stuff the
Margin with many Quotations; yet he has not failed to put them down,
wherever the Niceness or Uncommonness of the Subject might otherwise chance
to shock the Understandings of Readers not thoroughly versed in things of this
Nature: Not but that the Author is very well satisfied, that even where no
Authorities are expressly cited, he is able to maintain what he there lays down
by Arguments drawn from Law, as well as Reason, if any man shall think it worth
while to call it in question; but if he requires larger and fuller Proofs on
this Subject, he may, if he pleases, first consult the last Eight Dialogues of
a late Treatise, called, Bibliotheca Politica; as also Mr. Atwood' s Learned
Treatise concerning the Antiquity and Justice of an Oath of Abjuration. And I
hope he may thence receive sufficient satisfaction, that the Principles here
laid down, are founded not only upon right Reason, but the ancient Constitution
of the English Government.

This may suffice for the manner of handling this Argument. But now to say
somewhat more of the ends of publishing this Discourse, and they are these:
First, to make every man (though of never so common a Capacity) understand (as
well as the Author is able to perform it) what is the true, ancient, and legal
Government of this Kingdom. 2dly, What are the main and most considerable
Prerogatives of the Crown. And lastly, What are the fundamental Rights and
Liberties of the People. And that these are so far from being contradictory or
inconsistent, that they rather serve to defend and strengthen each other; so
that it has been for the defense and preservation of all these, that this
wonderful and happy Revolution has been brought about, and Their Present
Majesty's placed upon the Throne; as also to convince those who traduce by the
Nicknames of Whigs, and Commonwealths-men, those that have been in the worst of
times the only true Assertors of this ancient limited Monarchy; so that if they
plead for Resistance in some Cases, it is only in those of utmost and absolute
necessity, and in order to preserve the Original Constitution, and to prevent
the Head of the Legislative Power from devouring the Body: nor can they have
any other Notions of Loyalty, but their Obedience to the Government established,
and exercised according to Law, as the ancient Sense, as well as Etymology of
that word imports.

To conclude, Whosoever shall think fit to bestow a little money to buy, and
time to peruse this small Treatise, the Publisher hopes he will find the design
to be truly English, that is, sincere and honest, that all good Subjects may
know how to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things
that are Gods, without blindly sacrificing (under the will worship of a
pretended Loyalty) the Religion, Civil Liberties and Properties of their
Country to Caesar's Will, as some of late Years have done, who made these the
darling (because most gainful) Doctrines as well of the Pulpit, as the Bar and
the Press.

A BRIEF ENQUIRY INTO THE Ancient Constitution and Government of England, ctc.
In a Dialogue between a Justice of Peace, and an Understanding Freeholder.
I. GOOD Morrow Neighbor; What brings you hither so early? If you want a
Warrant, I Will call my Clerk, and then hear your Business.


F. No, I assure your Worship, the Business I come about is of greater concern,
and that no less than the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, as well as the
Power and Prerogative of our Kings; which though I heard you. Treat of in your
late Charge to the Grand Jury last Quarter Sessions, yet since I could not come
near enough to hear it distinctly, not being of that Jury my self, pray give me
the substance of that Discourse; and I the rather desire it, because I have
since heard it much censured by some of our Neighbors as savouring of
Commonwealth Principles: But to save you the labor of a needless repetition, I
will ask you those Questions which I desire most to be satisfied in.


I. Pray use your discretion, and begin when you please; I will do my endeavor
to satisfy you as well as I can, though without putting my self to the trouble
of quoting many Authors, which perhaps you never heard of; and therefore pray
believe, that whatever I shall tell you, I have not only Reason, but
Authorities also for what I then said.


F. I have no cause to doubt what you say; therefore, pray Sir, in the first
place tell me, what you then said about the Natural state of Mankind as to
Civil Liberty: Pray Sir, what think you, Were men at first Born Subjects, or
did they become so by some Human means?


I. As to this, Adam (for example) being the First man, could not, as a Husband
to Eve, or as a a Father to Cain, Abel, and the rest of his Children, be an
Absolute Lord or Monarch over them: His Power, as that of all other Fathers of
Families, not being a Civil Power, but that of a Husband, or Father, only for
the direction of his Wife in all things relating to the affairs of the Family;
and over his Children in order to their good Education in the Fear of God, and
for their Maintenance whilst they continued Members of it; so that Subjection
to Government could never begin from men's being born Servants, or Subjects, as
some will have it.


F. Pray then tell me, Sir, what is Civil Government?


I. I think Civil Government is God's Ordinance, which he has ordained for the
Good and Happiness of Mankind, to preserve men from the Violence both of
Foreign and Domestic Enemies, since the nature of man depraved by the Fall of
Adam is too apt otherwise to fall into all manner of mischiefs and enormities,
as well toward himself as others.


F. How then did it begin? Was it by any Divine Precept, or else by the Consent
of many men who had found the Inconveniences of living without it?


I. Before the Flood there is no mention in Scripture of any sort of Civil
Government, or any Precept left for it; the first that seems to prescribe it,
being after the Flood, when God gave Noab that positive Precept, Genesis 9. 6.
That whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; whence Divines
argue a necessity of Magistrates for putting this Law in execution; but who
were to appoint them, the Scripture is wholly silent; and though indeed there
is mention made of Kings in Genesis very early in the world, yet is it not
there told us how those Kings were made; therefore it is most reasonable to
suppose, that they either at first began by the tacit Consent or Election of
the Masters of Families, and other Freemen of the same Lineage, or Nation; or
else by Conquest of other Nations by force of Arms.


F. But, pray Sir, is there not an account given us in Scripture of Judges and
Kings made by God's own Appointment among the Jews?


I. Yes; but that concerned no other Nation but them; who are the only People,
that I know of, that had a Civil Government, as well as Divine Law, from God's
own Appointment.


F. But, Sir, did not God's thus giving the Jews Kings, or Persons at least
endued with Kingly Power, (though not under that Title) render Monarchy to be
of Divine Right, so as that all other Nations are thereby obliged to have no
other Government but that?


I. No sure, not at all; for till the time of Saul they had no visible King
over them; God himself was their King, and those that Governed under him could
do nothing of moment without his express Command; and where that did not
interpose, the Government was by Moses and a Senate of Seventy Elders, and also
by the Heads or Princes of the several Tribes as Subordinate to them; and after
his Decease, by Joshua and the other Judges whom God raised up; who if they had
been Kings in Power, but not in Title, it would have been in vain for the
Israelites to have desired a King to be like other Nations; and you see when
they desired such a King, God was angry with them, as if they had rejected
himself; so that there is no other consequence to be drawn from all these
Examples, but that Kingly Government is the most Ancient, and may also be the
best, if kept within due limits.


F. Pray whence then do Kings nowadays derive their Power, (since God has
long since left off making any Kings by Divine Precept)? Whether is it from
God, or from the People?


I. I told you before, that all Power is from God, and consequently Kingly
Power must be so too; yet this is so to be understood, that this Power cannot
Rightfully be acquired without the People's Consent; I mean all those who being
Master's of Families, and Freemen at their own dispose, had at first a Power
of setting up what sort of Government they pleased; and hence it is that we
find so many sorts of Governments in the world; as for example, Monarchy, which
is either Absolute, as in France and Turkey; or Limited, as in England, and as
it was not long since in all the Northern Kingdoms of Europe; or else
Aristocracy, that is, the Government of the best sort, or Nobility; or else
Democracy, where the Common People Govern alone, or else have the predominant
Power. But all these, as they derive their Power from God, are alike ordained
by him; though in respect also of men, who first found out and instituted these
several Governments, they are also called by St. Peter, the ordinance of men,
or a human creature, as the Original words it.


F. But do we not also find in Scripture, that most of the great Kingdoms or
Monarchies of the world have began from Conquest? Does not therefore Conquest
of a Nation by Arms give the Conqueror a Power from God to Rule over that
People without their Consents?


I. I will not dispute what Authority the Babylonian, Persian, Macedonian, and
Roman Monarchies might have over those Nations they conquered, by a particular
Donation from God, who had long before foretold those Monarchies by Daniel, and
the other Prophets; and as for the first of these Empires, the Jews are
particularly Commanded by the Prophet Jeremiah, to serve the King of Babylon;
the like is foretold by Isaiah of Cyrus; yet for all this, I think no other
Conquerors can pretend to the like Right over any Nation at this day; since all
Conquest is either by a just, or an unjust War; that the latter can give no
right at all to the Conqueror, all Writers agree; and that even the former can
give no right without the Peoples consent, either tacit or expressed, seems also
as certain, since in respect of them who are not capable Judges of the right or
wrong of the Quarrel, it can lay no obligation of Obedience, farther than they
please by some act of their own to acknowledge the Conqueror for their Lawful
Prince; which being once done voluntarily, is all one in respect of themselves,
as if it were by their Election, or that of their lawful Representatives: Nor
could the first Conqueror (mighty Nimrod, for example) ever conquer the
neighboring Nations by the sole assistance of his own Children and Servants,
without the conjunction of other Fathers of Families, and Freemen, who it is
most likely followed him for a share of the Spoil, and upon certain Conditions
agreed upon between them; for the like we find of all other Conquerors in
Ancient as well as Modern Histories.


F. But pray show me, Sir, how this can be, since most Nations have been
conquered at some time or other; but few of them have given their Consents (as
I know of) either in a whole Assembly of all that Nation, or else by their
lawful Representatives, as we do in England.


I. It Is true, they have not given their Consents all at once, but singly, and
one by one, they have done, and constantly do it every day in Towns and
Countries that pass from one King to another by Conquest; for it is certain
that all such Subjects as do not like the Religion or Government of the
Conquering Prince or Commonwealth, may lawfully retire out of the conquered
City or Country, and carry their Estates with them, or else sell their Lands,
and carry away the Money if they can, without any crime; so that it is apparent
it is only from the Acknowledgment or Recognition of each particular Person who
stays there, that this Conqueror comes to have any Right to the Subjects
Allegiance.


F. Pray how is this Consent or Acknowledgment given, since Oaths of Allegiance
(as I am informed) are not exacted in all places of the world where Conquests
are made?


I. I grant it; but where they are not so imposed nor taken, the persons that
have not sworn to this new Government, can never be obliged to an Active
Obedience, or to fight for, or serve the Conquering Prince, against perhaps
their former lawful Sovereign; yet I think thus much I may justly maintain,
That whatever Prince, be he a Conqueror, or Usurper (who is much the same thing
in respect of the Subjects) who shall take upon him to administer the Civil
Government, by protecting the conquered people, punishing Malefactors, and
doing equal Justice by himself or his Judges between man and man; whosoever of
this conquered people will continue in that City or Country, and receive his
Protection, and enjoy all the other Rights of other Subjects, is so far obliged
by virtue of that Protection he receives, as to yield a Passive Submission to
all the Laws that such a Conqueror shall make, and not to conspire against, or
disturb his Government by Plots or Rebellions. But indeed this tacit Consent or
Acknowledgment of the Conqueror's Authority, because not given by the People at
once, makes many men believe that their Consent is not at all necessary to make
a Conqueror's Power obligatory as to them; not but that I do acknowledge that
Oaths of Allegiance are of great use in any Kingdom or Commonwealth, to bind
men to a stricter Observance of their Duty, and also to an Active Obedience to
all their Conqueror's lawful Commands, even to venturing their Lives for the
Government, since it is for the Public Good of the Community, if they are so
required.


F. I am well enough satisfied as to the Original of Government, and the Right
that all Kings and Commonwealths have to their Subjects Allegiance, whether
they began at first by the express Consent or Election of the People, or else
by Conquest and their subsequent Consents; but pray satisfy me in the next
place concerning the Government of England; you said it was a Limited Monarchy,
and I have never heard that questioned; but how did this Limitation begin?
whether from the very first Institution of the Government, or else by the
gracious Concessions of our Kings?


I. Without doubt, Neighbor, from the very Institution of the Government; for
our first English Saxon Kings were made so by Election of the People, in their
great Councils, or Parliaments (as we now call them) and could do nothing
considerable either as to Peace or War without its Consent; and this Council
was to meet of course once a year, without any Summons from the King, and
oftener by his Summons, if there was any occasion for it; and it is certain that
the Freemen of England have always from beyond all times of memory enjoyed the
same Fundamental Rights and Privileges (I mean in substance) that they do at
this day.


F. Pray, Sir, what are those Fundamental Rights and Privileges that you say we
have so long enjoyed; tell me what they are.


I. I will in as few words as I can: First then, The Freemen of England were
never bound to observe any Laws, either in matters Civil or Religious, but what
were made by the King, with the Consent of the Great Council, consisting of the
Clergy, Nobility, and Commons, assembled in Parliament.

Secondly, That no Taxes could be lawfully imposed upon the Nation, or any
man's Property taken away without the Consent of this Council. 3. That this
Great Council had ever a power of hearing and redressing all Grievances and
Complaints of the Subjects, not only against the Vid. Mirror of Justice, Cap.
1. Sect. 2.
Oppressions of any of the King's great Officers or Ministers, who were too
great to be called to an account in any other Court; but also the particular
Wrongs of the King himself, the Queen, or their Children.


F. Pray how could this be done, since the King may at this day dissolve the
Parliament whenever he pleases?


I. I grant it is so now; but certainly it was otherwise when Parliaments met
of course at a certain place once a year without any summons from the King; yet
after that time, I find it in the Ancient Treatise, called The Manner of
holding Parliaments: Vid. Modum Antiq. tenendi Parl.
That the Parliament ought not to be dissolved whilst any Petition or Bill
depends undiscussed, or at least whereto no determinate Answer is given; and
that if he do, or permit the contrary, perjurus est, i. e. he is perjured: And
even at this day the Two Houses may justly refuse the King any supply of Money,
whilst he refuse to redress their just Grievances.


F. This is more than I ever heard of before; but pray proceed to tell me, what
are the rest of the Liberties and Privileges of an Englishman?


I. In short, they are these; Not to be banished the Realm, or imprisoned,
without just cause; nor to be kept there only as a punishment, but in order to
a legal Trial; not to be tried, condemned, or executed, without a lawful Jury
of his Peers first passed upon him, (unless in time of War, by Martial-Law);
lastly, no man is obliged to quarter Soldiers without his own consent, and then
paying for what they have. There are other less Rights and Privileges, expressed
in the Petition of Right, acknowledged and confirmed in Parliament by King
Charles I. all which I omit; but these being the chiefest that concern our
Lives, Liberties and Estates, were only insisted upon in my said Charge.


F. But pray, Sir, tell me, as to the King, Is he not the sole Supreme Power in
England?


I. No certainly; for then he could make Laws, and raise Money without the
Peoples Consent; but every printed Act of Parliament will show you where the
Supreme Power resides, wherein it is expressly recited in these words, Be it
therefore enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty, and by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of this
Realm, and the Authority of the same; or as I can show you in several Statutes
of King Henry the VIIIth. wherein it is recited thus, Be it enacted by the
Assent and Consent of our Sovereign Lord the King, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
Authority of the same; whereby you may see, that not only the words Assent and
Consent, but the word Authority is referred, as well to all the Three Estates,
as to the King.


F. This, I confess, is plain enough, but what are the King's chief
Prerogatives.


I. I will tell you in as few words as I can; his Majesty's chief Prerogatives
(for to enumerate them all would be endless) are these, First, to call
Parliaments once a year, or oftener, and Dissolve them if he pleases; to give
the last hand, or sanction to all Laws for raising of Taxes, and for the
enacting all other things that his Majesty, joining with the Two Houses of
Parliament, shall think fit to be Enacted; to appoint Judges to Try, Condemn,
and Execute Traitors, and all other Malefactors for Treason and other Crimes;
and to grant Pardons for those Crimes, if his Majesty shall think fit (yet
still according to his Coronation Oath); to grant Commissions to all other
Magistrates and Officers, both Civil and Military, no Arms being regularly to
be Raised but by his Authority; also by the Advice of his Privy Council, to
issue Proclamations according to Law, and for the Public Good for enforcing
the observation of such Laws, as shall be thought fit, in case those that are
entrusted with the execution of them prove too remiss: Lastly, to make War and
Peace, though the latter, as well as the former of these, were anciently very
seldom made without the Advice and Consent of Parliament. These are the chief
Prerogatives which I mentioned in my Charge, though I grant there are diverse
others, though less material.


F. But, pray Sir, cannot the King by his Prerogative do some things against
the Laws, and Dispense with them in all cases which he himself may judge for
the Common Good of the Kingdom?


I. The King had anciently no Power to Dispense with Statutes, with non
Obstantes; and so it is solemnly declared in the Kings Bench in the 39th. of K.
Edward the 3d. Vid. the year-book, Ter. Pasch.
by all the Justices as a Rule in Law, well known at that time, and I could
tell you (were it not too tedious) how this Prerogative of Dispensations first
began; but even then the King could not Dispense with any thing that was
morally Evil in it self, or with what was Enacted by Authority of Parliament
for the common Good and Safety of the whole People, or Nation in General: And
this is the true reason why the Late King James could not Dispense with all
Statutes concerning the taking away the Test, because the whole Nation had an
Interest in them; nor could he Dispense with any Act which conferred a
particular. Right or Privilege on a third Person; and lastly, he could not
commonly Dispense with any Statute wherein there was a particular provision to
prevent the King from Granting Charters with Clauses of Non-obstantes; But now
all Dispensations with such Statutes, are taken away by a particular Clause in
the late Act of the Rights and Liberties of the Subject Vid. 1o Will. and Mar.
which you may see if you please; and which I take to be no more than a Solemn
Declaration of what was the Ancient Law of England, before non obstantes came
up.


F. I am very well satisfied in this; but, pray Sir, tell me the reason, Why
the King cannot, as the Supreme Executive Power of the Kingdom, exercise his
Royal Prerogative, though it were to the prejudice of some particular Persons?


I. I can give you a very good reason for this, because this would be contrary
to that Trust which was at first reposed in the King by the Representative Body
of the Nation when this Limited Monarchy was first instituted, and which that
ancient Treatise, called the Mirror of Justices, Chap. 1. Sect. 2.
writ above Four hundred years since, very well sets forth the Common Law of
England as it stood before the Conquest, as also the Original of the Government
of this Kingdom by one Person, or Monarch; which he thus recites, That when
Forty Princes (that is, Aldermen, or Earls of Counties) did Elect one King
(viz. Egbert) to Reign over them, to Maintain and Defend their Persons and
Goods in Peace by Rules of Right; they made him at first to Swear, That he
would maintain with all his Power, the true Christian Faith, and would Govern
his People by Right without any respect of Persons; and would also be Obedient
to suffer Right (i. e. Justice) as well as others of his People. By which it
appears, That all the Prerogatives of the Crown are trusted in the King by Law,
for the Good and Preservation of his People, and not for the exercise of an
Arbitrary Will, or Power contrary thereunto. As also Sir John Fortescue, once
Lord Chancellor to King Henry the VIth. in his Treatise in Praise of our
English Laws, has thus handsomely set forth, viz. That the King was Made, or
Elected, for the safeguard of the Law, the Bodies and Goods of his Subjects;
and he has this Power derived from the People; so that he cannot long Govern
them by any other Power; and he also gives us the reason why he cannot
regularly Dispense with Acts of Parliament; Because, says he, they are made by
the general Consent of the King, and the whole Realm; and if there be any thing
in them that proves inconvenient, the King may quickly, or in a short time,
call another Parliament to amend it; but not without that, as it certainly
would if the King had an Absolute and Unlimited Power of Dispensing with all
Laws. So that you see the King is entrusted with his Prerogative by Law (that
is, by the Consent of the People only for their Benefit and Preservation);
therefore if the Judges, or any other inferior Officer act contrary thereunto,
though by the King's express Letters, or Messages, they are Forsworn, and may
be punished for it; and in this sense it is, that the King, whilst acting thus
by his subordinate Officers or Ministers, is said to do no wrong, because they
are liable to be questioned for it; and if he acts otherwise by his own
personal Power, or Commands, it is not as King of England, but as a private
Person; so that if we will consider our own happiness, we Englishmen are blessed
with such noble Privileges and Liberties, that I think there is no Nation in
the world where all degrees and ranks of men may live more happily than we do:
And as for the King, though it is true he has not an Absolute Unlimited Power
of doing whatever he will, yet he has sufficient to Protect his Subjects, and
bountifully to Reward those that serve him faithfully; and whenever he
undertakes any Foreign War with the general Consent and Assistance of his
People in Parliament, he most commonly proves a Terror to those who dare oppose
him.


F. I am very sensible of this Happiness we enjoy; and therefore when I think
how miserably the poor Countrymen live in France and other Countries, we of
the Yeomanry have all the reason in the world to venture our lives in the
defense of our Ancient Constitution; since if ever we should be reduced to an
Arbitrary Government, either by a standing Army at home, or a Conquest from
abroad, we can expect no better than Wooden-Shoes and Canvass-Breeches, and to
drink nothing but Water with the miserable French Peasants; and, I doubt, if
things should once come to that pass, you Country-Gentlemen would be but in
little better condition.

But since the greatest part of your Charge was to justify the Right of their
present Majesty's to the Throne, and that you insisted pretty long upon that
Head; yet methoughts you were a little too short in telling us only that King
James (who was once our Lawful King) could cease to be so; for you seem to rest
contented with the bare words of the Convention's late Vote, viz. That King
James having endeavored to subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom, by
breaking the original Contract between the King and the People, and that having
violated the Fundamental Laws, by withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom, he
had Abdicated the Government, and that the Throne was thereby become Vacant. So
that tho you speak pretty largely of King James's Violations by Raising of
Money without Consent of Parliament, and of exercising his Dispensing Power;
yet methoughts you seem chiefly to place this Vacancy of the Throne upon King
James's Abdication, or Desertion of it; which, let me tell you, as plain a
Country Fellow as I am, will not down with me; for I can never believe the King
would have deserted the Government, if he thought he could have staid here with
safety; therefore, pray tell me your meaning of these hard words, Constitution
of the Kingdom, Original Contract, and Abdication of the Throne.


I. I was not willing to insist too long in the face of the Country upon these
nice Points, which were not proper to be handled before an Assembly of ordinary
Countrymen; but since you have always appeared to me to be above the ordinary
Capacity of those of your Rank, I will tell you what I conceive was the true
Sense of the Convention in every one of those expressions: first for the
Constitution of the Kingdom, which King James went about to violate, I take
that to be the Government by King, Lords and Commons in Parliament, which he
endeavored to violate, by his taking away of Charters from Corporations, and
doing his utmost to impose a Parliament upon the Nation, of such men as would
not only take off the Penal Laws from Papists, and all other Dissenters, but
who would also have confirmed to the King that Arbitrary Power of dispensing
with what Laws he pleased; which would indeed have rendered Parliaments wholely
useless, and was as good as putting the whole Legislative Power into the sole
Person of the King.


F. But the Original Contract puzzles us yet more than all the rest, and I
heard Parson-Slave-all, at a neighboring Gentleman's house the other day, ask,
Whether the Speaker of the Convention had not the keeping of it under his
Cushion? for he could never yet light upon it in any English History or
Law-Book.


I. Pray tell that witty Parson next time you meet him, that if he pleases to
look over our Histories and Law Books, that in the very same Leaf where the
Divine Hereditary Right of Succession to the Crown in a Right Line is
established as an unalterable and fundamental Law, in the very next Clause he
may find this Original Contract. But not to banter you, I will tell you my
sense of this expression, which, in my opinion, signifies no more than that
Compact or Bargain which was first entered into between King James's Ancestors
or Predecessors, (and under whose Title he enjoyed the Crown) whereby they
bound themselves by a solemn Oath, when they took the Crown upon them, at their
Coronation, to keep and maintain the Laws of the Realm, and to govern the
People according to these Rules of Justice and Mercy, that is in short, acting
according to Law. Which Oath, or the substance of it, having been constantly
renewed every fresh Succession to the Crown, as soon as the King was capable of
taking it, sufficiently declares, that as the King upon observing this Compact,
by governing according to Law, had a Right to his Subjects Allegiance; so if he
refused to act according to it, but would wilfully violate the Ancient
Constitution of the Kingdom, he thereby ceases to be King by Law, and by
destroying his own Title to the Crown, thereby also dissolves that Bond of
Allegiance which before bound his Subjects to him as well in Duty as Affection.


F. But how can you prove that this Contract was mutual, or that the King was
to enjoy his Crown only upon this Condition, That he observe the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom? since I have heard it positively asserted by those that
are very well skilled in our Laws, that the King is as much King before ever he
is crowned, as afterward; and that he may choose whether he will ever take any
Coronation Oath or not.


I. I will not now dispute that Point with you; but yet let me tell you, if a
King should at this day refuse, to be crowned, because he had no mind to be
tied by his Coronation Oath, I doubt whether the People, if they understood the
force of that Oath his Predecessors have all along taken for so many
Successions, might not as well refuse to take him for their King, since he
refused to hold the Crown upon those Conditions that his Ancestors at first
took it; and so might look upon themselves as good as discharged of all Oaths
of Fidelity to him, since those Oaths were no doubt at first instituted on this
mutual Consideration, that both should observe their part, and not that one
side should be loose, and the other fast; but to show you in the first place,
that every Coronation Oath was in the Saxon times, and long after the Conquest,
a Renewal of this Original Contract may appear from these Considerations:

1. That all the Kings of the West Saxons were elected, or at least confirmed
by the great Council or Parliament Vid. Spel. Council. 1 Vol. p. 29.
; and I can show you a particular Law of a General Synod or Parliament of all
England, wherein is particularly set down the Laws or Rules for the electing of
their Kings, as that they were not to be Bastards, etc. And pursuant to this
Law of electing their Kings, this great Council Vid. Vitam Alfredi. Edit. Oxon.
often preferred the Younger Brother before the Elder, or the Uncle before the
Nephew, when either greater Merit, or the pressing Necessities of the Kingdom
required it, which when once agreed upon by the Bishops, and great men of the
Kingdom in the great Council, after their Election, and upon the day of their
Coronation, the Archbishop of Canterbury (whose Right it has always been to
crown the King) went to the King Elect, and before ever he proceeded to the
Coronation, tendered him a solemn Oath See the Old Form of the Coronation Oath
before the Conquest, and after, in Mr. Attwood's Treatise of the Antiquity of
an Oath of Abjuration, p. 94. to the end.
, whereby he was to swear three things:

First, That God's Church, and all the Christian People of his Kingdom should
enjoy true Peace and Quiet.

Secondly, That he should forbid Rapine, and all Injustice to all sorts of men.

Thirdly, That he would command Justice together with Mercy in all Judgments:
And then (and not till then) was the Crown set upon his Head, and the Scepter
put into his Hand by the Archbishop; and till this was done, the Prince Elect
was not looked upon as King, nor had any Right to the Subjects Allegiance. And
thus stood this immemorial Custom unaltered, not only during the Saxon times,
but long after the coming in of the Normans; for the first seven Kings after
William I. who till their Coronations were never owned nor styled Kings until
King Edward I. who was Elected (or Recognized) for King, in a great Convention
of the Estates, who then assembled of their own Accord, when he was in the Holy
Land, and they caused an Oath of Fealty to be taken to him two Years before his
arrival in England; and though I grant since that time the Crown has been
claimed as Hereditary, yet has it rather been by virtue of those Entails that
have been successively made of it by express Acts of Parliament, and not from
any Fundamental Law or Constitution of the Kingdom. This was the ancient Form
of electing and making our Kings, the Footsteps of which Election still remain
to later times, when the Archbishop used to lead the King or Queen to all parts
of the Scaffold, as at the several Coronations of King Edward VI. and Queen
Elizabeth See the Forms of those Coronations in Stow, Holinshed. and others.
: asked all the People standing below, Whether they would have this Person to
be their King or Queen?


F. I confess you tell me more of this matter than ever I knew before; but yet
I am still to seek, how this old Coronation Oath, expressed in so few words,
should tie those Princes to observe the Laws of the Kingdom, since it seems
that by this Oath, he was rather to govern according to Equity, than Law.


I. That is, because you do not understand the Legal Force of those words
contained in this Oath; for by the first Branch of it, whereby God's Church,
and all Christian People should enjoy true Quiet, is meant not only that the
Clergy in particular should under him enjoy all their lawful Rights and
Privileges, but also all the other Lay-Members of Christ's Church should enjoy
the free Profession of the Christian Religion as by Law established, without any
molestation or disturbance.

2. By forbidding Rapine and all Injustice, is meant not only his hindering
Robberies, and all violent takings of his Subjects Goods, but also the illegal
taking them by his own personal Commands, or by his inferior Officers or
Ministers.

3. By commanding Justice together with Mercy in all his Judgments, is meant no
more, than his not pardoning the Guilty when condemned, and also not to condemn
the Innocent, or such whose particular Circumstances might deserve Mercy, and
is no more than what was afterward granted by Magna Charta, the sense of which
is, That the King there promises neither to deny nor defer, nor yet to sell
Justice to any man; which extends likewise as well to his great Officers and
Judges, as himself, since they being the Keepers of the King's Oath and
Conscience, he is guilty of the like Perjury, if he either connive, or is a
wilful Partaker or Encourager of their Injustice. And it was also declared for
Law by the Judges, in the Reign of King Edward III. That not only the King, but
the Prelates, Nobles, Governors, and Justices, etc. of this Realm, were tied by
their Oaths to maintain the ancient Laws, Franchises and Customs of the Kingdom
of England. And also in a Letter sent from the Parliament in the 29th of Edward
I. to the Pope Vid. Mat. West. p. A. D. 1301. 435. 436.
, the States of the Kingdom do there declare, That since the Premises required
by the Pope, were to the disherison of the Crown, and subversion of the
Kingdom, and to the prejudice of the Liberties, Customs and Laws of their
Country, and to whose observance and defense they were bound by the Oaths they
had taken, and which they would defend to the utmost of their power; nor would
permit even the King himself, although he would do it, to attempt the same. Now
pray tell me what greater Assertion of a right of Resistance in some Cases,
than this Letter from the Parliament, sent by the King's own privity and
consent.


F. But you have not yet shown me how the King, who is an Hereditary Monarch at
this day, can be tied by the Oath of his Predecessors, since (as your self
cannot deny) he is King before ever he is Crowned.


I. I will not deny, but the Law is taken to be so at this day; yet it is also
as true, that from the beginning it was not so, as I have here sufficiently
made out; and yet for all this, I can prove, that tho the Succession to the
Crown is now become Hereditary, and so may alter the manner of acquiring it,
(and this for the avoiding of Contests between Competitors at Elections) yet
notwithstanding this Hereditary Succession, it does no ways alter the
Conditions on which the Crown was at first conferred, any more than if the
Office of Lord High-Constable, or Earl-Marshal of England, having been at first
granted for Life, and being afterward by subsequent Grants made Hereditary,
those that thus enjoyed them should have pretended that they were now no longer
forfeitable for any Maladministration, tho never so enormous. Now, let us but
apply the Case of those great Offices of Trust to that of Kingship, which is
certainly an Office of the highest Trust, and then we may easily discover, that
whether it be for life, or else entailed to them, and their Heirs, they are
still obliged by the first Contract of their Ancestors, which is for memory
sake still renewed at every King's Reign; so that tho the manner of their
Accession to the Crown be altered from what it was at first, yet the Conditions
on which it was first taken, remain the same as long as the Oath it self
continues; so being renewed at every King's Reign. And hence it is, that our
Kings enjoy their Crowns, be it for Life or Intail. Now it is certain, that
this Solemn Oath or Contract which was taken by the first King, ought by Law to
be renewed at the beginning of every King's Reign; and hence it is, that our
Kings are not only bound by their own express Oaths or Contracts with their
Subjects, but also by the implied Oaths or Compacts of their Predecessors under
whose Title they claim.

And King James I. was so sensible of this double Contract, that he expressly
mentions it in one of his Speeches to 1609. both Houses of Parliament, where he
very well distinguishes between both those Contracts, telling them, That a King
in a settled Kingdom binds himself by a double Oath to the Observation of the
Fundamental Laws of his Kingdom, tacitly as being a King [that is claiming
under his Ancestors] and so bound to protect them as well as the Laws of his
Kingdom; and expressly by his own Oath at his Coronation: So as every Just King
in a settled Kingdom is bound to observe that Paction or Covenant made to his
People by his Laws, in forming his Government agreeable thereunto, according to
that Paction which God made to Noah, etc. And then goes on to tell them, That
therefore a King governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and
degenerates into a Tyrant as soon as he leaves off to Rule according to his
Laws. And then concludes, That all Kings who are not Tyrants, nor Perjured,
will be glad to bind themselves within the limits of their Laws; and they that
persuade them otherwise, are the worst Vipers and Pests both against them, and
the Commonwealth.

So that you see here by King James's own Concession, that there are not only
Fundamental Laws, but an Original Contract (which he there calls a Paction or
Covenant) to observe them from the time of the first King or Monarch to this
day, and that when he ceases to Govern according to this Compact (which he here
calls his Laws) he then becomes a Tyrant.


F. But I have heard some say, That William the First, after he had conquered
England, distributed almost all the Lands to his Norman and French Followers;
and that if there were any Original Contract ever entered into by the English
Saxon Kings, it was quite void upon the Conquerors obtaining the Crown, and
subduing all the People of this Nation; so that whatever Liberties we now
enjoy, they were but the gracious Concessions of himself, and his Successors,
without any such Original Compact.


I. I confess it is so alleged by some high flying Gentlemen, who, if they
could, would make us all Slaves to the King's Absolute Will; but without any
just grounds in my Opinion, since every one of their Suppositions are either
false, or built upon rotten Foundations. For in the first place, a: Conquest in
an Unjust War (as I have already proved) can confer no Right on the Conqueror
over a free People; and if this War were never so Just, yet could not he
thereby have acquired any Right over the whole Kingdom, since the War was not
made against the English Nation, but Harold only, who had usurped the Crown
contrary to Right: so that King William could have no Right to it without the
People's Consent in their Great Council or Parliament, which most of the
Historians of those times say he obtained; but indeed, King William (whom you
call the Conqueror) never claimed by that Title, but by the Donation or
Testament of King Edward the Confessor, and the Consent or Election of the
People of England, as all his English-Saxon Predecessors had done before him;
nor did he give all, nor yet a third part of the Lands of England to his Norman
Followers, as you suppose; or if he had, would it do the business for which it
is urged, since his Norman and French Followers to whom he gave those Lands,
were never conquered, but were (if any thing) the Conquerors of others, and
from them most of our Ancient English Nobility and Gentry are lineally
descended, or else claim under their Titles by Purchases, Marriages, etc. and so
succeed to all their Rights and Privileges. And at the worst, supposing King
William to have in some Cases governed Arbritrarily, and like a Conqueror over
the English; this was not so, till he was provoked to it by their frequent
Plots and Conspiracies against him; and yet even that was done contrary to his
Coronation Oath, which was the same that all the Saxon Kings had taken before,
only with this Addition, That he should govern as well his French as his
English Subjects by equal Law or Right See his Coronation Oath in Mr. Atwood's
Treatise of the Oath of Abjuration, p. 96.
so that his wilful Breach of this Oath could not give him, or his Successors
any just Right by the Sword over the Lives, Estates, or Liberties of any
Englishman, who had never fought against him, nor offended his Laws. And tho I
should grant that this King, and his Son William Rufus, governed his Norman, as
well as his English Subjects very Arbitrarily, and contrary to his own Laws;
yet did his Brother, King Henry 1st, make both his English and Norman Subjects
large amends by the great Charter of their Ancient Liberties, which he granted
immediately after his Election to the Crown by the Chief Bishops, Lords, and
Freemen of the Kingdom; and upon which the great Charter of England, renewed
by King John, and afterward confirmed by his Son, Henry the 3d, were founded,
being but larger Explanations thereof.


F. I confess this is more than ever I knew before; but what if a King of
England (as King James lately did) will cease to govern like a legal or limited
King, and prove a Tyrant by breaking this original Compact, which his
Predecessors made with the people, does it therefore follow that he may be
resisted if he does? or can he ever cease to be King, or forfeit his Royal
Dignity, if he acts never so Tyrannically? for sure if all resistance of his
Power be unlawful, as being so declared by several Acts of Parliament in King
Charles the Second's Reign, he can never cease to be King, except he will
wilfully turn himself out of the Throne.


I. I am very well satisfied that those Acts you mention were only made upon
this Supposition, That the King would never violate the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, by which he became King, or go about to change the Constitution of the
Government; since that had been to give the King an Irresistible Power to make
us all Slaves whenever he pleased; so that our Religion, Lives, and Civil
Liberties, would lie not only at the King's mercy, but at the mercy of those
Ministers that govern him; and therefore as it can never be supposed to have
been the intent of that Parliament to tie up themselves, and the whole people
of this Nation to the King on such hard terms; nay, supposing that the
Parliament had done it, I do not think they had any right so to do, since they
were entrusted by those that chose them, not to alter the Fundamental
Constitution of the Government, but to strengthen and confirm it; so that if by
this Act of Non-resistance the Government might easily be altered, and the
Legislative Power, as well as that of raising Money, may be taken out of the
Power of the King, and the Two Houses, and should be put solely in the King's
person, the whole frame of the Government would not only be altered, but
actually dissolved, and consequently Resistance in this case would not be a
crime, but a duty; since Parliaments were instituted for the maintenance of the
King's Legal, and not Tyrannical Power, and for preserving the people in that
share of the Government, which by the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom
belonged to them.


F. But pray tell me, Sir, Is there any express Law for this Resistance; for
indeed I could never hear of any such? and therefore, I doubt, that if those
Noblemen and Gentlemen, who went in lately to help his present Majesty, when
Prince of Orange, had been taken Prisoners, and himself defeated by the King's
Army; but they would have all of them been guilty of High Treason, by the
Statute of 25 of Edward the Third; and sure it would have been no good Plea, to
be allowed by the Judges, that they took not up Arms against the King of
Government, because the Government was dissolved by the King's exercising an
Arbitrary Power.


I. I would not argue with you what would have happened if the King had got the
better, and either taken the Prince of Orange prisoner or driven him out of the
Kingdom; for I never knew in all the Histories I have read, but that a Prince,
who had the Armed Force of the Nation on his side, could hang whom he pleased;
and will always find Judges and Jurymen enough ready to side with him in it,
as we have found by many late Examples.

But this is no Argument for the Right or justice of such Proceedings; for we
know King Charles the First was tried and condemned by the Pretended Authority
of the Rump Parliament, notwithstanding, his denying that they had any
Authority over him; and though it be true there is no express Act of Parliament
to tell us when the Government is dissolved, and when, and in what case men may
resist the King, or those commissioned by him; yet does it not follow that no
such thing can ever be lawfully done; for it is sufficiently proved from the
reason and necessity of the thing it self, though no express Law or Conditions
be made for it; which may be also observed in all Moral or Religious Promises
or Contracts. Thus if I promise, or swear to a man, never upon any account
whatsoever to beat or kill him, this-is still so to be understood, that he does
not go about to beat, or kill me; for then my right of self-defence will take
place, notwithstanding my Oath: so when people are married, they mutually
promise each other to live together till death do part, yet no man will say a
man or woman commits a sin, or breaks this solemn Promise, if the former, by
reason of Adultery in the Wife, or the latter, by the extreme Cruelty or
Harshness of the Husband, do separate from each other, and that perhaps for
ever.

But I shall now show you that there is a Resistance allowed even by the Law it
self in some cases, against those that have the King's personal Commission, as
may appear by this Instance. Suppose an Officer with a Company of Soldiers
should under a color of such a Commission take upon them to keep possession of
a House, contrary to Law, do you not believe, but the Sheriff may upon a legal
Process issued out thereupon, raise the Posse Comitatus, and restore the
Possession by Force to the Right Owner, notwithstanding this Commission; and
the Reason is plain, because though the Officer may have the King's personal
Command for so doing, yet it is the Sheriff alone who acts by a Legal
Authority, and who alone can justify the using of this Force: Now if any man
should be killed in this Action, no doubt but the Officer and his Soldiers, and
not the Sheriff, and the men that assisted him, would be found guilty of
murder.


F. I grant this may be so; but is not this the true reason of it, because the
Sheriff acts by the King's employed Authority, without which no man can lawfully
take up Arms? But how can this be justified, in case Arms were taken up upon
supposition the Government is Dissolved, which is all one as to affirm, That
the King is no longer King?


I. I allow that great part of what you say is true, but not all; for in the
first place it is plain, that there is a Legal Resistance of those Commissions,
though issued by the King, and which is justifiable by Law, as appears by this
instance; which rule holds good as long as the Laws can be permitted to have
their due course: But what if the King will not permit that they shall, but
will take part with this wicked Officer and his Soldiers, and maintain them in
these violent Actions, and either not let the Law pass upon them, or if it
does, should constantly Pardon them as soon as they had committed any such
violent illegal Acts by his Commands contrary to Law? Can any man believe that
such Proceedings, if commonly practiced, would not quickly dissolve the
Government, and make such a King cease to be so, since he refused to Govern and
Protect his Subjects according to Law, and his own Coronation Oath, which
virtually contains those Conditions on which he holds his Crown? for when there
is no Justice to be had in the Kings Courts, it then becomes a mere Anarchy,
wherein there can be nothing but Rapine and Confusion, and consequently puts
men in a State of War.


F. I have I know not what to say to this; But can you show me any express Law
for the King's ceasing to be so, in case he thus leave off to Protect his
People, and Govern them according the Laws of the Land?


I. Yes that I can, for I can show you a good old Law of King Edward the
Confessor, Vid. Lambert's Saxon Laws. Leg. Guil. ^h. 6. 7. p. 60.
which is also among those that were confirmed by K. Will. I. whereby it is
expressly declared, That the King, who is God's Lieutenant, is appointed to this
end, That he defend his Kingdom and People, and above all things Reverence his
Holy Church, and Defend it from Injuries, and take away Wicked doers from it;
which unless he do, not so much as the name of King shall remain to him; neo
nomen Regis in eo constabit, as it is in the Latin; which is likewise
confirmed by Bracton, Lib. 2. Chap. 2.
an ancient Lawyer, who tells us, That it is the King's Crown or Authority to
do Justice and Judgment, and to maintain Peace, without which (it follows) That
this Crown or Authority cannot Consist, or be retained: So in another place he
says, That it is not the King, where only Will, and not Law Governs; and in
another place he gives this reason for it, Because the King was Elected to do
Justice to all men. Therefore when he thus abuses his Power, and deviates from
the main end of his Creation, his Authority ceases, or is at an End; so that
nothing seems plainer to me, than that all our Ancient Laws and Lawyers have
declared, that a King who wilfully Acts contrary to these known Laws of the
Land, by turning Tyrant, and by endeavoring to alter the Ancient Constitution,
and by thus breaking his Contract abovementioned, looses or forfeits all his
Regal Dignity and Power.


F. But, pray Sir, How can this be, since our late Statutes declare the King
not to be subject to any Coercive Power of the Two Houses of Parliament?


I. I grant the Law to be so now; but from the beginning it was not so (as I
said but now); many of the Saxon* Kings before the Conquest, were Deposed by
the great Council of the Kingdom; and since that time King Edward and Richard
the IId. were solemnly Deposed by Authority of Parliament; and that proceedings
against them were never expressly Condemned or repealed by any subsequent
Statute that I know of; but admit the Law is not so now, does it not therefore
follow, that because the King is not Punishable, nor Accountable to the
Parliament, that therefore he is wholly also Irresistible, and can never fall
from his Royal Dignity, let him behave himself as he will toward his People?
for sure it is one thing to be accountable, or Punishable by the Parliament as
his Superior, and another to be Disobeyed and Resisted by the whole Nation,
when it shall judge he has broken this Original Contract made by himself and
his Predecessors, in violating the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the
Government, by virtue of which he became King; since the former course of
Proceedings must be according to some Law* but for this there is no Law now
extant, but the contrary declared by several Statutes; whereas Resistance in
those cases I have now put upon a total breach of the Original. Contract, is
not only justifiable from the very Constitution of the Government; but also
from the Right of Nature, viz. Self-defence; whereby, whoever violently
Assaults me in Life, Liberty, or Estate, I am justified in Defending my self
against him; for otherwise any Right were wholely insignificant, if it might
not be Defended by Force, when endeavored by Force to be taken away.


F. But methinks this seems hard, and of evil consequence? to take this Power
of Judging the King's Actions, whether Legal or not, out of the Parliament, and
to place it in the diffusive Body of the whole Nation, whereby we of the high
shoos would be made as capable of Judging when this Original* Contract is
broken, as the best Gentleman of you all; which, the temper of the meaner and
beggarly sort of People considered, seems very dangerous, since this would give
them a Right to Rebel, and take Arms whenever they had a mind to it, as I have
read in our Chronicles they did in Richard the IId. and Henry the VIth. and
Henry the VIIth's time; and as they did lately in Plundering, Pulling down, and
Burning Popish Gentlemen's Houses, etc.


I. You very much mistake me, for I do not put this power of Judging any where,
but where it ever was, much less to give a Power of taking up Arms, and raising
Rebellion to the Mob, or most common sort of People; but first to show you,
that every man in his several Station, and at his Peril, is to judge of the
Legality and Illegality of the King's Commissions, or Proclamations: Pray let
me ask you this question, Suppose that the King grants a Commission to certain
of us Country Gentlemen, to raise a Tax contrary to Law, are we obliged to Obey
it, or not?


F. No sure, you are not, because you should be Punished, not only in
Parliament, but at Common Law, if you did.


I. Well then, it seems that we Justices and Deputy Lieutenants may judge in
this Case, but, pray tell me, suppose we should notwithstanding order this Tax
to be levied, and you were High-Constable of the Hundred, Do you think your
self obliged blindly to obey our Orders, being so Notoriously contrary to Laws?


F. I think truly I should not, but should plainly tell your Worships, that I
was not obliged either by Law or in Conscience to have any hand in oppressing
my self and my Neighbors, and should desire you to put this ungrateful Task
upon some Body else, since I thought my self liable to be called to Account one
time or other, if I did it.


I. Very well; but if you and the other High-Constable of the Country should
agree with us Justices to raise this Tax, Do you think the Petty-Constables and
Assessors were obliged to act by this New Commission contrary to Law?


F. I do not think that if we High-Constables should be such Fools and Knaves,
the Petty-Constables and Assessors were obliged to be so too.


I. Well then, you see that not only we Gentlemen, but you Yeomen can judge,
(nay, are obliged at your Perils to do it) when things are imposed upon you
contrary to Law; nay, and to refuse to execute them too.


F. I grant all this is true, but this is not Resistance by force; but I
suppose you Gentlemen would count it downright Rebellion in us Country-Fellows,
if you should tell us such a Tax already imposed was according to Law; and we
should be so far from paying it, as to raise the Country, and fall upon you
Commissioners that went about to raise it by distraining or imprisoning the
Refusers.


I. By your favor, Neighbor, your very Refusal to levy this Tax is a Civil
Resistance; since all Disobedience to the Command of Superiors is so, as
proceeding from a Right that those that disobey suppose they have of judging of
the Legality or Illegality of such Commands; but as for forceable Resistance,
though I do not allow it to you, or any man else, as long as no Force is used
against them, yet so much let me tell you, that if we Deputy Lieutenants and
Justices of the Peace, should ever be so foolishly wicked as to take upon us to
assist the King by the power of the Trainbands, or a standing Army, to levy any
Tax without Act of Parliament, or color of Law at least, but that not only you
of this County, but of all the Counties in England, might lawfully stand upon
your defense, and resist this Rapine and Violence; since if this were once
permitted, it would in a moment alter the Constitution of the Government in a
main Fundamental Point. The like I may say of any other matter of the same
nature, if it should be imposed upon you by Force, contrary to Law, that is,
contrary to, or without any Act of Parliament to warrant it.

Nor would this justify all the Rebellions you mention to have been raised by
the Common People in those several Kings Reigns; since those were raised upon
levying of Taxes imposed by the King and Parliament, which is the sole Supreme
Legislative Power of the Nation, where I grant it is Rebellion to resist;
whereas that Resistance, which I only now suppose to be Lawful, is against the
King's personal Commands or Commissions in opposition to known Laws, which is
not to resist the Supreme Power of the Nation, but only the King's Person, when
he acts not as King, but as a private man.


F. But, pray Sir, is not this to separate the King's Personal, from his
Politic Capacity, to suppose the man may be resisted, and not the King; or the
King's Personal, but not his Legal Commissions or Commands? for to do this, I
have heard, has been declared to be Treason?


I. This is also justifiable by Law in some Cases; for if the King should
happen to prove mad, (as diverse Kings have) pray do not his Servants about him
hold or tie the Madman, and yet how can they do this, without binding the King?
And, pray tell me, what difference is there between Madness, which is a Natural
Disability and Tyranny, which is a moral incapacity to govern? since both are
alike destructive to the Common Good of the Nation. And when you suppose we may
lawfully disobey the King's personal Commands, what do we but then by
disobeying the King, distinguish between the King's politic and his personal
Capacity; that is, when he acts legally as King, and when he issues out his
Commissions or Commands, without any Law to warrant him? or else when the
Persons commissioned are made by Law incapable of the King's Commissions, as
the Popish Officers lately were? since otherwise we were all obliged to yield
the same Obedience to the one as well as to the other.

Nor is it at all harder, but much easier to judge, when such Commissions or
Commands are attended with Force and Violence, and when they are not; since
certainly every plain Country-Fellow can much better tell, when a thing
contrary to Law, is put upon or exacted of him by Force, than when it is only
barely commanded or required of him by a Commission or Proclamation; seeing the
latter only reaches the Understanding, but the former not only touches the
Understanding, but the outward Senses of Hearing, Seeing and Feeling* To
conclude, I would not have you therefore believe that I allow this general
Resistance to the whole Nation, but only when by a General Violation of our
Fundamental Liberties, the whole Constitution of the Government comes to be in
danger of an utter Ruin and Subversion, by breach of the Original Contract
abovementioned: and that these Violations and Oppressions do some way or other
concern the whole Body of the People of this Nation, that is, all Orders and
Degrees of men, and then only (and not till then) I look upon such a general
Resistance of the King, and those commissioned by him to be lawful; that is,
when all other Remedies are become absolutely desperate and impracticable,
through the King's wilful Obstinacy to amend such Violations.


F. I grant this seems very reasonable, but pray tell me what those grand
Violations are, that can thus alter the Fundamental Constitution of the
Government, and can make a total breach of this Original Contract?


I. They do, I conceive, consist but in a few Points, and they are these.

First, If the King should take upon him to make Laws, either concerning
Religion, or Civil Matters, and to impose then upon the People without their
Consent in Parliament.

Secondly, If he take upon him to dispense with all Laws, and especially when
his hands are tied up, by a particular Clause to the contrary, that he shall
not so dispense with them.

Thirdly, If he take upon him of his own head, without the Advice or Opinion of
his Judges, to raise Money upon the Nation: Or,

Fourthly, If he corrupt the Judges to give their Opinions according to his
humor, either by promising of Rewards, or threatening them if they refuse; and
will put none into those places, who will not do whatever he commands them, or
turns them out as soon as they act otherwise.

Fifthly, If he go about to alter the ancient Constitution of Parliaments, and
bring the Election of the Members of the House of Commons, only into the hands
of those of his own Party or Opinion, whereby our Liberty of Electing and
Voting by our Lawful Representatives would be quite taken away. The like I may
also say of the House of Peers, if he should go by Force either to exclude the
Bishops or Temporal Lords, who have a Right of sitting there by Prescription;
and should, under pretense of his Prerogative, bring such as had no Right to
sit there at all.

Sixthly, and lastly, If he should go about commonly or generally, to take away
the Subjects Lives, Liberties or Estates, by an Arbitrary Power, contrary to
Law, upon pretended Crimes, and without such due Trial as the Law requires.

Now I think you cannot but acknowledge, that most (if not all) of these Heads,
are easily to be judged of by all the People of England, when they are come to
that extremity that we can have no reason to doubt of it.


F. But, pray Sir, tell me who shall judge of these Violations, or what number
may be allowed to rise and redress them?


I. The Judges are, I told you before, the whole Body of the Nation or People,
every one in his private Capacity; that is, not the Clergy alone, or the Lords
alone, or the i. e. Nobiles Minores.
less Nobility or Gentry, and much less you Yeomen, or landed men, and least of
all the mere Rabble or Mob, but all men of all Orders and Conditions taken
together; and as for the number, it is any, though never so small, that are
able to make a head till more can come into their Assistance.


F. But would not a Free Parliament be a much better Judge of these
Violalations, than this general Body of the People?


I. I grant it, if a Parliament may be had that were free and unbiased; but
what if the King resolves not to call any? or, if he does, will not give them
leave to sit till they have redrest our Grievances? Or, what if he will not
call one, till he thinks he can make or pack it according to his own mind? The
Nation may at this rate be enslaved as much, nay worse, by having the
appearance of a Parliament to confirm the King's Arbitrary Power, than if he
had acted by none at all; so that in these Cafes there can be no other Remedy
left us, but an Appeal to the General Body of the People, with whom that
Original Contract I mentioned was at first made; not but that a Free Parliament
or Convention, when ever it can meet, may be of excellent use to examine what
the People (who thus take up Arms) have acted in defense of their just Rights
and Liberties, and to judge and declare it to have been well or ill done, and
upon what grounds; and this has been the course of all Parliaments that have
been called immediately after any great and general Resistance or Revolution,
made upon the Accounts abovementioned. This I could prove to you from several
Instances in diverse Kings Reigns since the Conquest, were it worth my pains;
but still in all those Cases the first opposition has been from the great Body
of the Clergy, Nobility and People together, as you may particularly read in
the Reign of King John, not long before the great Council at Runney Mead.


F. But, pray Sir, can you also justify those Lords and Gentlemen who took up
Arms, and declared for the Prince of Orange; and also those Lords, together
with the Officers and Soldiers, who deserted the King, and went into the
Prince's Army? Pray, Sir, did you look upon the Government to be then actually
dissolved when they went in to him, and that the King, by the breach of the
Original Contract, was then no longer King?


I. I do not say so; for though those Violations, if obstinately persisted in
without amendment, were enough to create such a Dissolution, and consequently a
Forfeiture of the Crown, as they wrought at the last; yet the Government can
never be dissolved, so long as there remain any hopes that the King will amend
those Violations he has made, in a Free Parliament; for the obtaining of which,
as it was the chief cause of his Highness's coming over, so was it also of
those Lords, Gentlemen and Officers going in to him, or declaring for him: and
this, I think, they may very well justify both in Honor and Conscience. And
though there be no express Law for it, yet it is no more than what the
Nobility, Gentry and People of other Kingdoms as well as this, have many times
done before in former Ages, when their Kings being misled and deluded by evil
Counselors or Ministers of State, have made the like Breaches upon their
Liberties. And though I confess such taking up of Arms have not always met with
the desired Success, yet for the most part they have, and then such wicked
Judges and Counselors have not failed to be punished, and those Lords,
Gentlemen and others, who so nobly and stoutly stood up for the Rights and
Liberties of the Nation have been also pardoned by Act of Parliament, and that
with the King's own consent, when those wicked men were once removed; but the
King himselff was never touched, till by his own wilful and obstinate
persisting in such violent courses, he let the Nation see that he was wholely
irreclaimable, and obstinately bent to destroy our Liberties, and set up
Arbitrary Government and Tyranny in this Kingdom, as I could show you from
several Instances in the Reigns of King John, Henry III. Edward I. and Richard
II. if it were necessary to give you a particular History of all those
Transactions; so that I suppose a twofold Right of Resistance in the People,
the one warranted by the Laws and Constitution of the Government, which may
well consist with our Loyalty to the King, and to the intent only to obtain a
Free Parliament, to redress Grievances, and punish those evil Counselors who
have been the chief Ministers and Designers of Arbitrary Power, as in the Case
of King James before his departure; the other Natural, when the Government by
the King's wilful and obstinate refusal to redress such Grievances, by ceasing
to govern us according to Law, he thereby also ceases to be King; and then the
Commonwealth or Civil Society being without a Head to execute Common Justice,
was absolutely dissolved.


F. What then is meant by these words in the late Vote and Declaration of the
Convention, viz. That King James having withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom,
has abdicated the Government? Do you believe that the King's bare delertion of
the Kingdom, when he declared he could not help it should be looked upon as in
Abdication of the Government. methinks that seems somewhat hard to conceive.


I. To deal freely with you, I never understood the word Abdicate in that
Sense, but only according to all the precedent Clauses in this Vote, viz.

That the King, by endeavoring to break the Original Contract, between the
King and his People, and by the Advice of Jesuits and wicked Persons, having
violated the Fundamental Laws, and having withdrawn himself out of this
Kingdom, has abdicated the Government.

Where you may observe that the word Abdicated, relates to all the Clauses
aforegoing, as well as to his deserting the Kingdom, or else they would have
been wholely in vain; so that the meaning of this word in this place is no
more, than that King James, by violating the Original Contract abovementioned,
and by endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Constitution, and by refusing to
restore it to its former Condition, (all which was expressed by his withdrawing
himself out of the Kingdom) has abdicated the Government; that is, by refusing
to govern us according to that Law by which he held the Crown, he has
implicitly renounced his Title to it; as when, for example, a Tenant for Life
aliens in Fee, though he take back from the Grantee a Lease for Life or Years,
yet he thereby forfeits his Estate, and the Tenant in Reversion may enter; and
the reason is, because he parts with that Estate which he held by Law, and will
hold by another Title which the Law does not allow; for abdicare in the Latin
Tongue, signifies no more than to renounce, or disclaim, as I could show you
from diverse Phrases in that Language, were you a Scholar good enough to
understand them; and this may be done by diverse other means, besides express
words: For if Kingship be a Trust for the preservation of the Rights and
Liberties of the People, than such Actings contrary to that Trust as plainly
strike at the very Fundamentals of the Constutution, are not only a breach of
that Trust, but a tacit Renunciation of it also, which I prove thus; the doing
of any Act that is utterly inconsistent with the Being and End of the thing for
which it is ordained, is as true a Renouncing, or Abdication of that thing, as
if it were made in express words, as I have now proved in the Case of Tenant
for Life.


F. I confess this is more than ever I heard before; but, pray, What do you
think was the reason that the Convention made use of this Hard word Abdicate;
(which I confess, to us Country Fellows, seemed as bad as Heathen Greek) when
they might as well have made use of plain Expressions, such as Renounce or
Forfeit, which you have now made use of?


I. I will tell you, Neighbor, my Opinion of this Matter, and if I am out you
must pardon me; because those Wise men in the Convention, who had the Wording
of this Vote, were afraid that those plainer words you mention, would have been
of too hard digestion to a great part of the Country Gentlemen, who had been
bred up with different Principles; and therefore used the word Abdicate, as
that which though it implied both a Renunciation, and also a Forfeiture of the
Royal Power, yet not being commonly so understood, made some men only to
understand it of the King's Desertion of the Throne by his going away; a
Notion, which because it served a present turn, men's heads were then very full
of: But indeed if this Desertion be closely examined, it will not do the
business for which it is brought, as you have already very well observed.


F. I confess I never understood the true sense of this word Abdicate before,
much less the reason why it was made use of; therefore commend me to the honest
bluntness of the Scotch Convention, which (as I am informed) did not stick to
declare, That King James by subverting the Fundamental Laws of that Kingdom,
had forfeited the Crown: But, pray Sir, tell me, what those Acts, or Violations
of this Original Contract were, which you suppose to cause this tacit
Renunciation of the Crown?


I. As for these I need not go far, since they are all plainly expressed in the
Convention's late Declaration, as striking at the root, or very Fundamental
Constitution of the Government it self, viz. Raising of Money contrary to Law,
that is, without any Act of Parliament, as in the late Levying of the Customs,
Excise, and Chimney-Money upon Cottages and Ovens, contrary to the several
Statutes that conferred them on the Crown. 2dly. His Assuming a Legislative
Power, by Dispensing with all Statutes for the Protestant Religion established
by Law; whereby he at one blow took away above Forty Acts of Parliament; and he
might at this rate as well have Dispensed with the whole Statute-Book at once
by one general Declaration. 3dly. Raising a Standing Army in time of Peace, and
putting in Popish Officers, contrary to the Statute provided against it; for
these being but the King's half Subjects (as King James the 1st. called them in
a Speech) might be looked upon when in Arms, as no better than Enemies to the
State; so that by thus Arming our Enemies, it was in effect a declaring War
upon the People, since it was abusing the power of the Militia, which is
entrusted with the King for our Safety and Preservation in our Religion,
Liberties and Civil Properties, and not for the destruction of them all, as we
found by woeful experience, must have inevitably befallen us. 4thly. The
Quartering of this standing Army in Private houses contrary to Law, and the
Petition of Right, acknowledged by the late King his Father. 5thly. His
Erecting a new Ecclesiastical Court by Commission, contrary to the Statute that
took away the High Commission Court. 6thly. And by the pretended Authority of
this Court, suspending the Bishop of London from his Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and turning out almost all the Fellows and Scholars of Magdalen
College, because they would not choose a President incapable of being Elected
by that College Statutes. 7thly. By Imprisoning the Archbishop of Canterbury
and the Six other Bishops, only for Presenting him with an humble Petition not
to impose the reading of his Declaration of Toleration, upon the Clergy of the
Church of England, as being contrary to the known Laws of the Kingdom; and then
Trying them for this as a High Misdemeanor, though it was contrary to the
Opinion of Two of the then Judges of that Court of King's Bench. There are also
other things of lesser concernment, as Packing of Juries, and unjust and
partial Proceedings in Trials, with excessive Fines and cruel Whippings; which
because they were done by the Lord Chief Justice Iefferies, and the other
Judges, contrary to Law, I leave them to answer for it; whereas the instances I
have now given, were in such grand Violations, as were done by the King's own
personal Orders and Directions, or else could never have been done at all: So
that by his willful acting these things, and obstinately refusing to let a Free
Parliament sit to Settle and Redress them, but rather choosing to leave the
Realm, than he would give way to it, when he might have done it: I think, upon
consideration of the whole matter, it will appear, that the Convention had good
and just Reasons for declaring the Throne Vacant, since the King had not only
broke his first declaration he made in Council, to maintain the Church of
England as by Law Established, and the Liberties and Properties of his
Subjects; but his own Coronation Oath besides, if he took the same his
Predecessors did; and if he did not, he ought not to receive any benefit by his
own default, but is certainly bound by the Oaths which his Grandfather King
James, and his Father King Charles took before him.


F. I confess these seem to be great breaches of the very Fundamentals of our
Religion, Liberties, and Civil Properties, if done by the King's express Order
and Directions; and if that he afterward refused to disclaim them, and suffer
the Authors to be Punished in Parliament, as they deserved, makes all those
faults indeed fall upon the King himself, and consequently seem to amount to a
Forfeiture of the Royal Dignity, according to that Law of Edward the Confessor,
you have already cited, That if the King fail to Protect the Church, and Defend
his Subjects from Rapine and Oppression; the very Name (or Title) of King shall
no more remain to him.

But, pray Sir, show me in the next place, how the Convention could justify
their Voting the Throne Vacant; for Granting that King James had implicitly
Abdicated, or Renounced all his Right to the Crown by the Actions you have but
now recited: Yet if this Kingdom (as I have always taken it to be) is
Hereditary, and not Elective, I cannot conceive how the Throne can ever be
Vacant, that is, void of a Lawful Heir, or Successor, as long as one of the
Blood Royal, either Male or Female, is left alive, since I have heard it laid
down as a Maxim in our Law, That the King never dies.


I. I grant this to be so upon all ordinary Deaths or Demises of a King or
Queen (as the Lawyers term it): But there are great and evident Reasons why it
could not be so upon this Civil, though not Natural, Death of the King; as
First, the natural Person of the late King being still alive, none can claim as
Heir to him whilst he lives, since it is a Maxim, as well in our Common as in
the Civil Law, That no man can be Heir to a Person alive.


F. I grant this may be so in ordinary Estates of Inheritance in Feesimple; but
I take it to be otherwise in Estates Tail; for if a Tenant in Tail had become a
Monk whilst Monasteries were in being in England, the next Heir in Tail might
have entered upon the Estate, because the entering into a Religious Order, was
looked upon as a Civil Death: now I take the Crown to be in the nature of such
an Estate-Tail, where the Heir Claims not only as Heir to the last King, but to
their first or common Ancestor, on whom the Crown was Entailed; otherwise
Brothers or Sisters by the half Blood, could never Succeed to each other, as
Queen Mary did to King Edward the VIth.


I. Well, Neighbor, I see you have either read Littleton, or else been very
well instructed in this Law concerning Entails, and therefore I will argue this
Point no farther with you; but if the Throne were not Vacant, pray then tell
me, whom think you the Convention should have immediately Declared King or
Queen, whether the Titular, or pretended Prince of Wales, or the Princess of
Orange; Since only one of these can Claim as Heir by virtue of the Entail you
now mentioned?


F. No doubt but the Prince of Wales would have been the Right Heir, could we
have been assured of his being really born of the Body of the Queen; but since;
I confess, there is a great doubt in most Persons throughout the whole Nation
concerning it, I must so far agree with you, that he could not well be declared
King till his Legitimacy were cleared, and those just suspicions we lie under
to the contrary, taken away; but then on the other side, till this were done, I
do not see how the Convention could well justify their placing the Princess of
Orange, or any Body else in the Throne.


I. We shall come to that by and by, but in the mean time, pray observe, that
here was a great and general doubt, who was the next lawful Heir, whether the
Prince of Wales, or the Princess of Orange; now in Disputes of this nature, in
all the hereditary, limited Monarchies in Europe, the States of the Kingdom
have always been the sole Supreme Judges of such Controversies; and whom they
have owned, and admitted as next Heirs, have always been taken and owned for
Lawful Kings, both at Home and Abroad; as I could show you from diverse
Instances, not only in England, and Scotland, but France, Spain, and Portugal:
And till this were done, the Throne must necessarily remain vacant, and all
this without making the Crown Elective; for what is this vacancy of the Throne,
but when through the Ignorance of the ordinary Subjects whom to place therein,
by reason of diverse Claims of different Competitors, none can be admitted to
fill it, (that is, to the exercise of the Kingly Office) till these disputes
could be decided by their proper Judges, viz. the Estates of the Kingdom, which
is all one, as to declare the Throne to be vacant? since it must necessarily be
so, till they were fully satisfied who ought to fill it.


F. I confess, what you have now said, carries a great deal of reason with it;
but how can you justify the Convention's placing their present Majesty's on
the Throne, without ever so much as examining whether the supposed Prince of
Wales were really born of the Body of the Queen. or not; which, in my Opinion,
ought to have been the first thing to be enquired after; whereas I do not find
that the Convention, nor yet the present Parliament, have taken any more notice
of him, than if there had been no such thing in nature, as a Son then born, or
pretended to be born, during the Marriage between the late King and Queen.


I. If the Convention have done well in declaring the Throne vacant, I think I
can easily justify their filling it with their present Majesty's; and that
upon two several Considerations:

The First is, that I suppose the Prince of Orange, by his Victory over King
James, sufficiently declared by his flying from Salisbury, and disbanding his
Army, and then quitting the Kingdom, (if he had done nothing else) did thereby
lose his Right to the Crown; and so consequently to the Peoples Allegiance; and
the Nation being then free, and without any King, who had a better Right to be
placed in the Throne, than the Prince of Orange their Deliverer? and besides
this, in respect of the Nation, King James (as I have already proved) having
Abdicated or Forfeited his Right to the Crown, by his notorious Breach of the
Contract abovementioned, and by his wilful persisting in it; I look upon the
whole Nation at his departure as fully discharged from all Oaths of Allegiance,
not only to King James, but to his Heirs likewise; and therefore were not
obliged to look after this supposed Prince, nor to examine his Legitimacy as
Heir apparent to the Crown.


F. I cannot comprehend how this can consist with those Acts of Parliament of
Queen Elizabeth, and King James, which oblige all the Subjects of this Realm to
take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance to the King or Queen, and to their
Heirs and Lawful Successors; and sure, I think, nothing less than an Act of
Parliament can alter these former Statutes and solemn Declarations concerning
the Succession in a Right Line: And I suppose you will not say, that the
Convention (who certainly were no Parliament) could without the Authority of a
Lawful King and Parliament, alter the Ancient Laws of Succession, since I have
heard it is a Maxim in Law, that nothing can be undone, but by the same Power
that made it; And therefore, in my Opinion, the Convention was too quick in
Declaring their present Majesty's King and Queen, before they had examined the
Prince of Wales's Title; who was commonly reputed, and prayed for in all our
Churches, as Heir Apparent to the Crown.


I. I confess you have in few words urged all that can well be said against the
late Act of the Convention, in declaring their present Majesty's King and
Queen: Therefore in Answer to this Objection, give me leave in the first place
to tell you, that you have been misinformed, That because the Acts for the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, obliged us to take it to the late King, and
his Heirs and Lawful Successors; that therefore no Person can be such a Lawful
Successor, unless he Claim in a right Line, by descent from the last King;
since long before these Acts were made, by the Ancient Oath of Fidelity at
Common Law, and which used to be required in all Court-Leets, men were as much
obliged to the King, his Heirs and Successors, as they can be by any of these
later Oaths, and yet no body then doubted, before those Acts were made, to pay
Allegiance to that Person whom the Estates of the Kingdom had solemnly declared
to be lawful King or Queen, without ever examining whether such Kings, or
Queens, were really and truly next Heirs by Blood, or not; as I can show you
from diverse Examples, had I now time for it.

And there is indeed great reason for their so doing; for since all disputes
about the right of Succession to the Crown, must be decided by some proper
Judges; or else be left wholly to the Decision of the Sword; and since (as I
said but now) in all the limited Kingdoms of Europe, the Estates of such
Kingdoms have been always appealed to by all the contending parties as their
only proper Judges of their disputed Titles; it is but reason, that all private
Subjects should submit and acquiesce in their final Judgments; since they are
all virtually Represented in such Assemblies, as the Representative Body of the
whole People, or Nation: Therefore, if the Convention of the Estates of
England, have for diverse weighty Reasons, thought fit to declare their present
Majesty's Lawful King and Queen, and to place them on the Throne, as then
vacant by King James's Abdication, I think all the Subjects of this Kingdom are
bound to bear true Allegiance to them, and to confirm it by the Oath appointed
for that end, whenever they shall be lawfully required thereunto.


F. Well, Sir, but is not this to alter one part of the Original Contract,
which those that are against the present Settlement, suppose to be the Right of
Hereditary Succession to the Crown, and that in a right Line: So that if the
supposed Prince of Wales be lawful Heir to King James, to place any body else
therein, seems to render the Crown for the future not Successive, but Elective;
for if it may be bestowed now according to the humor of the present Convention,
it may be done so again the next Succession, and so the right Heirs put by from
time to time, for the same, or some like Reason as now.


I. That does not at all follow; for if you will allow that the Throne was
vacant by the Abdication of King James, and that her present Majesty Queen Mary
is lawful Heir, if the pretended Prince of Wales were away; I will prove to
you, that the late Convention and present Parliament, have done all they could
or were obliged to do in this juncture, in placing Their present Majesty's on
the Throne, and Recognizing their Title, without taking any notice of this
pretended Prince; of whose Birth, whether true or false, I shall not now say
any thing one way or other; nor shall trouble my self to inquire into the
Validity of those Suspicions that may render his Birth doubtful to the
generality of the Nation: And therefore in the first place, I desire you only
to take Notice, that this Child was carried away by his Mother, when he was
scarce yet six Months Old; 2dly, That the Midwife and all the chief Witnesses,
who could Swear any thing concerning the Queen's being really with Child, and
brought to Bed of him, were likewise conveyed at the same time into France.


F. I grant it; but what do you infer from hence.


I. Why, only these two Conclusions:

1st. That neither the Convention nor Parliament are Obliged to take Notice of
the Rights of any Person, though Heir to the Crown, that is out of the Dominions
of England, if he be no necessary part, or Member of Parliament; if neither
himself, nor any Body for him, will put in his Claim to the Crown, upon the
Demise of the King, either by Death, or Abdication; as in the Case now before
us, there being then a Claim made in the late Convention by his Highness the
Prince of Orange on the behalf of his Consort the Princess, as Heir apparent to
the Crown: The Convention were not obliged to look any farther after this
supposed Prince, or to know what was become of him; whether he was Drowned, or
taken at Sea by Pirates, or he being Dead, another put in his place, or carried
by his Mother into France: Since any of these might have happened for ought
they knew, no body appearing to put in any Claim for him, or to desire that his
Cause might first be heard, before he was Excluded.

2dly, That if such Claim had been made by any body for him, yet the Convention
could by no means be obliged to do more than lay in their Power, or to hear, or
examine the Validity of this Child's Birth; unless the Midwife, Nurses, and
others, who were privy to all the Transactions concerning it, were likewise
present, and sent back to give their Testimonies in this Case; for if the
Convention had proceeded to examine this matter without sufficient evidence,
they could only have heard it ex parie, on but one side, and so might have sat
long enough, before they could have come to any true decision in this matter;
whilst in the mean time, the whole Nation for want of a King, were in danger of
utter Ruin and Confusion.


F. But, pray Sir, why could not the Parliament have sent over Summons to those
Witnesses (which they say are no further off than France) to come and give
Testimony in this great Cause, before they had proceeded to have declared the
Prince and Princess of Orange King and Queen?


I. There may be several good Reasons given for it:

First, Because this Child being carried into the Dominions of a Prince who is
a declared Enemy of our Religion, and Civil Interest of the English Nation, he
would never have consented to his being sent over to be viewed by those that
the Convention should appoint for that purpose; without which Inspection, the
Nation could never have been morally assured that this was the same Child that
was carried away; since every one knows, that Infants of that Age are not
easily distinguished one from another, but by those that have been about them
from the very time of their Birth.

Secondly, Because his Reputed Parents counting themselves already injured by
the Convention, in declaring that the King had abdicated the Government, and
that the Throne was thereby become vacant, would never have obeyed any Summons
the Convention should have sent over, because they looked upon them not to have
any Authority at all, as not being summoned, nor sitting by virtue of that
King's Writs.

Thirdly, Admitting that the French King would have permitted this supposed
Prince to have been sent back, and that King James and his Queen would have
obeyed this Summons, yet was it not for the safety of the Nation to stay for or
rely upon it; since before this Question could have been decided, great part of
this Year had slipped away, and we being left without a King to head us, nor any
Parliament Sitting, able to raise Money (which cannot be legally done, without
the King's Authority in Parliament) the French King might, whilst we were thus
quarrelling amongst our selves about a Successor to the Crown, have sent over
King James with a great Fleet, and an Army of old Soldiers, and so have placed
him again in the Throne, more Absolute than ever he was before; since besides
that Legal Right of Succession, (which I grant he, once had) he might also have
set up a new Right by Conquest, over this Kingdom.

So that all things being seriously considered, since the safety of the People
ought to be the Supreme Law, as ever has been agreed as an undoubted Principle
by all wise Nations, I think we have done all that could well be done, in this
Case; nor have broken the Hereditary Succession, in declaring King William and
Queen Mary to be our Lawful King and Queen; since if she were Lawful Queen,
they might also declare him to be King, and make it Treason to conspire against
him as well as the Parliament could do in the case of Prince Philip of Spain,
who was Vid. the Act of 2o. Mariae, confirming the Treaty of Marriage with King
Philip.
declared King jointly with Queen Mary, though he had no other Right, but by Act
of Parliament: So that if the late Convention have declared, That the
Administration of the Government should remain solely in* King William during
his Life; this was only to put it out of all dispute, that none might at all
doubt in whom the Supreme Power lay, since it will not admit of any Division.


F. All this seems reasonable enough; but pray how comes it to pass, that King
William is to enjoy the Crown, not only during the Queens Life, but his own
also? this I heard Squire High-Church, and the Parson I last mentioned, cry out
upon, not only as a horrid Breach of the Hereditary Succession, but also as a
great wrong to the Princess of Denmark, and her Heirs, were the supposed Prince
of Wales now dead, since it is directly contrary to the Act of Recognition of
King James I. whereby the Parliament do not only declare him to be lawful and
lineal Heir of the Crown, as descended from the Eldest Daughter of King Edward
IV. But also they do thereby engage themselves, and their Posterity; to yield
Obedience to King James, and his Right Heirs.


I. Pray satisfy those Gentlemen when you meet them, that if they once will
grant that the late King James could Abdicate the Crown without his own express
consent, and that declaring this supposed Prince to be King was altogether
unpracticable and unsafe for the Nation, (as I have already proved) I think
they need not be concerned, whether his present Majesty enjoys the Crown for
Life, or not; as long as it is for the Peace and Safety of the Nation that it
should be so; since it was for those ends alone that King James was set aside,
and the supposed Prince past by, without so much as Enquiring into his
legitimacy. If the Convention had lawful Authority to decide the greater
points, they had certainly after they became a Parliament much more Authority
to decide and settle the less material parts of this Controversy, viz. The
settlement of the Crown after the Queens decease; since it is no more than what
all former Parliaments have done in like cases: Thus Henry the IV. and Henry
the VII. were, formally declared, (nay the latter recognized) for lawful Kings
by Authority of Parliament; notwithstanding the lineal Heirs by blood were then
alive and in being; and not only so, but before ever Henry the VII. married
with the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter to King Edward the IV. the Crown was
settled upon him, and the Heirs of his Body, by an Act which you may find in
Print in our Statute-Books: Though he had no Right at all by Succession, since
his Mother the Countess of Richmond, from whom all the Right he could pretend
to the Crown was derived, was then alive, nor had made any Cession of it to him.

So that if this be true (which I am able to prove) that an Hereditary
Succession in a right Line, was never any Fundamental Law of this Kingdom. And,

Secondly, That after the Crown came to be Claimed by an Hereditary Right,
which was no older than Edward the Ist's time, the Parliament have, often taken
upon them to break in upon this Hereditary Succession, whenever the safety and
necessity of the Kingdom required it. And,

Thirdly, That all those Kings who have thus succeeded without this lineal
Right of Succession, have been not only, during their own Reigns, owned for
true and Legal Kings; Attainders (of Treason, holding good against all Persons
that conspired against them) but also after their Reigns were ended; for we see
all such Acts of Parliament made under them stand good at this day, unless it
were those that were Repealed by subsequent Parliaments: and can there then be
any Question made, but that the present Parliament have as much Power to settle
the Crown upon his present Majesty for Life, as they had to settle it upon King
Henry the IV. or Henry the VII. and the Heirs of their Bodies? since those
Princes could not deserve more from the Nation, in freeing it from the Tyranny
of the two Richards, the II. and III. than his present Majesty has done by
freeing us from the Arbitrary Power of King James. And let me tell you farther,
that the Gentlemen you mention were mistaken in their Repetition of that Act of
Recognition of King James the Ist's Title; for though it is true they
acknowledged him for undoubted lineal Heir of the Crown, yet they do no where
in that Act tie or oblige themselves and their Posterity to him, and his right
Heirs, by that Act of Parliament; but only in general, that they promise
Obedience and Loyalty to that King, and his Royal Progeny; and sure none will
deny Their present Majesty's to be the true Progeny of King James the Is It.


F. I grant this seems very reasonable; but those Gentlemen I now mentioned
also said, that Henry the IV. was in the Reign of King Edward the IV. declared
an Usurper by Act of Parliament; and as for Henry the Seventh, he had either a
Title from the House of Lancaster by the tacit concession of his Mother, or
else from that of York by the like tacit concession of the Princess Elizabeth
his Wife; or else if there were no such concession, he was an Usurper till he
had Married the said Princess, she being Heiress of the Crown. Pray what say
you, Sir, to this?


I. Pray tell those Gentlemen from me, that they are quite out in their
Suppositions; for if an Act of Parliament of Edward the Fourth, be of
sufficient Authority to prove Henry the Fourth an Usurper, I can give you
another Act of Parliament (though not Printed) which reverses the Attainder of
King Henry the Sixth, Margaret his Queen, and Prince Edward their Son; wherein
it is expressly declared, Vid. Par. Rolls 1. H. 7. N. 16.
that King Henry the Sixth was contrary to all Allegiance and due order,
attainted of High Treason in the first Year of King Edward the Fourth;
wherefore it is by the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
Assembled in Parliament, Enacted, That all Acts of Attainder, Forfeiture, and
Disablement, made in the said Parliament against the said Blessed Prince King
Henry, are made void, Annulled and Repealed. So that if the Attainder of Henry
the Sixth was against all due Order and Allegiance, then certainly the said
King must have been a Lawful King, and not an Usurper at the time of his Death;
and if he were not so, then certainly the like must be affirmed of Henry the
Fourth, from whom he was descended, and under whom he claimed: And as for Henry
the Seventh, there was no formal Cession of their Right ever given by the
Countess his Mother, or the Princess his Wife, either before, or after his
coming to the Crown: And as for a tacit and implied Cession, expressed by
saying nothing against it, pray tell me why we may not as well suppose a like
tacit consent in the Princess of Denmark's not making any Opposition or
Protestation against this Act, whereby the Crown was settled upon his Majesty
during his Life, but rather agreeing to it? for I have heard that several of
her Servants in both Houses, did declare, that the Princess did not design that
her future Right should be any hindrance to the present Settlement. Pray
therefore tell me, why may not King William hold the Crown after the Death of
the Queen (if she should happen first to die) without any Usurpation, as well
as King Henry the Seventh held it after the Death of his Queen, notwithstanding
his two Sons, Prince Arthur and Henry both lived to be Married before their
Father Died; and Henry the Eighth was then in his nineteenth or twentieth Year
of his Age; old enough of conscience to govern himself?


F. I confess these things were altogether unknown to me before, as they are I
believe to most of my condition; and I give your Worship many thanks for your
kind Information. But, pray Sir, resolve me one Question more, and I have done;
Do you think a Man may Lawfully take the new Oath of Allegiance to Their
present Majesty's, notwithstanding King James is still alive? and do you think
I could justify it (in Law) should I be called to an account for it, if he
should again by some unexpected means or other obtain the Throne?


I. Well, Neighbor, to satisfy you as to the first of your questions, I
answer thus; I doubt not but you may Lawfully take this Oath, since the
Parliament have done no more in thus settling the Crown, than what many former
Parliaments have done before in like Cases; whose Proceedings have been still
looked upon as good, and held unquestioned unto this day; as appears by the
President of Henry the VIIth. I now gave you; and upon which Declarations of
Parliament (who are the only proper Judges, who have most Right to the Crown,
in case of any dispute about it) the People of this Kingdom have still thought
themselves sufficiently obliged to take such Oaths of Fidelity and Allegiance,
as the Government thought fit to frame, and require of them according to Law.

But, I confess, the latter of your questions is somewhat harder to be
answered, because it depends upon a matter that is farther remote, since we
cannot tell whether if (ever at all) King James should re-obtain the Throne, by
what means it may happen; for if it should be by the Force either of the Irish,
or French Nations, I doubt not but we should be all made mere Slaves and
Vassals, without any Law or settled Property, but his own Will: But if it should
be by any Agreement or Composition with him upon his Engagement to Govern
according to Law; the^ le^ me tell you, Not only your self but every other
Subject that takes this Oath, will have a good Plea in Law for taking it, by
the Statute of the 11th. of Henry the VIIth. Chap. 1.
whereby it is expressly Enacted; That every Subject, by the duty of his
Allegiance, is bound to Serve and Assist his Prince and Sovereign Lord at all
seasons, when need shall require; and then follows an Act of Indemnity for all
those that shall personally serve the King, for the time being, in his Wars:
Which were altogether unreasonable, if Allegiance had not been due before to
such a King as their Sovereign Lord, mentioned in the Preamble; and if
Allegiance were due to him, then certainly an Oath may lawfully be taken to
observe it; since it is no more than what the Law has ever required from
Subjects to such a King, not only by this Statute, but at Common Law too, as
appears by my Lord Cooks Comment on the Statute of Edward the IIId. where he
asserts not only from the Authority of this Statute, but also from the old
Year-Books, that a King de Facto, or for the time being, is our Lord the King,
intended in that Statute; and that the other, who has a Right and is out of
Possession, is not within this Act.

So that, you see, according to this Act of Henry the VIIth. as also by the
Judgment of the best Lawyers of England, whatever Person is once solemnly
Crowned King of England, and has been so Recognized by Authority of Pariiament
(as Their Present Majesty's have now been) are, and ever have been esteemed
Lawful and Rightful Kings or Queens, though they had no Hereditary Right of
Succession as next of Blood, as I have proved to you from the instance of King
Henry the 4th. and 7th. and could do also by the Examples of Queen Mary, or
Queen Elizabeth, (take which you please) since they could not both of them
succeed as the Legitimate Daughters and Heirs of King Henry the Eighth: So that
it is plain, one or other of these Queens had no better than a Parliamentary
Title to the Crown: Therefore, upon the whole matter, whether Their present
Majesty's are Heirs to the Crown by Lineal Descent, is not the Question; but
whether by the Law of England they are not to all intents and purposes Lawful
and Rightful King and Queen; so that an Oath of Allegiance may be lawfully
taken to them, and all men obliged to serve them in all their Wars and other
Affairs, even against King James himself; since we cannot serve Two Masters,
that is, owe Allegiance to Two Kings at once.


F. I cannot deny but what you say seems not only very reasonable, but also
according to Law; but I heard the Squire and the Parson we but now mentioned,
positively assert, That the King and Parliament had no Power to alter the
Succession to the^ Crown, though they would; and that therefore this Statute of
Henry the Seventh, you now mentioned, which indemnifies all those that take up
Arms in defense of the King for the time being, is void: First, Because made by
an Usurper who had no Right to make such a Law in prejudice of the true King,
or the next Heirs of the Crown; but also because (as they said) it was but a
Temporary Act, and was to last no longer than during his life; and lastly,
because this Statute has never been allowed, or held for good in any cases of
Assisting Usurpers, since that time; for the Duke of Northumberland was
Arraigned and Executed for Treason, in the time of Queen Mary, because he had
Assisted and Taken up Arms on behalf of the Lady Jane Gray, who was Proclaimed
Queen, and Reigned as such for about a Fortnight; and yet, tho the Duke Pleaded
afterward that he had Acted nothing but by Order of the Queen and Council for
the time being; yet this Plea was overruled by the Peers, who were his Judges,
and he was Executed notwithstanding. Lastly, they said, That this Statute was
implicitly, or by consequence Repealed by those Statutes of Queen Elizabeth and
King Iemes, which appoint the Oaths of Allegiance to be only taken to the King,
his Heirs, and lawful Successors; besides a Statute of the 28th. of King Henry
the Eighth, by which it is made Treason in any of those on whom he had settled
the Crown, or should bequeath it by his last Will, to Usurp upon the Right of
each other; which could never have been, if the King or Queen for the time
being must have been Assisted and Obeyed by all the Subjects of this Realm, as
if they were Rightfully so; and therefore they concluded, that this Statute of
Henry the Seventh could make no alteration in the ancient Law concerning the
Succession, but that it stands still as it did before that Statute was made,
and as it was declared in the Case of Edward the Fourth, by which it was
affirmed, That the Henry's, the Fourth Fifth, and Sixth, were Kings only in
Deed, and not of Right, and but pretended Kings, and that the Statute which
settled the Crown upon Henry the Fourth and his Issue, was absolutely void,
against the Duke of York and his Heirs.


I. If this be all they had to say, I doubt not but to answer it well enough;
and therefore as to their first Objection, which would make this Statute of
Henry the VIIth. void, because made by an Usurper; methinks they might have
been so civil as to have allowed him to be lawful King in Right of his Wife at
least; this Statute being made during the time of his marriage with the
Princess Elizabeth, but indeed nothing more betrays these Gentlemen's ignorance
in our Laws; since if they will but look on any ordinary Statute Book, they
will find that the Statutes of those Kings they look upon as Usurpers, are of
as much force at this day, as those enacted by Princes in a right line, unless
it were such as have been since Repealed by some subsequent Statutes. 2dly.
Their Objection of its being a Temporary Law, only during that King's Life, is
also as vain, since the Statute it self mentions no such thing; but speaks of
the King for the time being, in all succeeding times, without any mention of
King Henry the VIIth. in particular. 3dly. That the Judges have looked upon it
as a void Law, or else Repealed it also as false; for the Case of the Duke of
Northumberland, does not prove it to be so; for though the Duke did not, as we
can ever find, plead this Statute at his Trial, yet I think if he had, it would
not have helped him, since the King or Queen, for the time, being within this
Statute, I only take to be he or she that have been solemnly Crowned and
Recognized by a free Parliament; or such a one on whom the Crown is entailed by
Statute; which it never was on the Lady Jane, on whom the Crown was only
bestowed by King Edward the VIth's Letters Patent, and consequently had no
Title by Act of Parliament. And lastly, that this Statute of 11th of Henry
VIIth. was never Repealed by any subsequent Act, is likely as certain; for I
never heard before, that any Act of Parliament could ever be Repealed by
Implication, but only by express words: But indeed, none of those Statutes you
mention have done it so much as by Implication; for though the Oaths of
Allegiance, and Supremacy are to be taken to the King or Queen, and their
Heirs, and Lawful Successors; yet who those Heirs or Lawful Successors shall
be, can only be known by some Law or other; now who can declare what this Law
is, or shall be, but the King and Parliament the sole Supreme Legislators? And
that this is Law at this day, appears by this undeniable Authority, that it is
by the Statute of the 13th of Elizabeth, declared to be Treason, during the
Life of the Queen, for any Person to affirm that the Queen and Parliament had
not Power to make Laws, to limit, and bind, and govern the Succession of the
Crown, in Possession, Remainder, or Reversion; (and to show you that this
Statute is still in force) every Person so holding, or affirming after the said
Queen's Decease, shall forfeit all their Lands, and Goods. But as for the
Statute of Henry the VIIIth. that will help them least of all; for it appears
by the Statute it self, that the Treason thereby Enacted, could only arise from
thence, and extend no farther than the Persons therein mentioned; nor is the
Succession of the Crown in a right line settled or confirmed by this Statute,
but the clear contrary; since King Henry had Power by this Statute to bequeath
the Crown by his last Will and Testament, under his Seal and Sign Manual; which
he afterward actually took upon him to do; so that the Law still continues as
it did before that Act of Edward the IVth. you now mentioned was made, since it
is declared by that unprinted Act of Henry the VIIth. I have now cited, that
King Henry the VIth. was unjustly deposed, and his attainder reversed, and
consequently his Right to the Crown is thereby declared to be good and valid to
all intents and purposes.


F. I confess you have thoroughly convinced me in this matter, and I think it
highly reasonable that it should be so; for how can we ordinary Subjects know
to whom to pay our Allegiance, in cases of any disputes that may arise about
the different Titles of Princes to the Crown, without appealing to some proper
Judges of it; and who can these Judges be, but the great Council of the Nation,
in which every person thereof is either personally present, or vertually
represented? and if this were the effect of your late Charge at our Sessions, I
wonder any persons should be so malicious as to misrepresent you for a
Commonwealthsman; but pray tell me what I shall say to those Gentlemen if I
happen to come again into their Company?


I. Pray assure them from me, that I am no more a Commonwealthsman, than
themselves, and am not only for keeping up and defending the Original
Constitution of King, Lords, and Commons, and the Rights and Liberties of the
People; but am also for an Hereditary Monarchy by Lineal descent, by all those
lawful means by which our Ancestors have maintained them, and that in all
cases; except where the exigency of our Affairs, and the necessity of providing
for the Public Peace and Safety of the Commonwealth, have not obliged the
Estates of the Kingdom several times to take a different course when it could
not be avoided without inevitable Ruin; and, I suppose, the same Estates have
still, by the very Constitution, the same Power and Right of Providing for the
Peace and Safety of the Nation, and the Preservation of our Religion,
Liberties, and Properties, as ever they had in all precedent times: So that
granting the most that can be said, that the Convention have now exercised that
ancient Power, in placing Their present Majesty's on the Throne; yet this would
be no more an Argument for our making a common course of it upon every
Succession to the Crown, than it would be for you when you were a Traveling
upon the Road to break into any bodies ground you pleased, because you may have
been forced when the way has proved unpassable, either through Water or Dirt,
to leap a Ditch (perhaps for safeguard of your life) into a Neighbor's
Enclosure.


F. Sir, I am so well satisfied with what your Worship has now said in these
grand Points, that, with your good leave, I shall not fail, not only to
vindicate your Person from those aspersions, but also to maintain the
lawfulness of our present Settlement upon the same Principle you have now laid
down; since I know of none that seem to me more agreeable to Right Reason, and
the Laws and Constitution of this Kingdom; and therefore I hope you will always
believe me to be your honest Neighbor and humble Servant, and so I take my
leave of your Worship.


I. Neighbor, I am yours, and bid you heartily farewell.


FINIS.
Books Sold by Richard Baldwin.
THE Works of F. Rabelais, M D. In Five Books; or the Lives, Heroic Deeds and
Sayings of the Good Gargantua and Pantagruel, and his Voyage to the Oracle of
the Bottle. As also his Historical Letters. To which is added, the Author's
Life, and Explanatory Remarks. By Mr. Motteux. Never before Printed in English.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or an Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the
English Government; with Respect both to the just Extent of Regal Power, and to
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Wherein all the chief Arguments, as
well against as for the Late Revolution, are Impartially represented and
considered. In XIII. Dialogues. Collected out of the best Authors both Ancient
and Modern. To which is added, An Alphabetical Index to the whole Work.

The remarkable Sayings, Apothegms and Maxims of the Eastern Nations,
Abstracted and Translated out of their Books written in the Arabian, Persian,
and Turkish Language, with Remarks: by Monsieur Galland, who lived many Years
in those Countries. Translated from the Paris Edition, into English Twelves,
Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.

The World bewitched, (is now published) containing an Examination of the
common Opinions concerning Spirits, their Nature, Power, Administration, and
Operations; as also the Effects men are able to produce by their Communication.
Divided into Four parts. By Belthazer Bekker. D. D. and Pastor at Amsterdam.
Vol. I. Translated from a French Copy, Approved of, and Subscribed-by the
Author's own hand.

A New and Easy Method to understand the Roman History. With an exact
Chronology of the Reign of the Emperors; An Account of the most Eminent
Authors, when they flourished; And an Abridgment of the Roman Antiquities and
Customs. By way of Dialogue, for the use of the Duke of Burgundy. Done out of
French, with very large Additions and Amendments, by Mr. Tho. Brown.

A Collection of Speeches of the Right Honorable Henry late Earl of
Warrington, viz. I His Speech upon his being sworn Mayor of Chester, in
November 1691. II. His Speech to the Grand Jury at Chester, April 13. 1692.
III. His Charge to the Grand Jury at the Quarter Sessions held for the County
of Chester, on the 11th. of October, 1692. IV. His Charge to the Grand Jury at
the Quarter Sessions held for the County of Chester, on the 25th. of April,
1693.

Letters of State, Written by Mr. John Milton, To most of the Sovereign Princes
and Republics of Europe. From the Year 1649. till the Year 1659. To which is
added, An Account of his Life. Together with several of his Poems; And a
Catalogue of his Works, never before Printed.

Mathematical Magic: Or the Wonders that may be performed by Mechanical
Geometry. In Two Books. Concerning Mechanical Powers, Motions. Being one of the
most easy, pleasant, useful, (and yet most neglected) part of Mathematics,
not before treated of in this Language.

Mercury; or the Secret and Swift Messenger Showing how a man may with privacy
and speed communicate his Thoughts to a Friend at any distance. The Second
Edition. By the Right Reverend Father in God, John Wilkins, late Lord Bishop of
Chester. Printed for Rich. Baldwin, where are to be had, The World in the Moon.

England's Interest; Or, a Discipline for Seamen: Wherein is proposed, a Sure
Method for Raising Qualified Seamen for the well Manning Their Majesty's Fleet
on all Occasions. Also a Method whereby Seamen will be obliged mutually to
Relieve each other on board the Men of War yearly, or thereabout; except where
any Seaman by his own voluntary Consent shall be willing to stay longer.
Likewise is showed the Advantages which by these Methods will accrue to the
Nation in general, and in particular to the Merchants and Seamen: For hereby
the Wages now given in Merchant-Ships will be brought lower, and every Seaman
will have the liberty of choosing his own Commander, after the first year, and
continuing with him, if he so likes. By Captain George St. Lo.

An Answer to a Paper written by Count d'Avaux, the French King's Ambassador in
Sueden, concerning the Proposals of Peace made by France to the Confederates.

An Essay concerning Obedience to the Supreme Powers, and the Duty of Subjects
in all Revolutions. With some Considerations touching the present Juncture of
Affairs.

An Essay concerning the Laws of Nations, and the Rights of Sovereigns. With an
Account of what was said at the Council Board by the Civilians upon the
Question. Whether Their Majesty's Subjects taken at Sea acting by the Late
King's Commission might not be looked on as Pirates? With Reflections upon the
Arguments of Sir T. P. and Dr. Ol. Both by Matthew. Tyndal, Doctor of Laws. The
Second Edition.

The Antiquity and Justice of an Oath of Abjuration. In answer to a Treatise,
Entitled, The Case of an Oath of Abjuration considered.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Court of
Aldermen of the City of London, at St. Mary-le-Bow, on the 29th of May, 1694.
By John Trenchard, M. A Recto of Wrexhall in the County of Somerset, and
Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester.

A Poem on the Late Promotions of several Eminent Persons in Church and State.
By N. Nate, Servant to Their Majesty's.

The Doctrine of the Holy Trinity placed in its due light, by an Answer to a
late Book, Entitled, Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book, etc. Also the
Doctrine of the Incarnation of our Lord asserted and explained.

Liturgia Tigurina: Or, the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, usually practiced,
and solemnly performed in all the Churches and Chapels of the City and Canton
of Zurick in Switzerland, etc.

The Tragedies of the Last Age, considered and examined by the Practice of the
Ancients, and by the common sense of all Ages; in a Letter to Fleetwood
Shepherd, Esquire Part I. The Second Edition.

A short View of Tragedy; its Original, Excellency, and Corruption; with some
Reflections on Shakespeare and other Practitioners for the Stage. Both by Mr.
Rimer, Servant to Their Majesty's.

A New, Plain, Short, and Complete French and English Grammar; whereby the
Learner may attain in few months to speak and write French correctly, as they
do now in the Court of France; and wherein all that is dark, superfluous, and
deficient in other Grammars, is plain, short, and methodically supplied. Also
very useful to Strangers that are desirous to learn the English Tongue; for
whose sake is added a short, but very exact English Grammar. The Third Edition,
with Additions. By Peter Berault.

Truth brought to light; or the History of the first 14 Years of King James I.
In Four Parts, etc.

Travels into diverse parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's
order, to discover a new way by land into China; containing many curious
Remarks in Natural Philosophy, Geography, Hydrography, and History. Together
with a Description of Great Tartary, and of the different People who inhabit
there. Done out of French. To which is added a Supplement extracted from
Hakluyt and Purchase, giving an Account of several Journeys over Land from
Russia, Persia, and the Mogul's Country, to China, together with the Roads and
distances of the Places.

Saul at Endor; or the Ghost of the Marquess de Louvois consulted by the French
King, concerning the present Affairs. Done out of French.

An Answer to the late King James's Declaration, dated at St. Germains, April
the 7th. S. N. 1693. Licensed by Mr. Secretary Trenchard.

Reflections upon two Pamphlets lately published; one called, A Letter from
Monsieur de Cross, concerning the Memoirs of Christendom; And the other, An
Answer to that Letter; pretended to have been written by the Author of the said
Memoirs. By a Lover of Truth.

A true and exact Account of the Retaking a Ship called, The Friends Adventure
of Topsham, from the French, after she had been taken six days, and they were
upon the Coasts of France with it four days; where one Englishman and a Boy set
upon seven Frenchmen, killed two of them, took the other five Prisoners, and
brought the Ship and them safe to England, etc.

A Project of a Descent upon France. By a Person of Quality.

A Compendious History of the Taxes of France, and of the Oppressive Methods of
Raising of them.

An Impartial Enquiry into the Advantages and Losses that England has received
since the beginning of this Present War with France.

The Gentleman's Journal: Or the Monthly Miscellany. In a Letter to a Gentleman
in the Country. Consisting of News, History, Philosophy, Poetry, Music,
Translations, etc. Sold by R. Baldwin, Where are to be had complete Sets for
the two last years, or single ones for every Month.

Nevil Pain's Letter, and some other Letters that concern the Subject of his
Letter. With short Notes on them, for the clearer Information of the Members of
Parliament, in order to Nevil Pain's Trial.

A True Relation of the Wonderful Cure of Mary Maillard, (lame almost ever
since she was born) on Sunday the 26th of November, 1693. With the Affidavits
and Certificates of the Girl, and several other Credible and Worthy Persons,
who knew her before and since her being Cured. To which is added, a Letter from
Dr. Welwood to the Right Honorable the Lady Mayoress, upon that Subject.

A Second Five years struggle against Popery and Tyranny: Being a Collection of
Papers, Published by Samuel Johnson.

Remarks upon Dr. Sherlock's Book, Entitled the Case of Resistance.

Reflections on the History of Passive Obedience.

An Argument proving, that the Abrogation of King James by the People of
England from the Regal Throne, and the Promotion of the Prince of Orange, one
of the Royal Family, to the Throne of the Kingdom in his stead, was according
to the Constitution of the English Government, and Prescribed by it. In
Opposition to all the false and treacherous Hypotheses, of Usurpation,
Conquest, Desertion, and of taking the Powers that Are upon Content.

An Essay concerning Parliaments at a certainty.

Notes upon the Phoenix Edition of the Pastoral Lteters, par. 1.

These last Six Books, By Mr. Samuel Johnson.


