TWO LETTERS FROM SCOTLAND. GIVING A True Relation of the unhappy Loss OF THE
Gloucester-Frigot, Whereof Sir John Berry was Commander.
With a particular Account of the Persons of Quality drowned therein, and the
miraculous Escape of His Royal Higness the Duke of York.
SIR,
I Shall give you an Account from hence, as I received it from a faithful Hand,
of the loss of the Gloucester-Frigot, which was thus:

Sir John Berry Commander of the Gloucester-Frigot, having received on Board
the said Ship His Royal Highness in Margaret Road, in order to his Voyage for
Scotland, set Sail from thence with a fair Wind, the Weather continuing very
Fair, attended by the Ruby, Happy Return, the Dartmouth, and Pearl Frigots,
with several Yatches, and several Persons of great Quality, both of England and
Scotland, attending His Royal Highness on the Seventh Instant: At Night they
came about 16 Leagues off the Mouth of the Humber, about which place lies a
Sand called the Lemon-Oar, and whether by the unskilfulness, or wretched
neglect of the Pilot, God knows, the aforesaid Ship in which His Royal Highness
was, and many other Persons of Quality, run on Ground upon the said Sands,
about Ten of the Clock at Night; but it pleasing God that the Weather proving
Fair and not Stormy, that the Ship did not presently Burst, nor did not
immediately Sink, but lay some hours e're She Sank; so that the Duke, and some
others, as many as the Longboat could hold, had time to escape the Danger and
ventured to Sea, and got safe aboard on one of the Yatches, but for the rest
remaining on board, the Ship foundring before any Boats could come to their
Assistance, all perished, among whom was the Lord Roxborow, the Lord O Bryan,
the Lord Hollis, Lord Hume, Lord Dowglass, Sir Christopher Musgrave, Sir James
Hyde, Mr. Clifton, and an English Lady, whose name we cannot as yet learn; all
the Dukes Cooks but one, all his Footmen, and all the rest of his Servants, Sir
Charles Scarborow was miraculously saved (as we suppose) on some piece of the
Ship. The Captain, Sir John Berry, was also lost with his Brother, Captain
Berry, and several others who accompanied him: There was in all to the number
of three hundred and three Persons, and odd, of which but sixty were saved. The
Duke is since safely here to the Joy of his Duchess, and others who have been
to Congratulate his Escape from so great Danger: His Royal Highness is very
sensible, and extremely troubled at the loss of so many Noble Persons, and
others, and of so gallant a Ship. The Pilot is secured in Edinborow. This is
all at present, our late Insurrection being fully quieted.

I am etc.
In such a Loss and, so much Distraction it is impossible at first to give an
exact Relation of the Misfortune, therefore since the last Letter which we
Printed we have another account given us from Scotland, something more fully and
particularly, which take as follows.
THat on Friday last was Sevennight a Consult was held on Board the said Ship,
in which His R. Highness was for the Steering her through the difficult places
near Yarmouth, and it was His R. Highnesses Opinion, that they stood too near
the Shore; but one Mr. Aires a Pilot, whom His R. H. had chosen and advanced,
being on Board, undertook the Carrying of her safe, and laid down his Course,
which was opposed by several in the Ship; but it is wrote, that he pawned his
Life (which is like now to be forfeited) that he was in the right; and
believing that he had passed that dangerous Sand, called the Lemon-Oar, on
which some hundreds of Vessels have unfortunately been cast away; he made a
Tack, and in a very short time she struck on the aforesaid Sand, which put all
on Board into a Consternation, it being about Five of the Clock in the Morning,
His R. Highness being then in Bed, who immediately arose, and had not time to
put on any thing but his Breeches and Nightgown: The Men endeavoring to have
got her off, but they found Six foot Water in her hold, by which they perceived
her past recovery. Sir John Berry, with his Sword drawn in his hand, desired
His R. Highness to enter the the Longboat, which after much persuasion he did,
taking with him only one small Trunk of great value, leaving behind him all his
Money, Plate, Goods, and other things of great value: Sir John suffered none to
go into the Boat with him, but those His R. Highness called for, which were
about Forty persons; and which was observable, one or two in mean Habit, and
unknown; and they were no sooner cleared off the Ship, and at Sea, but she
burst to pieces, and sunk to the bottom. But some do affirm, that though the
Seamen saw present Death before them when His R. Higness put off in the
Longboat, that they gave him an Huzza, and immediately drank his Health in
Salt Water. Sir John Berry committed himself to the mercy of the Waves, and was
afterward taken up, and they likewise say, that several persons, to save their
Lives, took hold of the Longboat, and those therein were forced to knock their
hands off the Boat* for fear of their sinking her, and so let them drown to
preserve themselves. Sir Charles Scarborough, one of His Majesty's Physicians,
who Attended His Royal Highness, was taken up almost dead, floating on a Plank,
yet it is feared he will hardly recover.

The loss of the Seamen and Passengers are great, being as it is supposed above
a third part that perished, among whom are missing the Lords Roxborow, O Bryan,
and Hopton, Sir James Duglas, Mr. James Hide, Brother to the Lord Hide, who was
Lieutenant of the said Ship, one Mr. Haly a Querry, Sir Patrick Hume, and Mr.
Skeleton the Kings Page, with diverse others, whose names are not yet come to
hand; but there are above 240 missing, with the Dukes and the Noblemens
Attendants, His Physicians, Cooks, and Footmen. It Is judged that in Money, and
other valuable things, which all perished in the Sea, will amount to above
30000 l. besides the Ship her self, with her Guns and furniture, being a third
Rare Ship, new fitted and mounted with 58 Pieces of Ordinance, a great loss to
his Majesty.

His Royal Highness, and those with him, safely arrived at Edinburgh on the
Sunday following, where is great lamentation made for the loss of so many
persons. They say that Airs the Pilot was saved, and is committed to Prison at
Edinburgh, to be tried for this miscarriage, who says for himself, that the
late great Storms had removed the Sands far distant from the place in which
they were before, which thing sometimes happens.



London, Printed for John Morice. 1682.


