portrait of Charles II HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE CAROLUS SECUNDUS Dei Gratia,
Angl, Scotiae, Franciae Et Hiberniae, Rex, Fide Defensor etc.
F. H. Van Houe Sculp:


Patriarcha non Monarcha. THE Patriarch Unmonarch'd: BEING OBSERVATIONS ON A
late Treatise and diverse other Miscellanies, Published under the Name of Sir
Robert Filmer Baronet. IN WHICH The falseness of those Opinions that would make
Monarchy Jure Divino are laid open: AND The true Principles of Government and
Property (especially in our Kingdom) asserted.

By a Lover of Truth and of his Country.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1681.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
IT may not be unknown to those that have been conversant in Books and
Pamphlets published during the late unhappy times, that all the Treatises
(except the Patriarcha) which are the subject of the ensuing Observations, were
published at first in single Tracts without Name, though they have since come
out under that of Sir Robert Filmer Baronet, deceased: All which, though I hope
they might be written with an honest design, and in defense of Kingly
Government, and of his then Majesty's lawful and just Rights, then trampled
upon by a domineering Faction, and may contain some things useful enough to
confute diverse levelling Notions then too much in fashion; yet whilst this
Gentleman (as violent men commonly do) ran into the other extreme, and must
needs assert an Absolute Monarchy Jure Divino, so that no other Government can
be lawfully exercised, nor the least Limitations set to it, without Sacrilege,
and diminution of that Sovereignty which is derived from no less an Original
than God himself; and by denying that Princes can ever be obliged by any
Fundamental, or after-Contracts, or Concessions, or by any Coronation-Oaths, to
abstain from the Lives, Liberties, or Properties of their Subjects, farther
than as they themselves shall think it convenient; so that there can be no such
thing in nature as a Tyrant: I leave it to the judgment of the impartial
Reader, whether what this Author might design as Physic, has not served
rather to inflame the Distemper; and whether he has not by such rash and
ill-grounded Assertions, given too much advantage to the Enemies of Kingship to
retort, That since all Government was ordained by God for the good of Mankind,
that could never be of divine institution which would render all things to be
so much the Princes Right, that the Subjects can claim a Property in nothing
which he shall please to take from them; and that however they use them, yet
they still exercise but their own Royal Rights and Prerogatives. So that by
thus taking away all distinctions between Kings and Tyrants, and between Slaves
and Subjects, I fear that (like Rehoboam's harsh Answer to his Peoples
Complaints) he has not given many of his Readers a prejudice against that
Government, which tempered by known Laws, I take to be the best in the World.

For as Superstition can never serve to advance the true Worship of God, but by
creating false Notions of the divine nature in men's minds, or render it not as
it ought to be, the Object of their Love and Reverence, but servile Fear; so I
suppose this asserting of such an unlimited Power in all Monarchs, and such an
entire Subjection as this Author exacts from Subjects, can produce nothing but
a Slavish Dread, without that Reverence, Esteem, and Affection for their
Princes Person and Government which is so necessary for the quiet of Princes,
and which they will have, whilst they believe he thinks himself obliged in
Conscience and Honor to protect their Lives and Fortunes from Slavery and
Oppression, according to just and known Laws: And that contrary Notions of this
Supreme Power, are so far from settling men's minds in a sober and rational
Obedience to Government, that they rather make them desperate and careless who
is their Master, since let what change will come, they are sure to be no better
than Slaves, as may be seen in all the Absolute Monarchies from France to China.

You may also consider whether most of the Arguments this Author makes use of
for absolute Obedience to Usurpers, as representing the lawful Prince and
Father of the People, might not serve for the establishing of Oliver and the
Rump-Parliament, as well as a lawful Sovereign; since I am sure Milton makes
use of the same places of Scripture for this purpose, which this Author and
Salmasius do for another.

So that most moderate men, nay, the Author's own Friends, may wish that either
these Treatises had never been published, or at least have been left in private
Studies and Booksellers shops, amongst those heaps of Pamphlets condemned to
dust and oblivion; since no man can imagine to what end this Patriarcha and
other Tracts should come out at such a Time as they did, unless the Publishers
thought that these Pieces, which printed apart could only serve to ensnare the
Understandings of some unthinking Country-Gentleman or Windblown-Theologue,
could do no less, being twisted into one Volume, than bind the Consciences, and
enslave the Reasons of all his unwary Readers.

Since therefore short Treatises of this kind, written in a gentile style, and
a formal appearance of Law and Reason, do more mischief among young men, and
those that have not leisure to look much into the grounds of this Controversy,
than tedious Volumes: And that this Notion of the Divine and Patriarchal Right
of absolute Monarchy has obtained so much among some modern Churchmen, who
cry it up as their Diana, and consequently has so much infected our
Universities, that are the Seminaries where the Youth of this Nation do
commonly receive Principles both in Religion and Politics, which if they have
not a mind large enough to overcome the prejudices of Education, will mis-lead
them as long as they live, and so make them desire at least to alter that
Government, and give up those Privileges which their Ancestors were so careful
to preserve and deliver down to Posterity: I thought my self obliged (having
perhaps more leisure, though less parts and learning than a great many others)
to do God, my King, and Country this service, as to lay open the weakness of
the Reasons, and the dangerous consequences of this Author's Principles. And
though men of greater abilities may either despise such weak Arguments as this
Author makes use of, or else think it below them to spend so much time from
their more useful and beneficial Employments, and that indeed his Reasons are
not so knotty or intricate, that they require any more than honest sense and
plain English to lay them open to the unprejudiced Reader; yet since the Poison
has spread so far among the men of Letters, and in the Country among diverse of
the Gentry and Clergy, I thought it not amiss to do my weak endeavor to
undeceive them: And in so doing, I desire to be thought no other than what I
really am, a zealous assertor and defender of the Government established by Law;
being so far from a Commonwealths-man, that for my own part I reverence
Monarchy above all other forms of Government, and should be as willing to have
it unmixt (it being that by which God Almighty governs the Universe) could
humane nature be long trusted with it, and could we be as certain that his
Vicegerents on Earth would as easily imitate those divine Attributes of wisdom
and goodness, as they are prone to lay claim to his absolute Power. For as
where those Perfections direct the Scepter, a Prince is to be loved and
reverenced as the best Representative of the divine nature; so the exercise of
an absolute unlimited Power, without these, can create no other Idea in men's
minds, than what the barbarous Indians have of those terrible Gods they
worship, to whom though they often make Oblations of what is dearest to them,
yet it is upon no higher motive of Devotion, than that they thereby hope to
cajole them not to do them any mischief, and would soon cast them off if they
knew how to get rid of them. Therefore the fault is not in the Government as
absolute, but in humane Nature, which is not often found sufficient, at least
for above one or two Successions, to support and manage so unlimited a Power in
one single person as it ought to be. And for this I desire the Reader to look
over the Catalogue of all the Persian, Roman, and Turkish Monarchs that have
ever succeeded in so many hundreds of years, and see how many good ones they
will find among them, and who truly considered the good and prosperity of that
Empire which God had trusted them withal; the effects of which absolute Power
being very well known to the Satyrist who lived under it, when he thus shrewdly
observes: -- Nihil est quod credere de se
Non possit, cum laudatur Diis aequa potestas.
Juven. Sat. 4. And how much Christian Religion has altered the case, I desire
all observing Readers to consult the late Histories of France and Muscovy, and
other despotick Governments in Europe.

But since the Government of this Nation, as now established, I conceive the
best in its kind, as most equal and beneficial both to the Prince and People;
so that it is only their faults who would go off from it, if they are not both
Prince and People the happiest in the World: I hope I may, without sin, wish
those accursed from God, who would remove our ancient Landmarks, and pull up
all Limits between Prerogative and Law; and who (as it may justly be feared)
would mis-lead Princes, enslave Mankind, and (if occasion were) sacrifice both
to their own private Interests and Ambition. The like I may say of those who
would destroy this ancient Government, and set up a Democracy amongst us; since
I know not which is worst, to be knawn to death by Rats, or devoured by a Lion.

Nor is it that I am conscious to my self of having writ any thing in these
ensuing sheets contrary to Law, destructive to Government, or that Obedience
which all good Subjects owe their Prince and his Laws, which has made me
forbear prefixing my Name to this Treatise; since perhaps some of those Motives
which might persuade this Author to forbear it in the Treatises he published,
might likewise have the same effect upon me; especially since I doubt not but
what I have here written will provoke those Craftsmen who esteem this Notion of
our Authors (by which they expect to get both Riches and Honor) as the Diana
that fell down from Jupiter: And therefore it is no wonder if they are angry
with any man that should go about to pull off the specious Vails with which
they have covered it, and show it (as it really is) a wooden Idol of their own
making; and if they knew the man, would, according to the usual course of those
who abound more in Malice than Reason, quit the matter, and fall upon the
person of their Antagonist, and endeavor to stir up both the great Vulgar and
the small Vulgar (as Mr. Cowley ingeniously terms men of Title without Sense.)

Besides all which, joined with the small opinion I have of my own
performances, or that I think these Papers capable to transmit my Name to
Posterity; yet if I were sure I could do it, however writing against an
ingenious Gentleman long since deceased (and whose good Name upon all accounts
I design not to diminish) yet I should not think it generous to raise my self
a Fame to the prejudice of another man's: And therefore my Request to you is,
That you would believe I write these Obscrvations for no other end than for the
Truth, and in defense of the Government as it is established, and the just
Rights and Liberties of all true Englishmen. All which, I pray God preserve as
long as the Sun and Moon endure.

I am your Friend, Philalethes.

Observations UPON A TREATISE CALLED PATRIARCHA, And several other
Miscellanies, Lately Published Under the Name of Sir Robert Filmer Baronet.
CHAP. I.
THE reason why I choose to begin these Observations with this Treatise of the
natural Right of Kings, rather than with any of the rest, though published long
before it, is, because being (as I suppose) writ after the rest, and on purpose
to assert Monarchy to be Jure Divino, is likely to contain the Authors most
mature thoughts; and being written with better connection than his other
Tracts, contains the substance of them all; which were designed not so much to
establish an Hypothesis, as to observe the weakness of other men's: and being
published at several times, and on diverse occasions, give us but the same
Notions repeated, according as the Tenets in the Authors he writ against needed
(as he thought) a Confutation: Which how far they do deserve it, I leave to the
Reader to judge; and therefore shall not take upon me to defend any man's
Opinions, though never so great or learned, farther than I conceive them
agreeable to right Reason. Nor shall I trouble my self to criticize on every
small Error or Mistake in this Author's Writings, but only set my self to
consider such main Arguments as appear to be founded on false or mere
precarious Principles; not concerning my self with his other Treatises, but as
they contain some other Reasons or newer Matter than I find here.

Page 2. The design of this Treatise, is against an Opinion maintained by some
Divines, and several learned men, That Mankind is naturally endowed and born
with Freedom from Subjection, and at liberty to choose what form of Government
it please; and that the Power which any one man has over others, was at first
bestowed according to the discretion of the Multitude. Page 3. This Opinion, he
says, is not to be found in the Fathers of the Primitive Church: that it
contradicts the Doctrine and History of the Holy Scriptures, the constant
practice of all ancient Monarchies, and the very Principles of the Law of
Nature. And upon this Doctrine the Jesuits, and favorers of the Geneva
Discipline, have built this perilous Conclusion: That the People or Multitude
have power to punish or deprive the Prince, if he transgress the Laws of the
Kingdom. And for this quotes the Writings of diverse Jesuits.

How far this Tenet deserves the Author's Censure, and is liable to the
Conclusions he says some have drawn from thence, since the truth or falsehood of
Propositions does not depend upon the men that have made use of them, I shall
consider hereafter; now confining my self only to examine the Reasons he
brings either in this or any other of his Treatises to overthrow this Opinion.
And if they prove weak, and insufficient for the end the Author designed them,
some Friend of his, or his Tenets, had best find out others; which if they
prove and appear evidently true, I shall then rest satisfied, and acknowledge
my self absolutely convinced. In the mean time I shall now give you the
Author's Hypothesis all at once, in his words, that you may judge whether I
deal fairly with him or no.

P. 5. To pass over therefore his Cautions (which are honest and sober) I shall
come to what he observes upon several passages of Bellarmine. And though he
does not quote the places from whence he took them, yet I hope he has dealt
fairly with him: Though I shall not take upon me to defend the contradictions
or false consequences either of this or any other Author, since I only observe
the only Answer which ( p. 11.) Sir R. F. gives Bellarmine's Argument for the
natural Liberty of the People, is out of Bellarmine himself, whose words are
these: If many men had been created together out of the Earth, they ought all
to have been Princes over their Posterity. In which words (the Author says) we
have an evident confession, that Creation made Man Prince of his Posterity. And
indeed not only Adam, but the succeeding Patriarchs had by right of
Fatherhood, Royal Authority over their Children. Nor dares Bellarmine deny
this. That the Patriarchs (says he) were endowed with Kingly power, their
deeds do testify; for as Adam was Lord of his Children, so his Children, under
him, had a Command and Power over their own Children: but still with a
subordination to the first Parent, who was Lord Paramount over his Childrens
Children to all Generations, as being the Grandfather of his People. Which
conception of Bellarmine, though it may destroy his Argument for natural
Freedom, yet I conceive that it does not destroy the necessity of supposing all
the Kingdoms and Commonwealths now in being in the world, to have had their
beginning from Conquest, or else from the Consent or Institution of the People
who began it; as I shall endeavor to prove more at large.

But from this concession of Bellarmine's, the Author taking this as a yielded
point, proceeds thus: P. 12. I do not see how the Children of Adam, or any man
else, can be free from Subjection to their Parents: And this Subjection of
Children being the Fountain of all Regal Authority, by the Ordination of God
himself, it follows, That Civil Power not only in general is by Divine
Institution, but even the Assignment of it specifically to the eldest Parents:
Which quite takes away that new and common distinction which refers only Power
Universal and Absolute to God; but Power Respective, in regard of the special
Form of Government, to the Choice of the People.

P. 13. This Lordship which Adam by command had over the whole World, and by
right descending from him, the Patriarchs did enjoy, was as large and ample as
the absolutest Dominion of any Monarch which has been since the Creation. For
Power of Life and Death, we find that Judah the Father pronounced sentence of
death against Thamar his Daughter-in-law for playing the Harlot; Bring her
forth (says he) that she may be burnt. Touching War, we see that Abram
commanded an Army of 318 Soldiers of his own Family; and Esau met his brother
Jacob with 400 men at Arms. For matter of Peace, Abraham made a League with
Abimelech, and ratified the Articles with an Oath. These Acts of judging in
capital Crimes, of making War, and concluding Peace, are the chiefest Marks of
Sovereignty that are found in any Monarchy.

And not only until the Flood, but after it, this Patriarchal power did
continue, as the very name Patriarch does in part prove. The three Sons of Noah
had the whole World divided amongst them by their Father; for of them was the
whole World overspread, according to the Benediction given to him and his Sons:
Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

Then he proceeds upon a vulgar Opinion, p. 14, 15. That at the Confusion of
Tongues, there were 72 distinct Nations erected, not as confused Multitudes,
without Heads or Governors, but they were distinct Families which had Fathers
for Rulers over them: whereby it appears, that even in the Confusion, God was
careful to preserve Paternal Authority, by distributing the diversity of
Languages according to the diversity of Families. And for this he quotes the
Text, Genesis 10. v. 5. Speaking of the division of the Isles of the Gentiles
among the Sons of Japhet, it follows, v. 5. These are the Families of the Sons
of Noah, after their Generations in their Nations; and by these were these
Nations divided in the Earth after the Flood. So that though the manner of this
Division be uncertain, yet it is most certain the Division it self was by
Families from Noah and his Children.

P. 16. As for Nimrod's being King over his own Family by Right, and over other
Families by Usurpation and Conquest, and not by Election of the People or
Multitude, he gives us Sir Walter Rawleigh's opinion that it was so; (which I
think is no better a proof than if he had given us his own:) but if it were
true, it proves no more, than that this Patriarchal Right could not long
continue, since it was usurped in the Grandchild of Ham, the fourth descent
from Noah. But he proceeds thus:

As this Patriarchal Power continued in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, even unto
the Egyptian Bondage; so we find it amongst the Sons of Ismael and Esau: it is
said, These are the Sons of Ismael, and these are their names by their Castles
and Towns, Twelve Princes of their Tribes and Families, etc.

P. 18. He owns this Paternal Government was intermitted during their Bondage
in Egypt, because they were in subjection to a stronger Prince: But after the
return of the Israelites out of bondage, God, out of a special care of them,
chose Moses and Josuah successively to govern as Princes, instead of the
supreme Fathers: And after them, God raised up Judges to defend his People. But
when God gave them Kings, he re-established the ancient and prime Right of
Lineal-succession to Paternal Government: And whenever he made choice of any
special person to be King, he intended that the Issue also should have the
benefit thereof, as being comprehended sufficiently in the person of the
Father, although the Father only was named in the Grant.

P. 19. The Author proceeds to obviate an Objection that he sees may be made to
his Hypothesis, That it may seem absurd that Kings now are Fathers of their
People since Experience shows the contrary. It is true (says he) all Kings are
not the natural Parents of their Subjects, yet they all either are, or are to
be reputed the next Heirs to those first Progenitors who were at first the
natural Parents of the whole People; and so in their right succeed to the
exercise of Supreme Jurisdiction: and such Heirs are not only Lords of their
own Children, but of their Brethren, and all others that were Subjects to their
Fathers. And therefore we find that God told Cain of his brother Abel, His
desires shall be toward thee, and thou shall rule over him. Accordingly when
Jacob bought his brothers Birthright, Isaac blessed him thus: Be Lord over thy
brethren, and let the sons of thy mother bow before thee.

P. 20. As long as the first Fathers of Families lived, the name of Patriarch
did aptly belong unto them; but after a few Descents, when the true Fatherhood
it self was extinct, and only the right of the Father descended upon the true
Heir, then the Title of Prince or King was more significant to express the
power of him who succeeds only to the right of Fatherhood which his Ancestors
did naturally enjoy. By this means it comes to pass that many a Child, by
succeeding a King, has a right of a Father over many a gray headed Multitude,
and has the Title of Pater Patriae.

It may be demanded, What becomes of the Right of Fatherhood, in case the Crown
does escheat for want of an Heir; whether does it not then devolve to the
People? The Answer is, It is but the negligence or ignorance of the People to
lose the knowledge of the true Heir: for an Heir there is always. If Adam
himself were still living, and now ready to die, it is certain that there is
one man, and but one in the world, who is next Heir, although the knowledge who
should be that one man, be quite lost.

P. 21. This ignorance of the People being admitted, it does not by any means
follow, that for want of Heirs the Supreme Power is devolved to the Multitude,
or that they have power to rule, and choose what Rulers they please. No, the
Kingly power in such cases escheats to the Princes and independent Heads of
Families: for every Kingdom is resolved into those parts whereof at first it
was made. By the uniting of great Families or petty Kingdoms, we find the
greater Monarchies were at first erected; and into such again, as into their
first matter, many times they return again. And because the dependancy of
ancient Families is often an obsure and worn-out knowledge, there the wisdom of
many Princes have thought fit to adopt those for Heads of Families, and Princes
of Provinces, whose Merits, Abilities, or Fortunes, have enabled them, or made
them fit and capable of such Royal Favors. All such prime Heads and Fathers
have power to consent in the uniting or conferring of their Fatherly Right of
Sovereign Authority on whom they please: And he that is so elected, claims not
his power as a Donative from the People, but as being substituted by God, from
whom he receives his Royal Charter of an Universal Father, though testified by
the Ministry of the Heads of the People.

P. 22. In all Kingdoms or Commonwealths in the world, whether the Prince be
the Supreme Father of the People, or but the true Heir of such a Father, p.
23. or whether he come to the Crown by usurpation of the Nobles, or of the
People, or by any other way whatsoever; or whether some few or a multitude
govern the Commonwealth; yet still the Authority that is in any one, or in
many, or in all these, is the only Right and natural Authority of a Supreme
Father. There is, and always shall be continued to the end of the world, a
natural Right of a Supreme Father over a multitude, although by the secret Will
of God, many do at first most unjustly obtain the Exercise of it.

To confirm this natural Right of Regal Power, we find in the Decalogue, that
the Law which enjoins Obedience to Kings, is delivered in the Terms of, Honor
thy Father and thy Mother: as if all Power were originally in the Father. If
Obedience to Parents be due immediately by a natural Law and Subjection to
Princes, but by the mediation of an humane Ordinance, what reason is there that
the Laws of Nature should give place to the Laws of Men? as we see the power of
the Father over his Child, gives place, and is subordinate to the power of the
Magistrate.

P. 24. If we compare Rights of a Father with those of a King, we find them
all one, without any difference at all, but only in the latitude or extent of
them: As the Father over one Family, so the King as Father over many Families,
extends his care to preserve, feed, clothe, instruct, and defend the whole
Commonwealth. His War, his Peace, his Courts of Justice, and all his Acts of
Sovereignty, tend only to preserve and distribute to every subordinate and
inferior Father, and to their Children their Rights and Privileges; so that
all the Duties of a King are summed up in an Universal Fatherly Care of his
People.

I have been so just to the Author as to transcribe as much of his first
Chapter as tends to prove the original power of Kings, as well that you might
see the Hypothesis which he builds his Divine Right of Absolute Monarchy in his
own words, and so be the better able to judge whether I understand and answer
him or not; as because it contains the substance and strength of all that the
Author had to say in defense of it.

So that I shall now fall to examine whether his Foundations will bear so
weighty a Structure as he has raised upon it. His first Argument against the
natural Freedom of Mankind is drawn from Scripture, and from Bellarmine's own
Concession, That Adam was (and consequently every other Father ought to be) a
Prince over his Posterity. And as Adam was Lord over his Children, so his
Children, under him, had a power over their own Children, suberdinately to the
first Parent, who was Lord Paramount over his Childrens Children to all
Generations, as being the Grandfather of his People.

So that neither the Children of Adam or any else, can be free from subjection
to their Parents; and this subjection to Parents being the foundation of all
Legal Authority, by the Ordination of God himself: therefore no man can be born
in a state of Freedom or Equality.

In answer to which, I shall not concern my self what Bellarmine or any other
have granted; but would be glad to know where and how God has given this
Absolute power to Fathers over their Children, and by what Law Children are
tied to an Absolute Subjection or Servitude to their Parents, Vid. Preface to
his Observations on Aristotle 's Politics.
since the Author in another place affirms, that at first a Child, a Slave,
and a Servant, were all one without any difference. I see no divine Charter in
Scripture of any such absolute despotick power granted to Adam or any other
Father.

The Author, in his Observations on Grotius de Jure belli, etc. founds this
dominion of Adam over the Earth and all Creatures therein, on Genesis 1.28. and
quotes Mr. Seldom in his Mare Clausum; where he says, That Adam, by donation
from God, was made the general Lord of all things, not without such a private
dominion to himself as did exclude his Children, etc. From which words I do not
conceive that Adam's absolute power over his own Offspring can be made out;
for the words are spoken as well to the Female as Male of Mankind: Be fruitful
and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and have dominion over the fish of the
Sea, etc. and over every living thing that moves (in the Original, creeps)
upon the face of the Earth. By which words Adam has no power conferred upon
him over his own Children (when he should have them:) These words implying no
more than a conferring of a power by God on Mankind, under these words of Male
and Female (and was not at all personal to Adam or Eve alone) whereby they
might subdue or tame the Brute Creatures for their use, not comprehending those
of the same kind with themselves; since the general words extend no farther
than to every living thing that creeps upon the Earth: nor does Gods grant of
the Creatures to Noah comprehend more than this: Only God there gives man a
privilege to kill the Creatures for Food, which Adam had not. Which shows that
Adam was so far from having any such power of Life and Death over his own
Children, that he had it not so much as over Brute Creatures: Since if he had
this power as a Monarch, it is highly probable, that being the Father of all
Men in the world, and having by the murder of Abel not only lost a Son but a
Subject, it had been his Right alone to have punished Cain the Murderer:
Whereas we find Cain, Genesis 4. v. 14. upon his conviction of the Murder,
telling God, that every one that finds him, should slay him; and therefore,
v. 15. God set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should slay him. From
whence we may infer, 1. That it was a Law of Nature then, that Murder was to be
punished. 2. That this Right of punishing did not belong to Adam, as a Father,
alone, so as to have power of Life and Death over his Children, since the Text
does not mention that he was afraid his Father should put him to death, but
every one that met him: Neither does God set a mark upon him to secure him from
Adam, but from any body else that should light on him. From whence it follows,
that if Adam had no more right by Gods concession to take away his Sons life
for the murder of his Brother, (which is one of the greatest offenses he could
commit) than any other of his Brethren or Kinsmen; there is no reason why he
should have it in any other case. And as for what the Author says, That this
Lordship which Adam had over the whole World, the Patriarchs by a Right
descending from him, did enjoy; which was as large and ample as the absolutest
Dominion of any Monarch which has been since the Creation; I cannot understand
how this Right derives it self from Adam: For he tells us but a little before,
p. 12. That Civil Power not only in general is by divine Institution, but even
the Assignment of it specifically to the eldest Parents. Therefore granting
that all the Patriarchs from Abraham to Jacob's twelve Sons, inclusively,
assumed a power of Life and Death over their own Families, 1. I desire to know
how this Right can be derived from Adam: for the Right of supreme Monarch of
the world descending upon the eldest Son of Adam, whom we will suppose to have
been Seth (since Cain might forfeit his Birthright,) this power of Life and
Death could only be truly vested in the eldest Grandchild, or descendant from
Seth; which I suppose the Author means by eldest Parents, or else he talks
nonsense: And that Abraham was this eldest Grandson of Seth, will be hard to
prove, since it is not apparent from Scripture, whether Shem or Japhet were the
eldest Son of Noah, or Abram or Nahor the eldest Son of Terah. And the Fathers
and ancient Commentators on this place, are divided in their opinions
concerning this point. And it is plain from diverse places in Scripture, that
the eldest Son is not always first named. But supposing that Shem was the
eldest Son of Noah, it does not appear that Arphaxad from whom Abram descended,
was his eldest Son, since the Scripture does not undertake to give us the names
of all the Sons of Shem, but only of Arphaxad, as his name was necessary for
the deriving of the Genealogy of Abraham the Ancestor of the Jewish Nation. But
if any man will answer (as the Author does, p. 21.) that this right Heir of
Adam coming by length of time to be lost, this supreme Kingly power became
devolved to all independent Heads of Families; then this Right of Adam, as Lord
and King of the whole World, as the first man, must certainly be extinct, since
none but the true Heir could have a Right to that (according to the Author's
principles:) So that this power of Life and Death which the Author will have
the Patriarchs to have exercised over those of their Family, must belong to
them either as Fathers, or else as Masters, or Heads of their particular
Families; and not as Heirs to Adam. But since the Author seems to found this
Power of Adam upon Mr. Hunton's concession, (See Anarchy of a limited Monarchy,
p. 264.) That it is God's Ordinance that there should be Civil Government,
because Genesis 3.16. God ordained Adam ^o rule over his Wife, and her desire was
to be subject ^o his; and that as hers, so all theirs that should come ^ut of
her: First, all Expositors look upon these words ^s respecting only a Conjugal,
and not Filial Sub^ction. Neither were they spoke in the state of Nature or
Innocence, but after the Fall. Neither for all that, did Adam, or any other
Husband, by these words ^cquire an absolute Authority over the Life of his
^ife, in the state of Nature, so that she has no ^ght left her to defend
herself from the unjust violence (...) rage of her Husband. Therefore since
this Power (...) Adam over Eve and her Children, cannot be pre^nded to belong
to him as a Father, but as a Master (...) a Slave, and those that shall be
descended from her; (...) were worth while to enquire, what Power a Father
(...) Master of a Family can claim separate from any ^ommonwealth, (as we will
suppose these Patriarchs ^ere.) For this will serve toward the solving those
^xamples he puts of Abram's power of Peace and ^ar, and of Judah's power of
Life and Death over (...) Daughter-in-law Thamar. We will first then con^er the
power of a Father by the Law of Nature ^er his Children, and then that of a
Master of a Fa^ly over his Wife, Servants, or Slaves. To begin ^th that of a
Father, as the most worthy; I shall deavour to search into the Original of the
Father's ^wer over the persons of his Children, and how far extends.

It is evident, that this Power of Fathers over their ^ildren, can only take
place in the state of Wedlock; (...) as to Children got out of Marriage, it is
uncertain ^o is their Father: who can only be known by the declaration of the
Mother; and she sometimes cannot certainly tell her self. So that no man is
obliged to take care of or breed up a Bastard, because the Mother, if she had
her liberty of keeping what company she pleased, can never morally assure him
that the Child is his: therefore unless he take upon him the care and education
of this Child, it belongs to the Mother, and not to him to provide for it. So
that the Right of the Father over his Child, commences by virtue (...) the
Marriage, which is a mutual Compact between a Man and a Woman for their
Cohabitation, the generation of Children, and their joint care and provision
for them. So that though by the Law of Nature (which is confirmed by the Law of
God) the Woman as the weaker vessel, is to be subject to the Man, as the
stronger, stouter, and commonly the wiser creature, (...) whose care and
courage she must owe the greatest part of her provision and protection; yet she
is not without an Interest in the Children, since she is under (...) obligation
to perform her part (and that the most (...) borious and troublesome) in their
Education; thoug^ her Power and Right in them be still subordinate (...) that
of the Man, to whom by force of the Marriage she has already subjected
herself. Some Writers ther^ fore think they have done sufficiently when they
(...) us, that the Father has an absolute Dominion ov^ his Child, because he
got it, and is the cause of it being. By this Argument the Mother has great^
Right over the person of the Child, since all Nat^ ralists hold the Child
partakes more of her than of (...) Father; and she is besides at greater pain
and troub^ both in the bearing, bringing it forth, nursing an^ breeding it up.
But if it be answered, that the Man being Master of his Wife, is by the
Contract so lik^ wise of her Issue: Then it follows, that this power (...) the
Father does not commence barely from Gene^ tion, but is acquired from the
Contract of Marriage; which (till I meet with some reason to the contrary) I
see not why it might not be so agreed by the Contracts, that the Father should
not dispose of the Children without the Mothers consent: Since we see it often
so agreed in the Marriages of Sovereign Princes, Vid. Articles of Marriage
between King Philip and Queen Mary, in Godwin's Annals, An. 1554. Thuanus, Lib.
IX. So likewise where a Subject marries his Queen, as the Lord Darnley's
Marriage with Mary Qu. of Scotland, the Sovereignty, and consequently the Power
over the Children to be born remained entirely in Her.
who are always supposed to be in the state of Nature, in respect to each
other. Yet though I will not deny, but some Gratitude and Acknwledgment is due
from Children to Parents, even for this, that they did enter into the state of
Marriage for their generation, and were the occasion of their Being: Yet I do
not see, how by this alone a Father acquires an absolute power and dominion
over the person of the Child, to dispose of it as he thinks fit: Since Parents
acting here only as Natural, and not Moral Agents, they are not the voluntary
Causes of its generation: Therefore I cannot found so great a Right as that of
an absolute perpetual Dominion over the Children, upon so slight a foundation.

We must therefore trace this Right of Fathers over his Children to a more true
original than any of these. Since then all the Laws of Nature, or Reason, are
intended for one end or effect, viz. the common good and preservation of
Mankind; and that Marriage is no otherwise a Duty, than as by the propagation
of our Species it conduces to, without the help and assistance of others; and
that the Parents entered into this state of Marriage for the procreation of
Children: both the Instinct of Nature and Law of Reason dictate, that they are
obliged to take care of and provide for that Child, which they as subordinate
Causes have produced; as being those on whom God has imposed this Duty, which
is much greater than that of Generation: for now the world is sufficiently
peopled, it may be doubted, whether any person is obliged to Marry, further
than it may consist with their convenience, or course of Life. But Parents,
when they are Married, are tied by the Laws of Nature to take care of the
Children. Therefore I suppose the highest Right of Parents in their Children,
does arise merely from their discharge of this great Duty of Education, as may
appear from this Instance. Suppose the Parents not being willing to undertake
the trouble of breeding up the Child, do either expose it, or pass over their
Right in it to another, as soon as it is born; I desire to know if the person
that finds this Child, or he to whom it is assigned, breed it up until it come
to have the use of Reason, what Duty this Child can owe his Parents, if they
are made known to him? Certainly, all the obligation he can have to them, must
be upon the score of their begetting him; which how small that is, you may
observe from what has been said before: nor can the Parents claim any further
Right in this Child, since by their exposing and granting it away, they
renounced all the Interest they could have in it; so that the Duty and
Gratitude he should have owed them, had they taken upon them the care and
trouble of breeding him up, is now due to his Foster-Father or Mother, who took
care of him until he was able to shift for himself. From whence it is evident,
that the highest Right which Parents can have in their Children, is not merely
natural, from generation; but acquired by their performance of that nobler part
of their Duty. And so the highest Obedience which Children owe their Patents,
proceeds from that Gratitude and Sense they ought to have of the great
obligation they owe their Parents, for the trouble and care they put them to in
their Education.

Having now, I hope, found out the Original of Parents Right and Interest in
their Children, and the chief ground of their Gratitude and Duty to their
Parents; we will now proceed to the Second Point proposed, and consider what
kind of Right this is, and how far it extends. Since therefore the Father's
greatest interest in his Child proceeds from his having bred it up, and taken
care of it, and that this Duty is founded on that great Law of Nature, that
every Man ought to endeavor the common good of Mankind, which he performs, as
far as lies in his power, in breeding up, and taking care of his Child; it
follows, that this right in the Child, or power over it, extends no farther
than as it conduces to this end, that is, the good and preservation thereof:
and when this Rule is transgressed, the Right ceases. For God has not
delivered one man into the power of another, merely to be tyrannized over at
his pleasure; but that the person who has this Authority, may use it for the
good of those he governs. And herein lies the difference between the Interest
which a Father has in his Children, and that property which he has in his
Horses or Slaves; since his right to the former extends only to those things
that conduce to their Good and Benefit; but in the other he has no other
consideration, but the profit he may reap from their labor and service, being
under no other obligation but that of Humanity, and of using them as becomes a
good-natured and merciful man; yet still considering and intending his own
advantage, as the principal end of his keeping of them. Whereas in his Children
he is chiefly to design their good and advantage, as far as lies in his power,
without ruining himself: and though he justly may make use of their labor and
service while they continue as part of his Family; yet it is not for the same
end alone that he uses his Horses or Slaves, but that his Children being bred
up in a constant course of Industry, may be the better able either to get their
own living, or else to spend their time as they ought to do, without falling
into the Vices of Idleness or Debauchery. So that it is evident, the Father has
no more right over the Life of his Child than another man; being as much
answerable to God if he abuse this Right of a Father, in killing his innocent
Son, as if another had done it. Neither has he from the same Principles any
right to maim or castrate his Child, (as this Author allows him to do, in his
Directions for Obedience;) much less sell him for a Slave: Therefore it is no
part of the Law of Nature, (unless he cannot otherwise provide for it) but of
the Roman, or Civil-Law, that a Father should have power to sell his Son three
times. For the Father is appointed by God to meliorate the condition of his
Child, but not to make it worse; since it is not himself, but God that properly
gave him his being. So that I hope I have sufficiently proved there is a great
difference between a Child and a Slave, or a Servant for Life, though this
Author will have them in the state of Nature to be all one.

But, for the better clearing of this point, how far the power of Parents over
their Children extends, I think we may very well divide (as Grotius does) the
life of the Child into three periods or ages. De J.B. l. 2. c. 5. 2.
The first is the time of imperfect judgment, or before the Child comes to be
able to exercise his Reason. The second is the period of perfect Judgment, yet
whilst the Child still continues part of his Fathers Family. The third is after
he has left his Father's, and either enters into another Family, or sets up a
Family himself. In the first Period, all the actions of Children are under the
absolute dominion of their Parents: for since they have not the use of Reason,
nor are able to judge what is good or bad for themselves, they could not grow
up nor be preserved, unless their Parents judged for them what means conduced
to this end; yet this power is still to be directed for the principal end, the
good and preservation of the Child. In the second Period, when they are of
mature Judgment, yet continue part of their Fathers Family, they are still
under their Fathers command, and ought to be obedient to it in all actions
which tend to the good of their Fathers Family and concerns; and in both these
Ages the Father has a power to set his Children to work, as well to enable
them to get their own Living, as to recompense himself for the pains and care
he has taken, and the charge he may have bin at in their Education. For though
he were obliged by the Law of Nature to breed up his Children, yet there is no
reason but he may make use of their labor, as a natural recompense for his
trouble. And in this Period the Father has power to correct his Son, if he
prove negligent, or disobedient; since this Correction is for his advantage, to
make him more careful and diligent another time, and to subdue the stubbornness
of his Will: But in other actions the Children have a power of acting freely,
yet still with respect of gratifying and pleasing their Parents, to whom they
are obliged for their Being and Education, since without their care they could
not have attained to that age. But since this Duty is not by force of any
absolute Subjection, but only of Piety, Gratitude and Observance, it does not
make void any act, though done contrary to those Duties, as Marriage, and the
like; for the gift of a thing is not therefore void, though made contrary to
the Rule of Prudence and Frugality. In the third Period, they are in all
actions free, and at their own dispose; yet still under those obligations of
Gratitude, Piety and Observance toward their Parents as their greatest
Benefactors, since if that they have well discharged their Duty toward their
Children, they can never in their whole lives sufficiently recompense so great
benefits as they have received from them.

But it seems the Author is not satisfied with these distinctions,
Observations on Grotius de J. B. p. 62.
but says, He cannot conceive, how in any case Children can ever naturally
have any power or moral Faculty of doing what they please, without their
Parents leave; since they are always bound to study to please them. And though
by the Laws of some Nations, Children when they attain to years of discretion,
have Power and Liberty in many actions, yet this Liberty is granted them by
positive humane Laws only, which are made by the Supreme Fatherly Power of
Princes, who regulate, limit, or assume the Authority of Inferior Fathers, for
the public benefit of the Commonwealth: So that naturally the Power of Parents
over their Children never cease by any separation, but only by the permission
of the transcendent Fatherly Power of the Supreme Prince, Children may be
dispensed with, or privileged in some cases from obedience to subordinate
Parents.

For my part, I see no reason why these distinctions of Grotius may not be well
enough defended against all the Reasons which the Author gives us to the
contrary: For he only tells us, He cannot conceive how in any case Children can
ever naturally have any power or moral faculty of doing what they please,
without their Fathers leave; and that naturally the Power of Parents never
cease by any separation, etc. but gives us no other reason, than that they
are always bound to study to please them. As if this obligation of Gratitude
and Complacency, did likewise comprehend a full and perfect propriety of all
Fathers in the persons of their Children, and an absolute power over them in
all cases whatsoever, so that Children shall have no Right left to consult
their own good or preservation, in any case whatsoever, Vid. Bodin de Rep. l.
1. c. 4.
farther than the Father pleases. As for Bodin, and diverse others that have
writ on this subject, they do no more than follow others, who have asserted
this Absolute Power, upon no other grounds than the Jewish or Roman Municipal
Laws; but have never troubled themselves to look into the true Original of
Paternal Authority, or Filial Subjection, according to the Laws of Nature or
Reason. And most Treatises of this subject being commonly written by Fathers,
they have been very full in setting forth their own Power and Authority over
their Children; but have said little or nothing of the Rights of Children, in
the state of Nature, toward their Parents. Loc. sup. laudat.
Therefore Bodin thinks he has done enough in supposing that if a Father is
wise, and not mad, he will never kill his Son without cause, since he will
never correct him without he deserve it; and that therefore the Civil Law
supposes, that the Will of the Parents in managing the concerns of their
Children, is void of all Fraud; and that they will rather violate all Divine
and Humane Laws, than not endeavor to make their Children both rich and
honorable: And from those instances out of the Roman Law, supposes that
Parents cannot so much as will any thing to their Childrens prejudice, or so
much as abuse this Fatherly Power of Life and Death: And therefore thinks he
has sufficiently answered the Objection he makes, that there have been some
Parents, who have abused this power so far, as to put their Children to Death
without cause. He says, They give us no Examples to the contrary: And supposing
this to have sometimes fallen out, must therefore Legislators alter a wholesome
Law, because some persons may abuse it?

But if we consider what Bodin has here said, we shall find every one of his
Suppositions false: For, 1. he supposes it to be the Right of all Fathers, by
the Law of Nature, to have an absolute power over the lives and persons of
their Children. 2. That the Jewish and Roman Law are most agreeable to the Laws
of Nature in this point. 3. That Fathers do seldom or never abuse this power.
4. That if they do abuse it, yet it is better to leave it in their hands, than
to abrogate it or retrench it. The falseness of all which Assertions, I either
have already, or else shall hereafter make manifest: Only I shall remark thus
much at present, That upon Bodin's principle, women that murder their Bastards
would have a good time on it, because having no Husbands, they have full power
over the Life of their Children; and there is no reason that it should be
retrencht by any positive Laws, because some offend against it. But however,
this Argument of Bodin's would do our Author's cause no good: for if Parents
are to be trusted with this absolute power over their Children, because of the
natural affection they are always supposed to bear them; then Princes ought not
to be trusted with it, since none but Parents themselves can have this natural
affection toward their Children; Princes (as the Author grants) having this
power only as representing these Parents. Whereas Parentage is a natural
Relation, and neither can be created nor assigned farther than the Civil Laws
of the Country have appointed; and therefore there can be no adopted Son by the
Law of Nature, since Adoption arises chiefly from the promise and consent of
the person adopted, and partly from the Authority of the Civil Law, or
Municipal Law of the Commonwealth. So that in relation to Princes, upon this
Reason of Bodin's, cessante causa, cessat effectus. But indeed Bodin never
dreamt of this fine Notion of our Author's, that all Monarchs were not only
Heads, but Fathers of their people, or else certainly we should have had this
as the chief Argument to prove his French Monarchy to be Jure Divino. But I
shall trouble my self no farther with him at present, but shall proceed to
consider this point of absolute Obedience a little farther.

I suppose the Author (as any sober man else) would grant, that Children are
not obliged so much as to attempt to perform the commands of their Parents, in
case they evidently appear impossible or extravagant, such as a Father may give
when he is in a fit of drunkenness, madness, or sudden rage, which is all one
with madness; and of this who can judge, but the Children who are to perform
these Commands? And in this case no man will deny but it is lawful for the
Children to hold, nay bind their mad or drunken Parents, in case they cannot
otherwise hinder them from doing mischief, or killing either themselves, their
Mothers, or Brethren. So that though they may do this from that natural love
and charity which all men in the state of nature ought to show toward each
other, yet they may likewise justify the doing of it as Children, who ought to
have a greater concern for the good and preservation of their Parents, than
mere strangers, and have therefore an higher obligation to prevent their doing
any mischief either to themselves or near Relations; this being for the Fathers
good and preservation, and that for which he has cause to thank them when he
comes to himself. And if it be said, that the Son may then refuse his Fathers
Commands, or resist them, pretending he is mad, drunk, or in a rage, when he
really is not, and thereby take occasion to obey his Father no farther than he
pleases: to this I answer, That the Son is either really persuaded that his
Father is in some of those evil circumstances before mentioned, or else only
pretends that he thinks so, when really he does not. If in the first case he
err in his judgment, and the ignorance did not proceed from his own fault
(either of passion, prejudice, or too slight an esteem of his Fathers
understanding) he is not culpable, though he make such a false judgment of his
Fathers actions: for God considering only the sincerity of the heart, does not
require of any man more than he is able to perform. But if on the other side
the Son play the Hypocrite, and refuse his Parents Commands, pretending they
are mad or drunk, when really they are not, he is without doubt doubly guilty
both, of Hypocrisy and Disobedience. But this does not hinder Children in the
state of Nature from judging of the reasonableness or lawfulness of their
Parents Commands, and of the condition they are in when they gave them: for
otherwise a Child ought to be of his Fathers Religion, though it were Idolatry,
if he commanded it; or were obliged to break any of the Laws of Nature, if this
Obedience were absolute. And it is a lesser evil that the Commands of Parents
should be disobeyed, nay, sometimes their persons resisted, than that they
should make a Right to command or do unreasonable and unlawful things in a fit
of madness, drunkenness, or passion, destroy either themselves or others.

But it may be replied, that though Fathers in the state of Nature have no
Right to act unjustly or cruelly toward their Children, or to command such
unlawful or unreasonable things; yet however they are only answerable to God
for so doing; and there is out of a Commonwealth no superior power that can
question the Fathers actions: for since his Children are committed by God to
his care, he only is answerable for them, and for his actions toward them,
since no other man has any interest or concern in them but himself. So that if
he kill, maim, abuse, or sell his Son, there is no man that has Right to
revenge, punish, or call him to an account for so doing; and if no others that
are his equals, much less his Wife and Children, who are so much his
Inferiors, and who ought in all things to be obedient to his Will. Therefore
this Power, though it be not absolute in respect of God, yet is so in respect
of his Wife and Children: and so in all cases where the Children cannot yield
an active Obedience to their Fathers commands, they are notwithstanding obliged
(by the Law of God; See Ephesians. 6.1. Colos. 3.20.) to a passive one; and
patiently to submit to whatever evils or punishments he pleases to inflict,
though it were to the loss of Life itself.

To which I answer, That though it is true, a Father in the state of Nature,
and considered as the head of a separate Family, has no Superior but God, and
consequently no other person whatsoever has any Authority or Right to call him
to an account, and punish him for this abuse of his paternal Power; yet it does
not follow, that such absolute submission is therefore due from the Children,
as does oblige them either to an active or a passive Obedience in all cases to
the Fathers Will, so that they neither may, nor ought to defend themselves in
any circumstance whatsoever. There is a great deal of difference (in the state
of Nature) between calling a man to an account as a Superior, and defending a
man's self as an equal. For a man in this state has a right to this latter
against all men that assault him, by the principle of Self-preservation: But no
man has a right to the former, but only in respect of those over whom he has
an Authority, either granted him by God, or conferred upon him by the consent
of other men. So that the evils which an Aggressor, or Wrong-doer, suffers from
him he injured, though in respect of God the Supreme Lawgiver they may be
natural Punishments ordained by him, to deter men from violating the Laws of
Nature, yet they are not so in regard of the Person who inflicts them. For God
may sometimes appoint those for the Instruments of his Justice, who otherwise
do injury to the person punished; as in the case of Absalom's Rebellion against
his Father David. So that in this case the evils the wrongdoer suffers are not
properly Punishments, but necessary Consequences of his Violence and Injustice;
and in respect of the Inflicter, are but necessary means of his preservation.
So that if a Son have any Right to defend himself in what belongs to him from
the unjust violence of his Father, he does not act as his Superior; but in
this case as his Equal, as he is indeed in all the Rights of Nature, considered
only as a Man; Such as are a Right to live, and to preserve himself, and to use
all lawful means for that end. Therefore since, as I have already shown, that a
Father has no higher Right or Authority from God over the person of his Child,
but as it tends to his good and preservation, or as it conduces to the great
end of Nature, the common Good and preservation of Mankind: So when the Father
transgresses this Authority, his Right ceases; and when that ceases, the Sons
Right to preserve himself (and in that, to pursue that great end) begins to
take place. Therefore out of a Civil state, if a Father will endeavor
evidently, without any just cause, to take away his Sons Life, I think the Son
may in this case, if he cannot otherwise escape nor avoid it, and that his
Father will not be pacified neither with his submission nor entreaty, defend
himself against his Father, not with a design to kill him, but purely to
preserve his own Life; and if in this case the Father happen to be killed, I
think his Blood is upon his own head. But if any object to me the Example of
Isaac's submission to his Father, when he intended to sacrisice him: To this I
answer, that as this act of Abraham's is not to be taken as an Example for
other Fathers, so neither does the Example of Isaac oblige other Sons. For as
Abraham had no right to offer up his Son, but by God's express Will; so it is
rational to suppose, that Isaac being then (as Chronologers make him) about
nineteen or twenty years of Age, and able to carry wood enough upon his back to
consume the Sacrifice, and of years to ask where the Lamb was for the Offering;
was also instructed by his Father of the cause of his dealing so with him: and
then the submission was not paid to his Father's, but to God's Will, whom he
was persuaded would have it so. But if any man yet doubts, whether resistance
in such a case were lawful, I leave it to his own Conscience, whether if his
Father and he were out of any civil estate, whose assistance he might implore,
he would lie still, and suffer his Father to cut his throat, only because he
had a mind to it, or pretended revelation for it.

So likewise if a Father in this state should go about to violate his Sons Wife
in his presence, or to kill her, or his Grandchildren, I suppose he may as
lawfully use the same means for their preservation, (if he cannot otherwise
obtain it) as he might for his own; since they are delivered to his charge, and
that he only is answerable for them. For since the Father does not acquire any
property in the Sons person, either by begetting or educating him, much less
ought he to have it over those the Son has begotten.

But though Children may have this Right of defending their own Lives, or those
of their Wives and Children, from their Fathers unjust violence, when they can
by no means else be preserved; Yet I would not be here understood to give
Children this right of resisting upon any less occasion; as if the Father
should only go about to correct his Son, though without just cause, it were
therefore lawful for him to resist or beat his Father. For we are obliged by
the Law of Christ to bear smaller Injuries from others, much more from a
Father; neither yet would I give them any right to continue this state of War,
and to revenge upon their Parents the Injuries they have formerly received at
their hands. For all Revenge, taken in this sense, as a satisfaction of the
mind in returning of an evil or injury already received, without any respect
to a man's own preservation, or the good of the person that did the wrong, is
unlawful even in the state of Nature. Therefore this returning Evil for Evil,
which some improperly call Revenge, is only justifiable for one or both of
these ends; either to make the party that has done the Injury sensible of his
Error, and seeing the Follies and Inconveniences of it, to alter his mind,
and resolve to do so no more; or as it may conduce to a man's own preservation
for the future, and be a warning to others not to injure him in like manner,
since they see he will not take injuries tamely. But all this is still left to
a man's own prudence, how far he will pass them by: And he is certainly obliged
to leave off returning them, as soon as he can be safe without it; since
otherwise quarrels would be perpetual. Neither ought one, who has been highly
obliged to a man perhaps for his life, to return him evil for evil, since
scarce any Injury being great enough to cancel so great an Obligation.
Therefore since a Father, who has truly performed his Duty, is the greatest
Benefactor we can imagine in this life; so no man ought to revenge an Injury,
though never so great, upon him; since it is not only undutiful, but
ungrateful, and cannot serve either of those two ends for which alone this
returning evil for evil is allowable. For first, it cannot make the Father see
his fault; since this correction being from a Son whom he looks upon as one
highly obliged to him, and so much his inferior, will rather serve to
exasperate than amend him. Secondly, Neither can this bearing of the Injury
encourage others to attempt doing the like; since all that know the case, will
likewise consider the person that did the wrong. So that Patience alone is the
only lawful means to make the Father see his Error, and be reconciled to his
Child, who ought to embrace it as soon as the Father offers it.

But as for the places of Scripture brought for absolute Obedience to Parents;
viz. the fourth Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. Children, obey
your Parents in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1,2. and Children, obey your Parents in all
things, Col. 3.20. God did not intend here to give us any new Law or Precept
concerning this Duty, but to confirm and explain the fifth Commandment; as that
was but a confirmation of the Law of Nature, by which men were obliged to
reverence and obey their Parents, long before that Law was given. Therefore
since the Laws of Nature (which are but Rules of right Reason for the good of
Mankind) are the foundation of this Commandment, and of all those commands in
the New Testament, they are still to be interpreted according to that Rule.
Neither are other places of Scripture understood in any other sense; such as
are those of turning the right Cheek, of giving away a man's Coat to him that
would go to Law, and the like: all which we are not to Interpret Literally, See
Grotius and. Dr. Hammond's Annot. upon these places.
but according to Reason. And so are likewise these words of St. Paul to be
understood, Children, obey your Parents in all things; that is, in all things
reasonable and lawful. And this sense must be allowed of, or else Children were
bound to obey all commands of their Parents, whether unlawful or lawful; being
comprehended under this general word All. Nor will the distinction of an active
or passive Obedience help in this case; for passive Obedience cannot be the end
of the Fathers command, and consequently his will is not performed in
suffering; since no Father can be so unreasonably cruel, as to command a thing
merely because he would have occasion to punish his Son whom he thinks must not
resist him. Neither do these places appoint a Son when an infant, a man of full
age, and perhaps an old man of threescore, to be all governed the same way, or
that the same Obedience is required of them all.

And this brings me to a fuller Answer to the Author's Argument, and to show
that though Children are indeed always bound in Gratitude to please their
Parents (as far as they are able without ruining themselves) and to pay a great
reverence to them; yet that this submission is not an absolute subjection, but
is to be limited according to the Rules of right Reason or Prudence. And to
prove this, I will produce instances from the case of Adam's Children, since
the Author allows no Father to have had a larger authority than himself: We
will therefore consider in the first place, Adam's power as a Father, in
respect of his Sons marriage. Suppose then that he had commanded one of his
Sons never to marry at all, certainly this command would have been yoid, since
then it had been in Adam's power to have frustrated Gods Command to mankind of
increase and multiply, and replenish the Earth; which was not spoken to Adam
and Eve alone, since they could not do it in their persons, but to all mankind
represented in them. And likewise Adam had been the occasion of his Sons
incontinency, if he had lain with any of his Sisters before marriage. Secondly,
Suppose Adam had commanded Abel to marry one of his Sisters (that being the
only means then appointed to propagate mankind) which he could not love, can
any man think that he had been obliged to do it? Certainly no: for it would
have been a greater sin to marry a wife he knew beforehand he could not live
with, than to disobey his Father; for else how could this be true, Therefore
shall a man leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife? Since then Adam
could not force his Sons affections, but only recommend such of his Sisters as
he thought would best suit with his humor, therefore if the Son could not live
without marriage, and that Adam could not force a Wife upon him, it was most
reasonable that he should choose a Wife for himself. And to come to that other
great point, that the Son can never separate himself from his Fathers Family
nor subjection, as his Lord and Master, without his consent: Suppose then that
Adam had been so cruel and unnatural (as some Fathers are) and being sensible
of the profit he received from his Sons labors, would never have given them
leave to have left his Family, and have set up for themselves, nor to have had
any thing of their own, but (only allowing them and their Wives a bare
subsistence) have kept them like slaves as long as they lived; the Author I
suppose would reply, That he might have done so if he had pleased; and that the
Sons had no lawful means to help themselves, since he only was Judge when or
whether ever it was fit to set them free or no.

But I desire to know whether Adam had this power by a natural Right, or an
acquired; not by the latter: for I have already proved, that neither Generation
nor Possession can confer an absolute Right over the person of another: Nor yet
could he have it by the Sons consent; for they would never give their consent
to such an absolute slavish subjection. Nor yet could he have any such Right by
the revealed Will of God, since I have also proved that such an absolute
subjection is nowhere required by him in Scripture.

But now to return to the acquired Right of Education, neither can that confer
so absolute a power over any man's person, as that therefore he should be a
slave to his Fosterer as long as he lived; since admitting that the Father, or
other person that takes upon him that care, may perhaps justly claim a Right in
the service or labor of the Child, to satisfy them for their trouble and
charge in bringing him up: Yet it does not therefore follow, that this service
is due as long as the Child lives, but rather until such time as they can make
his labor satisfy them for their charge and trouble in keeping him; which may
very well be by that time the Child attains to twenty five years of age at
farthest. And there are those that have offered to breed up and maintain all
the Foundlings and Bastard-children in England, if they may be bound to serve
them until about that age. So that I see no reason why a few years Education
should give any man a Right over another person as long as he lived. But if it
be urged that the Child owed his life to his Father or Fosterer, since without
his assistance he must have perished, and therefore the service of the Child's
whole life is but little enough to recompense it; to this I answer, That the
Parents are under an absolute obligation, by the Laws of God and Nature, to
breed up their Child; and they sin if they do not perform it as they ought:
the end of a Father not being chiefly for the breeding up and preservation of
the Child, and therefore there is no reason he should acquire such a property
in him, merely because he did his duty; and the intent of a Father being to
better the condition of his Son, and not to make it worse, I doubt whether an
absolute or perpetual Servitude, or Death it self, were the better bargain; and
if this Right will not hold for the Father himself, much less will it for a
Fosterer, since he is likewise obliged by the Laws of Nature and Humanity, if
he be able, to breed up the Child he finds, and not to let it perish. So that
the advantage he may make of the Child ought not to be the principal end of his
undertaking, but the doing of good to mankind; and the advantage is to be
considered only as an encouragement, not as the only motive to his duty,
since he is obliged to do the same thing, though he were sure the Child would
either die or be taken away from him, before it could be with him half long
enough to satisfy him. Neither does this reason hold true, according to the
Scripture-rules of Gratitude, that a man has Right to exact of one to whom he
has done a Courtesy, or bestowed a Benefit, a Return as great as the Benefit
bestowed; since this were not beneficence, but mere bartering or exchange: And
a man who had his life saved by another assistance (suppose by pulling him out
of the water) was obliged by this principle to leave his life at his disposal
ever after.

Therefore I see no reason, from all that has yet been said, why a Son when he
comes to be a man able to shift for himself, may not in the state of nature
marry, and separate himself from his fathers Family, even without his Fathers
consent, if he cannot otherwise obtain his liberty by his entreaty and all fair
means: Not but that the Father may, if he please, disinherit his Son for so
doing, or for marrying without his consent, since every man is free to dispose
of his own upon what conditions he thinks fit. And the Son was to have
considered beforehand which he valued most, his own Liberty, or his Fathers
kindness, and the hopes of his share of his Estate after his death.

But I now come to the Author's main Argument from Scripture-Examples: That the
Patriarchs, by a Right derived from Adam, did exercise as Heads of their
respective Families, a dominion as absolute as that of any Monarch: And so
instances in Thamar brought out to be burnt by her Father-in-law Judah:
Touching War, Abram 's commanding an Army of 318 Soldiers of his own Family;
Esau 's meeting his Brother with 400 men at Arms: For matter of Peace, Abram 's
making a League with Abimelech: And that these acts of judging in capital
Crimes, of making War and Peace, are the chiefest marks of Sovereignty that are
found in a Monarchy. All which I shall endeavor to answer. First, The instance
of Judah rather makes against him; for he confines this power before to the
chief Father of the Family, and will never have Children to be free from
subjection to their Fathers: whereas in this case Judah, as Head of his own
Family, exercised an absolute power of Life and Death, and so was free from
subjection to his Father Jacob, who was then living. And suppose (as the Text,
Genesis 38. expresses) Judah went down from his Brethren to a certain Adullamite,
and there married, and set up a distinct Family; yet this will not help the
Author, since ( p. 33.) he will not allow the Fatherly Authority to be confined
to one Family, if the Families were at such a distance as they might receive
their fathers commands; which lies upon him to prove: And therefore this
subjection was not perpetual. Secondly, I shall show by another Example, that
the Head of a Family has not absolute power of the lives of his Children and
Grandchildren; and that is from Reuben's pathetical Speech, Genesis 42. to his
Father Jacob, when he refused to send Benjamin with him into Egypt; Slay my two
sons (says he) if I bring him not unto thee. Now if Jacob had this absolute
power as a Father, it had been impertinent in Reuben to have spoke thus, since
he knew his Father had power to slay his Sons, if he thought fit, whether he
gave him such an authority or not. But if it be replied, that Jacob when his
Sons married might set them at liberty, and so give them power of Life and
Death; that is, make them absolute in their respective Families: This is gratis
dictum, and no proof brought of it out of Scripture, and therefore may as well
be otherwise: Nor is it likely that Jacob should thus manumit his Sons, since
it is apparent they did not then set up distinct Families; for we find Jacob
still commanding them, as Head of the Family, to go down and buy Corn in Egypt,
saying, Go down and buy us (that is, the whole Family, whereof they were
Members) a little food. And yet these Sons did not think their Fathers command
so absolute, but that they tell him plainly, they will not go down unless he
send Benjamin with them.

As for the other Examples of Abram's exercising the full power of a Prince in
making War and Peace, I will not deny that the Heads of separate Families,
being out of Commonwealths, have many things analogous to them, though they are
not Commonwealths themselves: And the reason why I do not allow them to be so,
is, because the ends of a Family and a Commonwealth are diverse: and so many
parts of a Monarchical Empire are not to be found in Families, yet the Heads of
such Families may notwithstanding exercise a power of Life and Death in great
Offenses, and also of making War and Peace: And this being for the good of the
Family they govern, and by their employed consents, no body will contradict him
in the exercise of this power. But this being matter of fact, does not prove an
absolute and unquestionable Right in the Father of such a Family, of doing
whatsoever he please, and that no Member of the Family has power in any case
to contradict his will; for it is rational to conceive that this Father of a
Family having had an authority over his Children and Servants (born perhaps in
his house) from their very Infancy, and if he be a wise and a good man, and
has carried himself as a good Father or Master ought to do toward them, should
even by their consents (as knowing none more worthy than himself) retain the
exercise of that Authority after they are gown up to be men; in which he cannot
be contradicted, without disorder and mischief to the whole Family: So that
indeed this submission of the Children and Servants, is by a tacit consent to
obey the Father or Master in all things tending to the common good of the
Family. But this proves not this absolute despotick power the Author contends
for, but only the most reasonable way of acting for the Families good, and
whilst the Father exercises this Authority only for that end, which when he
transgresses, his Right to govern ceases: for if this Author would have but
considered the state of some parts of Africa, he should have found, that where
the Father will exercise this absolute power, and sell his Children for slaves,
the Children make as little scruple (where they are strong enough) to put the
same trick upon their Fathers: Nor can they be justly blamed for so doing,
until any man can show me that the Father has some better Right than mere
Custom or Power.

I shall now proceed to the consideration of those other places he produces out
of Scripture, for the natural Right of Fathers to be Kings over their
Descendants. Patriarcha, p. 16.
First, As for the example of Nimrod, that makes against him; for here the
Grandson of Ham, who ought to have been a Servant to the Children of Shem and
Japhet, interrupting this Paternal Empire, domineers and tyrannizes not only
over his own Family, but the Descendants of the elder Brethren. But Sir Walter
Rawleigh (of which opinion the Author himself is) will have him to be Lord over
his own Family, by Right of Succession; but to enlarge his Empire against
Right, by seizing violently on the Rights of other Lords of Families.

But however, after the confusion of Tongues, the Author will have it revive
again; and the distinct Nations thereupon erected, were not confused Multitudes
without Heads or Governors, and at liberty to choose what Governors they
pleased; but they were distinct Families which had Fathers for Rulers over
them: whereby it plainly appears, that even in this confusion God was careful
to preserve the Fatherly Authority, by distributing the diversity of Languages
according to the diversity of Families. For so it appears by the Text, Genesis
10.5.20.22.

But these places will not prove what the Author quotes them for, viz. the
Monarchical or Kingly power of Fathers: for neither does the Scripture or
Josephus mention, that this division of the World by Noah's Posterity was
performed by the Fathers of these Families as absolute Monarchs; but it rather
seems that their Children and Descendants followed them as Volunteers, as
retaining a Reverence and Affection to their persons for their great age,
experience, and care of their Families: Which Sir Will. Temple's Essay of
Government, p. 67.
an ingenious modern Author conceives to be the natural original of all
Governments, springing from a tacit deference to the Authority of one single
person. And of this opinion is excellent Pufendorf.

And of this kind were those first Kings which Aristotle calls Heroical, whom
the People did obey of their own accord, because they deserved well of them,
and either by teaching them Arts, or by warring for them, or by gathering them
together when they were dispersed, or by dividing Lands among them. Secondly,
If it were true that these Fathers of Families were so many absolute Kings, yet
it quite destroys the Author's Hypothesis, who will have but one true Heir to
Adam, who if he could be known, had a natural Right to be Monarch of the whole
world. And though Kings now (Patriarch. p. 19.) are not the natural Parents of
their Subjects, yet they all either are, or are to be reputed Heirs to those
first Progenitors, who were at first natural Parents of the People, and in
their right succeed to the exercise of Supreme Jurisdiction; and such Heirs are
not only Lords of their own Children, but also of their Brethren, and all
others that were subject to their Fathers. Whereas we see here no such right of
Eldership observed, neither among the Sons of Noah nor their descendants; but
every one, as appears from the words of the Text, was an independent Head and
Leader of his own Family: by these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided, etc.
and by these, viz. the descendants of Shem, were the Nations divided, etc. So
likewise the other places he brings concerning the Sons of Ishmael and Esau, do
destroy the Authors notion of an Heir to the Authority of the Father, or that
any Son is more Lord of his Brethren than another. For all the Sons of Esau and
Ishmael are reckoned as so many independent Princes, or Dukes, and Lords of
distinct Territories, without any Superiority in the eldest Son, who ought by
the Authors Principle to have been absolute Lord over the rest: And if these
could divide themselves into as many distinct Governments as there were Sons,
Why might not they do so in infinitum? And then there could never be any common
Prince or Monarch set over them all, but by Force or Conquest, or else by
Election; either of which destroys the notion of the Natural Right of
Eldership. And as for the places he brings to prove it; 1. Gods words to Gain
concerning Abel, will not do it, His desires shall be subject unto thee, and
thou shall rule over him. For first, this might be spoken only personally to
Cain, and not to give a Right to all Eldest Sons. Secondly, the words do not
signify an absolute Despotick Power, but a ruling or governing by persuasion
or fair means; as when a man is ruled, that is, advised by another in his
concerns. Then as for the blessing upon Jacob by his Father Isaac, Be Lord over
thy Brethren, and let the Sons of thy Mother bow before thee, 'twas never
literally fulfilled. For Jacob was never Lord over Esau, who was a Prince of
Mount Seir in Jacob's lifetime, whilst Jacob was at best but Lord of his own
family. And as for bowing and other Rights of Superiority, we read [ Genesis
33.3.] that Jacob, at his Interview with his Brother Esau, called him Lord, and
bowed seven times to the ground before he came to him. So that this Text is no
more than a Prophecy, to show why the Jews, or descendents of Jacob, should
have Right in Aftertimes to rule over the Edomites, or Posterity of Esau.
Lastly, this Example makes against the Author: for it seems it is not the
Eldest Son, but whom the Father pleases to appoint, is Heir after his death:
Since here Esau looses his Birth right by his own act, but chiefly by his
Fathers Will.

Yet if after all, some will urge from the Principles I have laid down, that it
seems more to conduce to the happiness and peace of Families, and in that to
the great end I have before laid down, the common good of Mankind, rather to
allow this absolute Power of Life and Death to Parents over their Children, and
an absolute Subjection to them as long as they live; since Parents do usually
take that care to breed up their Children, and to have that tender Affection
toward them, that they will seldom take away their Lives, or sell them for
Slaves, or keep them so themselves, unless there be very great cause; of which
the Father only ought to be Judge, since it being the nature of most Children
to be apt to contradict and disobey their Fathers commands, or perhaps resist
them, pretending they would kill them, when they only go about to give them due
correction; And since most young people hate restraint, and love to be gadding
abroad, they having a Right by these Principles to judge when they are able to
shift for themselves, would take any slight pretense to run away from their
Father as soon as they were grown pretty big, and so perhaps leave their Parents
in their old Age, when they had no body to take care of them: whereby nothing
but confusion and quarrels would happen in Families, great mischief to the
Parents, and often ruin to the Children; who being often opiniatred, and
self-willed, would think better of their own abilities than they really
deserved. And therefore diverse Nations seeing these great Inconveniences, did
by their Laws leave Parents the Power of Life and Death over their Children.
Such were (those the Author instances in) the Persians, See Patriarcha, p. 38.
chap. 2.
Gauls, and many Nations in the West Indies: And the Romans even in their
Popular State had this Law in force: Which Power of Parents was ratified and
amplified by the Laws of the XII Tables, enabling of Parents to sell their
Children three times. And the Law of Moses gives full power to the Father to
stone his disobedient Son, so it be done in presence of a Magistrate. And yet
it did not belong to the Magistrate to inquire and examine the justness of the
cause; but it was so ordained, lest the Father should in his Anger suddenly or
secretly kill his Son.

To all which I answer, that since this Argument quits the natural Power of a
Father by Generation, and only sticks to the acquired one of education, and
appeals to the common good of Mankind; I do acknowledge it is a better than
any of the rest. Yet I think it is not true, that Parents in the state of
Nature would more seldom abuse their power, than Children would this Natural
Liberty I here allow them, of defending and providing for themselves in cases
of extreme Danger and Necessity. For this Temptation to do ill is greater on
the Fathers side, than that of the Children: For they looking on themselves as
having an absolute and unquestionable power over them, and that they may deal
with them as they please, are apt to think themselves slighted and disobeyed by
their Children, perhaps on very light occasions; and their Passion often rises
to that height (as not considering the Follies and Inconsiderateness of Youth)
that they may, if Choleric or Ill-natured, strike them with that which may
either kill them, or else cripple or maim them; and perhaps out of an
immoderate Anger, or being weary of them, murder them on purpose. And Fathers
being more apt, as having oftener occasion to be angry with their Children, than
their Children with them, it is evident to me, that in the state of Nature
(where there is no Magistrate to keep the Father in awe) Fathers will be as apt
to kill or maim their Children, as Children their Parents. And if the Fathers
(as I said before) are intended for the good and preservation of their Child;
and that where their Right ceases, the Childrens Right to preserve themselves
takes place: It seems to conduce more to the general good of Mankind, that the
Children should make use of this last refuge of defending themselves, when they
cannot otherwise preserve their Lives and Members, than that Fathers should
have such an absolute Right to deal with them as they pleased, without any
power in the Children to resist or defend themselves. So likewise Fathers being
so much older, understand their own advantage better than their Children; and
being sometimes more ill-natured, and often (by reason of their Age) more
covetous than they, may be tempted to sell their Children for Slaves, whereby
they may fall into a condition worse than Death itself; and may not the Son
then endeavor to run away, or use all lawful means possible to escape so great
a misery? Or if the Father will keep his Son as a Slave all the days of his
life, without any hopes of ever being free? For when the Father dies, the Son
(according to this Author) is to be Servant to his Eldest Brother, or to
whomever else his Father pleased to bequeath him. Is not the case the same? And
as for the quiet of the Family, which is supposed to be preserved by the Sons
absolute submission, rather than his resistance in any circumstance, I think it
would rather increase Dissentions, by encouraging of Fathers to use their Power
over their Children, not as Reason, but Drunkenness or Passion may impel them:
Whereas this Right of Children in defending their Lives, and not being obliged
to give them up at their Fathers pleasure, will rather make Parents act
moderately and discreetly toward their Children, when they know they are not
obliged to stay or bear with them upon other conditions, than that they may
enjoy their Lives in safety, and the ordinary means thereof with some comfort.
Not that I give Children any Right, as I said before, to disobey their Parents,
or resist them upon every slight occasion; but rather to bear with their
Infirmities, as far as it is possible; And to suffer diverse Hardships and
Inconveniences from them, rather than to resist or leave them; considering the
great obligation they owe them. So that I do not allow this Remedy, but in case
of extreme Necessity, yet of which the Sufferer only in the state of Nature can
be Judge; since in that state where there is no Umpire, (without both their
consents) but God only, every man is Judge when his Life is in danger.

And if the Peace of Mankind were to be procured merely by a man's Sufferance
and Submission, without any respect to this Right, then it would be his duty to
give himself up to be robbed or killed by any one who had the wickedness to
attempt it; because himself being innocent, may go to Heaven; and the other
being guilty of an intent to rob or murder, may be damned if he be killed. And
besides, it would more conduce to the preservation of Mankind, that but one
man should be lost, whereas by resistance they may both perish. Yet I suppose
no man is so sottish, as to hold he ought quit his own preservation in these
cases; or if he do hold it for discourse sake, I am sure he would not be so mad
as to observe it. For this were such an Argument, as to hold, Because some men
may abuse that Law of Self-preservation to another man's destruction; Therefore
it were unlawful to defend a man's self at all.

As for the Examples of those Nations and Commonwealths who have permitted
Fathers to exercise a Despotick Power over their Children; The Law of Nature or
right Reason, is not to be gathered from the Municipal Laws or Customs of any
particular Nation or Commonwealth, which are often different and contrary to
each other. Therefore as to the Jewish Law, though I will not say it was
contrary to the Law of Nature, yet it was extremely rigorous and severe in all
its dispensations, and does not now oblige Christian Commonwealths in this
particular, as in diverse others, much less in the state of Nature. And as for
the Romans, they saw the inconveniences of this Absolute Power, and retrenched
it by degrees, until it came to be no more than now with us, and in most
Countries of Europe. So likewise the Arguments which Bodin brings for the
absolute power of Parents over their Children, depending upon the Roman and
Jewish Law, may be easily answered from these grounds.

Having, as I hope, cleared this main point of Paternal Authority, and of
Natural Obedience, without giving an extravagant power to Parents on the one
hand to abuse their power, or a privilege to Children on the other side to be
stubborn or disobedient to their Parents; If then this Paternal Authority
extend farther than I have seated it, I shall own my self beholding to any
Friend of the Author's, or his Opinions, to show me my error. But if they
cannot, I desire they would consider, whether this natural Right of Kings which
the Author asserts precedent to any compact or civil constitution, can extend
farther than the natural Authority of Fathers, from whom they are supposed to
derive it, and on which it is founded. And if it appears that Princes have such
Power as our Fathers, then all that the Author has writ on this subject
signifies just nothing.

Therefore I shall now proceed to examine the rest of his Principles; and shall
I hope prove, that (supposing this Fatherly Power as absolute as the Author
fancies) yet that his Divine Absolute Monarchy cannot however be derived from
thence.

The Author seems to think it a Question very easy to be answered. If any one
asks what comes of this Right of Fatherhood, in case the Crown, Fatherly power,
escheat for want of an Heir, whether it fall to the People, Patriarch. P. 20.
or what else becomes of it? To which his Answer is, That it is but the
Negligence or Ignorance of the People to loose the knowledge of the true Heir;
for an Heir there is always. If Adam were still living, and now were ready to
die, it is certain that there is but one Man, and but one in the world, who is
next Heir; although the knowledge who should be that one Man be quite lost.

So that this fine Notion signifies nothing now, for Adam being dead, and his
right Heir not to be known, it is all one as if he had none; since, for ought I
know to the contrary, the Authors Footman may be the Man. But to help this, the
Author has found out a couple of Expedients, (such as they be;) The first is,
Directions for Obedience, p. 69.
That an Usurper of this Power, where the knowledge of the right Heir is lost,
being in by possession, is to be taken and reputed for the true Heir, and is to
be obeyed by them as their Father. And if this will not do, he gives us
another, and tells us, Patriarch. p. 21.
The Government in this case is not devolved upon the multitude; but the Kingly
power escheats in such cases to the Fathers and independent Heads of Families:
For every Kingdom is resolved into those parts of which it was first made.

Each of which we will examine in their turn. To begin with the former, let us
see if it be so easy a thing as the Author makes it, to know who was Adam's,
or any Monarch's right Heir (setting the Municipal Laws of the Country aside;)
so that the People cannot be excused of wilful Ignorance or Negligence, if they
loose this knowledge. Where by the way I observe, that as easy a thing as it
was to know who was Adam's right Heir, and upon whom by the Laws of God and
Nature the Crown is to descend, upon the Death of the Monarch; yet he no where
positively answers this important Question: For sometimes he is to claim by
descent, as in this instance of the Heir of Adam; sometimes by his Father's
last Will, as in the case of Noah's Sons, according as the Examples out of
Scripture do best serve his turn. So that I believe he did not either
negligently or ignorantly avoid settling this point, because he might still
have a hole left to creep out at, or else because he could do it no better than
the Instances he brings would permit.

He says, [Direct. for Obedience, page 68.] A Son is always to live under the
subjection of his Father, unless by Gods immediate appointment, or by the Grant
or Death of his Father, he become himself possessed of that Power to which he
was subject.

By which words he seems to imply, that this Power is to descend to the Eldest
Son, when his Father dies. So likewise in this Treatise we are now upon, [ P.
12.] he says, Civil Power not only in general is by Divine Institution, but
even the assignment of it specifically to the eldest Parents. By which words I
suppose he means, (if any thing) eldest Sons; though I know not why he should
limit it to Parents: for methinks it were very hard the eldest Son should
forfeit his Right, in case he were not a Parent when his Father died. So
likewise he tells us, [P. 19.] That these Heirs of this Fatherly Power, are not
only Lords of their own Children, but also of their Brethren, and all others
that were subject to their Father. Yet tells us not plainly which of the Sons
is Heir; only says a little before, That when God made choice of any special
Person to be King, he always intended that the Issue also should have the
benefit thereof. Though this general Rule was false in the case of Saul, whose
Children were disinherited by God to establish the Crown upon David and his
Line. So uncertain things are Instances drawn from Scripture without any due
consideration of the Reason of them.

But to return to the subject: I grant that it is not impossible but from the
command of a Father of a Family, who has diverse other Families under him,
there may spring a Civil Government, though the Fatherly Authority does
properly regard the Education of the Children, and the Masterly Power to
increase Riches: And though it is not changed barely by the great number of
Children or Servants; yet the difference between them is not so wide, that
there can be no transition from one to the other, unless a new Right of
Sovereign Majesty be produced by God. For if a Father of a Family being
provided of a great stock of Children and Slaves, will by way of Manumission
permit them to enjoy their own Goods and Families apart, on that condition that
they submit to his Government for their common Security; I do not see what is
wanting to the making him a Prince, if he have strength sufficient to perform
the ends of a Commonwealth. But he dying, and nominating a Successor, if his
Sons will consent to him, and confirm his Will, they may if they please; if
not, all of them, as in an Interregnum, may appoint what sort of Government
they will have for the future. Nor will the Law of Nature be violated, if the
youngest Son, having most Votes, should be elected in his Fathers stead.

I should be glad any man could demonstrate to me from the Laws of God and
Nature, that Adam's eldest Son was by the Right of Eldership to be Lord over
his Brethren, without their Election or Consent, when their Father died. Indeed
the Jewish Law allowed a pre-eminence to the Elder Brother, and that he should
have a double portion, and be reverenced by all his Brethren, expressed by this
Phrase of, Let thy Mothers Sons bow before thee: But this proves not that as
Eldest Son he had therefore a Right of exercising all that Authority, upon the
Death of their Father, over his Brethren, which his Father had before: Neither
had Jacob any such Right over Esau, though he sold his Birthright, or the
eldest or any other Son of Jacob any such Right over his Brethren; for
certainly God would not have abrogated it if they had. So that Jacob's
Authority as a Father, ended with his Life: and for any Despotick Propriety or
Dominion over them, I have already proved that the Father has none in the state
of Nature. Yet admitting he had, the Children notwithstanding would have been
free at his Death. For Servitude being a mere personal Duty, due only to the
person of him that acquired this Slave; when the person dies to whom he owed
this subjection, the Slave is free in the state of Nature, unless the Lord of
this Slave transferred his Right in him to another in his lifetime; a man's
Person not being like a brute beast, to be seized by whoever can lay hold of
him; he has no longer any obligation to serve his Children, (unless he will
make himself their Slave of his own accord.) But if it be answered, that the
Father may bequeath this Right of Dominion over his Children at his Death, by
his Will, to which of his Sons he pleased; and that he that is so constituted
by their Father, is Lord over all the rest of his Brethren; and endeavor to
prove this from Genesis the 9. verse. 25, 26, 27. where Noah cursing Canaan,
because Ham his Father had derided his nakedness, says, He shall be a Servant
unto his Brethren: I desire you would take notice, that this Answer quite gives
up the Natural Right of the Heir, or Eldest Son. 2. I suppose this rather was a
Prediction or Curse to be fulfilled in Canaan's Posterity, than upon himself.
For first, this Right was not given, as it ought to have been, over the Person
of Ham the Offender, Observat. on Grotius, p. 49, 50.
whom this Author allows to have had an equal share with his Brethren in the
division of the World, and so to have been in all Prerogatives equal with them.
Neither does he give this Right to one of them, b^ to both alike; saying both
of Shem and Japhet, that Canaan should be their Servant: which could not be
meant of his person, since that could not be divided by them both, who were
like to live at so great a distance; therefore it can only signify, that his
Descendants should be slaves to the others. And several Commentators upon this
place, do suppose that Moses related this Curse of Noah upon Ham, only to show
the Jews the Right they had to make slaves of the Canaanites, because they were
descended from Canaan. And as for the Right of bequeathing slaves by Testament,
it is much disputed whether by the Law of Nature Testaments have any force in
this case; those that have written of it, being much divided about it in the
state of Nature, since all Propriety in that state being but Occupancy or
Possession, which ceases with the life of the Occupant. Therefore since a
Testament commences only from the Testators death, who as soon as he died,
lost his Right in the Goods bequeathed, since the dead can have no interest in
any thing; neither can the Legatee sustain the person of the Testator, since
this Right ceased before that of the Legatees could begin. So that it seems to
me at present, that the power of bequeathing either the persons of men or
goods, was but a consequence of an absolute Propriety in things which arises
from Compact in a Commonwealth, as I shall hereafter prove.

Therefore out of this State, a Will cannot bind the persons of the Children or
Servants so bequeathed: And for this cause we find Abraham, Genesis 24. v. 2, 3.
binding his Servant that ruled over his House, with an Oath not to take a Wife
for his Son of the Daughters of the Land. And Genesis 49. v. 29. Jacob taking an
Oath of Joseph not to bury him in Egypt; because they doubted whether they
could oblige them to do it by their Testament. But as for the Right of
bequeathing Crowns or Kingdoms by Testament, as I will not deny but that some
Kingdoms may have been so bequeathable by their Constitution, and others become
so by Custom; yet I cannot grant that this Right belonged to the Prince or
Monarch by the Law of God or Nature, but proceeds purely from a continued
Custom of the Kingdom, or Civil Law thereof; else why had not Henry VIII, or
Edward VI, power to limit or bequeath the Crown to whom they pleased, as well
as William the Conqueror? And to look into other Countries, what now renders
Women incapable of succeeding to the Crown of France, yet capable of inheriting
that of England, Spain, and diverse other Kingdoms of Europe, but the Customs or
particular Constitutions of the Estates of these Kingdoms? which no Will or
Testament can alter. What else hinders the Grand Seignior, that he cannot
disinherit his eldest Son if he survive him, Vid. Mezeray Abrege Chron. An.
1317. Phil. le Long.
but the Custom of the Ottoman Empire? And what is this Custom, but (as the
Author himself acknowledges in the case of England) the Commom Law of the
Country, Freeholders Inquest. p. 62.
which is said to be Common Custom? Thus to protect the Customs which the
Vulgar shall choose, is to protect the Common Laws of England. So that it was
the Will of the People, and not the Prince alone, that made this a Law: for if
this Law of the Succession of the Crown depended upon his Will, then if he be
an absolute Monarch, that (when sufficiently declared) being the only Law,
might alter it when he would (...) and so he might bequeath the Crown to whom
he pleased. But every one that understands the present Laws of Descent of the
Crown of France, or the manner of Succession in the Ottoman Empire, knows that
i^ the King of France or Grand Seignior (as absolute as they are) should
bequeath their Kingdoms to any other than the right Heir, this Will would
signify nothing, and no body would obey this Successor of their appointing.
And if any man think to evade this, by saying, That the Succession of the Crown
is a Fundamental Law of the Government, and that a Prince may be Absolute, and
yet not have a power to alter that as he may every thing else; I would ask him
who made this a Fundamental Law at first, whether the King then in being, or
the King with the Consent of the People, upon the first institution of the
Government? If the King made it alone, since he is supposed to have made it at
first for the good of the People, of which he is the Judge (and is supposed in
Law never to die) why then is not he as competent a Judge of what is good for
the People now, as a King that lived a thousand years agone was what was fit
for the People then? and consequently has as much Right of altering the
Succession for the Peoples benefit, as he that established it at first, since
every Law may be altered by the same Power that made it? But if he say it is a
Fundamental Law, because long custom has made it so, then it is apparent such
a Law has its force from the Consent of the People at first or since, Custom
being nothing else. Or lastly, if he will acknowledge that the Consent of the
People was necessary to make this a Fundamental Constitution, then it can
neither be altered without their Consent; and so consequently no Princes
Testament is good as to that, farther than the People or their Representatives
give their assent thereunto: And the same Law holds in the Father of a Family,
since this Author will have no difference between him and a King, but only
secundum Magis and Minus.

If then there be no Right in the state of Nature for a Father to bequeath his
Dominion over his Children by his Testament, let us return again to that of
Descent, and see if that will prove a better foundation to build this natural
Right of Princes upon. For my part, I think that it is not only impossible to
know who was Adam's right Heir of his Fatherly Power now, after five or six
thousand years, but might likewise be as uncertain, as soon as ever the breath
was out of his body: For supposing Eve survived him, why should not her natural
Right of governing the Children which she her self brought forth (and which out
of Wedlock would have belonged to her) revive and take place before any Right
of her eldest Son; to whom upon this ground she must have become subject, if
she would continue part of the Family or natural Commonwealth, (which she could
not avoid, there being none but her Children or Grandchildren in the world) and
it being against the nature of Government to allow two Absolute Heads in the
same Family or Commonwealth? So that for ought I see, the Mother of the Family
has the best Right to the Government in the state of Nature, after the
Husbands death, upon the Authors own grounds: For if the Commandment of Honor
thy Father and thy Mother, signify more than bare Reverence and Respect, as
appears by the Apostles Exposition of this Commandment, Ephesians. 6. v. 1.
Children, obey your Parents in the Lord, which he makes the same with Honor
thy Father and thy Mother; then this Obedience which was due to the Father,
belongs likewise to her when his power ceases.

But passing over this difficulty, and allowing this Fatherly Authority to
descend to Adam's next Heir, it might have been a great Question, who this next
Heir was, supposing Cain to have been disinherited for the murder of Abel, and
to have gone away and built a City, and set up a Government by himself? Yet let
us suppose Abel left a Son behind him, who survived Adam his Grandfather; which
he might very well do, and yet the Scripture be silent in it, since the intent
of Moses in his Genealogies being only to give us the Pedigree of the Jews,
and therefore says little of his other Children but by the by. I would ask the
Author or any man else, who was Adam's Heir after his death, whether this Son
of Abel or Seth; (whom we will suppose likewise to have survived his Father?)
If he say that Adam might leave it to Seth by Will, this is gratis dictum; and
it lies upon him to prove that Adam made a Will; or if he did, how it could
bind his true Heir. If he say that Seth ought to succeed and govern his
Brethren, as being nearer in blood to Adam, what reason was there that the
eldest Son's son should be punished and lose his Birthright for that which was
not his fault, but misfortune, viz. that his Father was murdered before his
Grandfather died? Nor could Seth claim, being elder and consequently wiser than
his Nephew: for his Nephew must be older, since Seth was not born until after
Abel was killed. But if it be affirmed, that the eldest Son of Abel ought to
succeed and represent his Father; I ask, by what Law? If it be replied, that it
is to be supposed that Adam, if he had made a Will, would rather have had his
Grandson succeed him than his younger Son; this is gratis dictum, and were to
affirm that the Right of governing is bequeathable; which I have already
confuted. But if it be said, that this Son of Abels should succeed because he
represents his Father; I would ask them, by what Law this Right of
Representation should take place before propinquity of Blood? or how could the
Fathers expectation only confer a Right to his Son, in that which the Father
was never possessed of? So that there being equal Reasons on both sides, and
neither Law nor Precedent in the case, there remained no way to decide this
Controversy, but either Combat, or the Judgment or Arbitration of the rest of
Adam's Descendants. I suppose the Author will not allow the former sufficient
to confer a good Title, since the best Title might have the worst success in
that Appeal to the Sword. If he allows the latter, then this hereditary
Monarchy of Adam became Elective, and depended upon the Will of all the Heads
of the Families which descended from Adam: (For it is not likely in so doubtful
and material a point as who should govern, any of them would lose the
privilege of giving his Vote.) And if so, this Right of Succession depended
upon their Wills, which might give it to which of the two Competitors they
liked best; and this being once done, might for quietness pass into a Custom or
Law for the future. And that this Right of Representation, where the Son dies
before his Father, cannot be decided by the Law of Nature or Reason alone, is
evident, in that diverse Nations or distinct Tribes of People have had different
Customs about it, and have established this Right of Succession diverse ways:
For though the Roman or Civil Law allow of this Right of Representation, yet
the Germans and all Nations descended from them, did not admit it until very
lately; See Grotius de J. B. Li. cap. 7.
which shows there is nothing but Custom in the case. And upon this pretense
the League in France admitted the Cardinal of Bourbon King, by the name of
Charles the X, before his Nephew the King of Navar, his elder Brothers Son, who
died before him. And that this difficulty who shall succeed, the Uncle or the
Nephew, has still perplexed mankind in all Countries where the Succession has
not been settled by positive Laws or long Custom, (which is but the continued
Will of the People) may appear by those different Judgments that have been in
all Ages made on this matter: for when there arose a Controversy between
Areus, Son of Acrotatus, eldest Son to Cleomenes King of Lacedaemon, and
Cleomenes the second Son of the said Cleomenes, the Senate adjudged the Royalty
for Areus against Clomenes. But in Spain, Mariani, l. 13. c. 3.
after the death of Alphonso the V, King of Castile, the States of Spain
acknowledged his younger Son Sancho to be King, and put by Ferdinand de la
Cerda the Grandson to the late King by his eldest Son, though he had the Crown
left him by his Grandfathers Will. And when Charles the II, King of Sicily
died, Vicerius in Vita Henry 7.
and left a Grandson behind him by his eldest Son, surnamed Martel, and a
younger Son called Robert; the matter being referred to Pope Clement V, he gave
judgment for Robert the younger Son of Charles; who was thereupon proclaimed
King of Sicily. And it seems Glanvil, who was Lord Chief Justice under Henry
II, makes it a great Question who should be preferred to the Crown, the Uncle
or the Nephew. So that it was no strange thing for King John to make himself
King before his Nephew Arthur, since it was a moot point among the Lawyers of
that Age, who ought to succeed. And where no Power could intervene, it was
decided by War, and sometimes single Combats, which Historians mention to have
been waged between Uncles and Nephews contending for the Principality; and not
only in this case, but in all others where the Succession of the Empire is not
settled by such Laws or Customs, it lies continually liable to be disputed
between the Sons or Grandsons of the last Prince, nor can ever be decided but
by the Sword: Of which there is an Example in one of the greatest and most
absolute Monarchies in the world, viz. the Empire of the Mogul, where for want
of settling the Succession at first by a positive Law, See Bernier's Travels, 1
part. and Tavernier Lib. Sir Tho. Row's Embassy, Purchase part. Terrey's
Relation of Indostan.
and making the Raias, Omrahs, or great Lords give their consent to it, and
swear to observe it, and so have made and ascertained it as an inviolable
Custom (as it is in the Ottoman Empire;) now upon the death of an Emperor,
though he declare by his Will who shall be his Successor, yet the Grandees (who
are so many petty Princes, and lead the People under their Command after them
as they please) do not think themselves at all obliged to observe it, much less
to set the Crown upon the eldest Sons head; but every man is for that Son of
the last Mogul whom they like best, that is, him they conceive will suit best
with their interests and designs: Nor do the Brothers think themselves at all
obliged to yield to their eldest Brother, whom they are assured will put them
to death, or make them perpetual Prisoners. So that every one provides for
himself, and makes his Party as strong as he can by Gifts and Promises among
the Grandees, against his Fathers death. Nay, lately this prize has been
played among the Sons even in their Fathers lifetime, as in the case of the
late Sha-Jehan, who lived to see all his Sons killed, and his person made a
prisoner by his youngest Son Aureng Zebe, who is for ought I know, Mogul at
this day. And if any man thinks this only an Evil peculiar to this Empire, and
not to others, let him but read the Histories of the several Revolutions and
Changes in all Moorish and Eastern Monarchies, and he shall find them managed
much after the same rate. Nor has these differences only divided these
Monarchies where the Succession was never well settled at first, but even those
that have been better constituted, and where one would belieev the Descent of
the Crown had been sufficiently settled by a long Descent of Kings for many
hundreds of years. And of this, Scotland has been a famous Example; where
after the death of King Alexander III, and his Grandaughter Margaret of Norway,
two or three several Competitors claimed a Right to succeed: But omitting
others, it was agreed that it lay between John Baylliol, and Robert Bruce Earl
of Carick; both of them drawing their Descent from David Earl of Huntingdon,
Great Uncle to the last King (in whom they all agreed the Right to the Crown
would have been, had he survived.) Baylliol claimed, as eldest Son to
Dornagilla, Grandaughter to Margaret the eldest Daughter of the said Earl
David. Robert Bruce claimed, as eldest Son of Isabel the second Daughter of the
said David. So that if Baylliol alleged his Descent from the eldest Daughter,
Bruce was not behind-hand; but pleaded, though it was true he was descended but
from the second Daughter, yet he being a Grandson, and a degree nearer, ought
to succeed; (whereas Baylliol was but great Grandson to Earl David:) And though
Dornagilla, Baylliol's Mother, was in the same degree with himself, yet he
being a man, ought to be preferred before a woman in the same Line; and that if
the Laws of Scotland would have given it to Dornagilla, if it had been an
ordinary Inheritance, yet Descent of the Crown was not to be ruled by the
Common Laws of other Inheritances. In short, this Dispute did so divide the
Nobility into Factions, and puzzle the Estates of the Kingdom, that not being
able to decide it, they and all the Competitors agreed to refer the
Controversy to Edward I. King of England, one of the wisest and most powerful
Princes of his time; who upon long advice and debate with twelve of the
learnedest men of both Kingdoms, at last adjudged the Crown to Baylliol; or, as
the Scotch Historians relate, because he would do him Homage for it: which,
Bruce being of a higher spirit, refused. Yet this did not put an end to this
great Controversy; for though Baylliol was thereupon admitted King, yet
falling out not long after with King Edward, to whom he owed all his greatness,
and having the worst of it, the Nobility and States of Scotland revived Bruce's
Title, and declared him King; who after a long War with England, enjoyed the
Crown quietly at last, and left it to his Issue, whose Posterity (in our
present King) enjoy it to this day.

To this I shall add one Example more from Portugal within these hundred
years. King Henry called the Cardinal dying without Issue, there was a great
Controversy who should succeed; (for he died suddenly just as the States of
the Kingdom were assembled to settle the Succession, for he declared himself
unable to decide it:) So that he only left by his Will twelve Governors of
the Kingdom, who should govern during the interregnum, but that the Crown
should descend to him that should appear to them to have the best Title. Four
eminent Competitors put in their claims: 1. Antonio called the Bastard, who
nevertheless pretended that he was lawful Son to Don Lewis, second Brother to
Henry the last King: So that he had no more to do but to prove himself
Legitimate. 2. Alexander Duke of Parma, who claimed as Grandson to Mary, eldest
Daughter to Don Duarte, youngest Brother to the last King Henry, and Son to
King Emanuel. 3. The Duke of Braganza, who claimed as Son to Katherine, second
Daughter of the said Don Duarte, yet alleged his Title to be best, because he
was the next of the Bloud-Royal who was a Native of Portugal (as the Heir of
the Crown, as he pretended, ought to be by a Fundamental Law of that Kingdom:)
yet it seems that Law was not then so well known, or otherwise there was no
reason why these Governors should not have admitted him King as soon as ever
they met. 4. Philip the second, King of Spain, who claimed as Son to Isabella
Daughter of Emanuel King of Portugal, and so a degree nearer than the rest to
Henry the last King. The States and Governors differing, the States were
dissolved; and during their recess, the Governors not agreeing among
themselves, the King of Spain raised an Army, and entering Portugal, seized the
City of Lisbon, and consequently all the rest of the Kingdom submitted to him,
and so made himself King by force. And yet we have seen in his Grandson's time,
the Estates of Portugal declare this Title void, and the Crown settled in the
Posterity of the Duke of Braganza, who still enjoy it by virtue of this
Fundamental Law. And that this Fundamental Law could not be altered but by the
consent of the Cortes or States, appears by the late Alteration of this
Constitution upon the Treaty of Marriage of the present Prince Regents Daughter
with the Duke of Savoy. And how much even Kings themselves have attributed to
the Authority of their Estates, appears by the League made between Philip the
Long King of France, and David King of Scots; wherein this Condition was
expressed, That if there should happen any difference about the Succession in
either of these Realms, he of the two Kings which remained alive, should not
suffer any to place himself on the Throne, but him who should have the Judgment
of the Estates of his side; and then he should with all his power oppose him
who would after this contest for the Crown. So that our Author, without cause,
lays the fault upon the wilful ignorance of the People in not remembering or
acknowledging the right Heir of the Crown; when the ablest and wisest men of
the Age they lived in could not by the mere Laws of Nature and Reason,
determine which was he: And our Author should have done well to have set down
some certain Rules, how the People might be assured, without a positive Law
before made, that they acknowledge the right Heir, and not an Usurper to his
prejudice.

CHAP. II. Observations on the Directions for Obedience in doubtful times, and
other places of his Patriarcha, and other Treatises.
BUT since this Author, rather than the disposal of a Crown shall fall to the
decision of the People, or States of the Kingdom, will give an Usurper a good
Right to it against all persons but him that has the Right; we will now
examine how much of that is true which he lays down in his Directions for
Obedience to Governors in doubtful times, and how far men are bound in
Conscience to obey an Usurper, whilst he that has Right is kept out by him.
First, he takes it for granted, that all those that so eagerly strive for an
original Power to be in the People, do with one accord acknowledge that
originally the Supreme Power was in the Fatherhood, Vid. Mezeray Abrege Chron.
An. 1318.
and that the first Kings were Fathers of Families; which if granted, yet will
not prove that this proceeded from that natural perpetual subjection which
Children owe their Parents; or that because they are Parents, they are
therefore Lords and Kings over them: So that this being the Groundwork of
whatever he says in this Discourse, p. 67. if this be faulty (as I hope I have
proved it to be) all that he builds upon this foundation, signifies nothing.
Secondly, he assumes that this Paternal power cannot be lost; it may be
transferred or usurped, but never lost, or cease -- But as the power of the
Father may be lawfully transferred or aliened, so it may be unjustly usurped;
and in Usurpation the Title of the Usurper is before and better than the Title
of any other than him that had a former Right: for he has a possession by the
permissive Will of God, which permission how long it will last, no man
ordinarily knows; every man is to preserve his own life for the service of God,
and of his King or Father: and is so far to obey an Usurper, as may tend not
only to the preservation of his King and Father, but sometimes even of the
Usurper himself, when probably he may he thereby preserved to the correction or
mercy of his true Superior. And though by humane Law a long Prescription may
take away a Right, yet divine Right never dies, nor can be lost or taken away.
The same he says p. 70. That in Grants and Gifts that have their original from
God or Nature (as the power of the Father has) no inferior power of man can
limit nor make any Prescription against them. Upon this ground is built that
Maxim, That Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, no time bars a King. Which second
assumption is likewise false: for I have already proved that all Fatherly power
ceases with the life of the Father, as Motherly power with the life of the
Mother; or else in the state of Nature a man must be left like other Cattle, to
be picked up and marked by whoever can first seize him. And secondly, that it is
false that this power and authority of a Father can be transferred to, or
usurped by another; or that the Son owes the person to whom his Father
transfers or sells him, any other duty than as his Assignee performs the Office
of a Father toward him. Much less that an Usurper acquires any Right over the
person of the Son in the state of Nature: for otherwise if a Thief should
procure strength enough to drive a Master of a separate Family out of doors,
and so this Rogue could subdue the whole House, and set up for Lord and Master
of it, that then the Wife, and Children, and Servants, were immediately bound
to obey him, because he has a possession, and is in by the permissive Will of
God, and so has a better Right than any body else, but the Master himself. It
is true indeed, in this case every Member of this Family is bound to preserve
his own life, and may yield a passive Obedience to this Rogue, for fear of his
power, and as far as he thinks it will conduce to his preservation; but I do
not see any obligation he has from Conscience or Reason, to obey this Robber
farther than as he cannot help it, but may take the first opportunity to drive
him out of the House, and call in his true Father or Master; unless he has
made him any promise to be quiet and not assault him, for then he is in the
same state with a Prisoner upon parol: for all Writers on this subject, hold
that nothing but a lawful War can give any man a Right over the person of
another, unless he become his Servant by some voluntary act of his own; or
otherwise the Slaves taken by the Argter-Pyrates were in a sad case, for they
were bound in Conscience never to escape, without the consent of their Masters.
Nor upon the Authors principles, is there any difference between a Father of a
Family, in the state of Nature, and a Prince, since he tells us more than once,
that a Kingdom is but a large Family: And consequently no difference between an
Usurper of the Fatherly power, and that of a Monarch; only the Rogue that
usurped the one, could call himself but Master of the Family; but the other
would style himself King, Emperor, o^ Protector. Nor will the place of St.
Paul, Romans 13. v. 1. oblige any man in this case: for though it is said, that
St. Paul wrote this Epistle, Nero an Usurper being Emperor of Rome; I deny
that Nero was an Usurper: for though it is true that Claudius left a Son, yet
since by the Roman Law a man might make whom he pleased his Son by Adoption,
which Son so adopted was in all respects looked upon as the true Heir of the
adopting Father, and Nero was so adopted by Claudius; and so being elder than
his own Son Germanicus, would succeed before him. Tacit Annal. 12. c. 25, 26.
And besides, the Adoption being confirmed and passed into a Law by the Senate,
Nero was as truly Claudius's Son by the Roman Law, as Britannicus himself. So
that an Usurper has at first no better Right than another: For Gods permitting
a wicked act to be done, as a Banditi or Pyrate to take a man Prisoner, does
not therefore confer on this Thief or Pyrate any Right over a man's person. So
that the instance the Author gives, p. 73. will not hold, That Usurpers have
such a qualified Right to govern, as is in Thieves who have stolen Goods, and
during the time they are possessed of them, have a Title in Law against all
others but the true Owners; and so such Usurpers, to diverse intents and
purposes, may be obeyed: For first, this is no Law of Nature or Reason, but
only a positive Law of England; where, for the avoiding of perpetual violence
and strife, and for the better securing of Property, they have made possession
even in Thieves to confer a Temporary Right against all but the true
Proprietor: Whereas in the state of Nature, a Thief by invading another man's
Goods unjustly, and taking them away by violence, becomes an Enemy to all
Mankind; and so may lawfully be killed, or have what he has so possessed taken
from him by any other. Secondly, Neither does the parallel between the
possession of Goods, and that of a Kingdom, hold: for Goods may be possessed by
the first Occupant; but Government, which is an Authority over the person of a
man can never be seized, since a man without his own act or consent can never
lawfully fall into the power or possession of another (as I have already
proved:) So that I know not to what purpose this Treatise of the Authors could
serve, but to make all men obliged in Conscience to yield not only a passive
but an active Obedience to all the Commands of Cromwell and the Rump, not only
in things lawful and necessary, but indifferent ones too, p. 74. in which
consists all Obedience, since all the Authority, even of lawful Powers, extends
only to indifferent things; all other actions being sufficiently settled by the
Law of God or Nature.

But the Author perceiving this difficulty, endeavors to extricate himself, by
saying, p. 75. That though granting in things indifferent, an Usurper may be
obeyed as well as a lawful Prince, yet that it does not therefore follow that
there is as much Obedience due to an usurped Power as a lawful; but that herein
lies a main difference between them, that some things are indifferent for a
lawful Superior, which are not indifferent but unlawful for an Usurper to
enjoin. Usurpation is the resisting and taking away the Power from him who had
such a former Right to govern the Usurper, as cannot lawfully be taken away. So
that it cannot be just for an Usurper to take advantage of his own unlawful
act, or create himself a Title by continuation of his own Injustice. And if it
c^ never be an act indifferent for the Usurper to disobey his lawful Sovereign,
much less can it be indifferent for him to command another to do that to which
he has no Right himself. It is only then a matter indifferent for an Usurper
to command another when the actions enjoined are such as the lawful Superior
is commanded by the Law of God to provide for the benefit of his Subjects, by
the same or the like restrictions of such indifferent things; and it is to be
presumed, if he had not been hindered, would have commanded the same or the
like Laws.

Let us now see how far this distinction will serve his turn. I should in the
first place be glad to know what he means by these words, lawful Sovereign or
Superior: If he means such a Superior who was particularly appointed by God,
God never since David and Solomon expressly appointed a King in any Nation.
Secondly, If one who was elected by the People, or whose possession is
confirmed by their acknowledgement publicly declared, and so passed into a
Law; this were to set up what he so much abhors, an elective King, who must
claim by Law. If by lawful, he means such a one who upon a bare possession,
has by his own power alone made a Law declaring himself to be the lawful
Superior; this Law is unlawful for him to make, or for the Subjects to obey:
And if it be such a one to whom possession gave a Right (as he will have it)
being in possession by the permissive Will of God, though at first an Usurper;
Why has not this second Usurper as good a Title to take the Government from
the former, as he or his Ancestors had to take it from him that had it before?
But indeed Occupancy only confers a Right in the state of Nature to such
things as are merely necessary for a man's subsistence; but Government is an
Office of Trust and Power, and which the Usurper might very well have lived
without: And why should a bare possession of this, though of three or four
hundred years, confer a better Right than that of a year or two? for this last
possession seems, according to the Authors principles, to be the better Title.
For he says, a little before, p. 69. That the first Usurper has the best
Title, being now in by the permissive Will of God: And if so, may not the last
Usurper use the like Argument, since he tells us, p. 67. That this last Usurper
has a better Title than any other, except him who had a former Right; for he
has a possession by the permissive Will of God: which permission how long it
may endure, no man ordinarily knows? Now which is best, a Right which once a
man only had by the permissive Will of God, but is now ended (God having
otherwise declared himself,) or a present possession which he has by the same
permissive Will; which when it will have an end, no body knows? But if he
answers, as he does, p. 69. That this Usurper is only then to be obeyed and
reputed by the Subjects for the true Heir, where he has continued so long that
the knowledge of the right Heir is lost by all the Subjects; for no man has an
infallible certainty, but only a moral knowledge, which is no other than a
probable Persuasion grounded on a peaceable Possession; which is a Warrant for
Subjection to Parents and Governors: I know not what the Author means here by
true Heir, and as little when he will have this knowledge to be lost. If he
means by right Heir, the Son or descendant of the first Usurper, I should be
glad to know how he that had no Right himself, could confer a Title upon
another; or by what Law his Son had a Right to succeed him? If by the consent
of the People, this were to grant that which he before denies as at all
necessary to any Princes Title. If because he or his Descendants have an
uninterrupted long possession, the difficulty still remains, how this long
possession can confer a Right, for the Reasons already given. But if it be said
that the Heir of this Usurper has a better Right than any body else, as having
possession, and that it were destructive to the Peace of the Commonwealth to
put him out, after so long an enjoyment of the Crown: it is true, this were a
good Argument not to make any alteration in the Government, as it is settled;
but they must likewise consider, that the same may be as well made use of by
the last Usurper and his Party, since he having now the possession in as full a
manner as he that had it before, cannot perhaps be put out of it, without
involving the Nation in a tedious bloody War. It is likewise as uncertain, when
the knowledge of this right Heir of the first Usurper shall be said to be lost
by all the Subjects. If he means personal knowledge, when all the people that
could remember the Prince that was turned out are dead, and none left alive
that certainly know who is his next Heir, the Right of this true Heir will
quickly be lost in one Generation: but if he means a traditional moral
knowledge (as he seems to do) then this can never be lost as long as there is
any Authentic or Historical Tradition of the Descent of this Heir; which
Tradition may be continued for a thousand years together: during all which
time, the Princes that succeed being Heirs of such Usurpers, can never require
a perfect Right to their Crowns, the Author holding it an undoubted truth, p.
60. That though Prescription may take away a common Right, yet divine Right (or
that to a Crown) never dies, or can be taken away thereby. And upon this ground
the common Maxim is built, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. So that as long as
this kind of moral knowledge of this right Heir can be had from any Authentic
History or Record, the Prince in being has only a Right from Possession, and
can never create himself a Title by the continuation of his own Injustice, or
command any of his Subjects to fight against this true Heir, since they are to
obey this Usurper, (p. 72.) or his Heirs, only in such things as tend to their
own preservation, and not to the destruction of the true Governor. By which
Principle, the Author at once renders the Titles of all the Crowns in Europe
disputable, and all Allegiance uncertain and questionable by their Subjects; as
I shall show in several instances, as I shall prove from Histories of
unquestionable credit. I shall begin with our own Country, England. If
therefore, as the Author will have it, p. 69. the Usurper is only then to be
taken for the true Heir, when the knowledge of the right Heir is lost by all
the Subjects; it will follow, that all the Kings and Queens that reigned in
England until the coming in of K. James, were Usurpers: for the Right of
Succession to the Crown of England, could not be obtained by Conquest alone.
(And I suppose this Author does not allow it to be bequeathable by Will) as
long as the right Heir was in being, and could be known from authentic
Histories and Traditions. Now the Right of the Crown by Descent belonging,
after the death of Edward the Confessor, to Edgar Atheling his Cosen; he dying
without Issue, the Right fell to Mawd his Sister, who married Malcolm III,
Buchanan de Rebus Scoticus, lib. 7.
King of Scotland; and though her Daughter Mawd was married to Henry the first,
King of England, from whom all our Kings are descended, yet the Right was not
in her, but in Edgar King of Scotland, her Brother, from whom all the Kings of
Scotland to King James were descended. It is true, the Kings of Scotland were
too wise ever to set up this Title, because they knew the Norman Race were
quietly possessed of the Throne, and had been admitted and confirmed for lawful
Kings by many great Councils or Assemblies of the Clergy, Nobility, and People:
yet did not this absolve the People, who might very well retain the traditional
knowledge of this right Heir; For divine Right never dies, nor can be lost or
taken away, or barred by Prescription. So that all Laws which were made to
confirm the Crown either to Henry I. or any of his Descendants, were absolutely
void and unlawful, by our Authors principles; and so likewise all Wars made
against the King of Scotland in person, were absolutely sinful and unlawful,
since (according to this Authors principle) the command of an Usurper is not to
be obeyed in any thing tending to the destruction of the person of the true
Governor. So by the same Principle, all Laws made in France about the
Succession of the Crown, are absolutely void: and it would be a mortal sin in
the French Nation to resist any King of England of this Line, if he should make
War in person upon the French King then in being, since according to the
ancient Laws of Descent in that Kingdom, he is true Heir of the Crown of
France. Nor can the French here plead ignorance, since there is scarce a
Peasant there but knows our King styles himself King of France, and quarters
the Arms of that Kingdom; and so ought to understand the justness of his Title.
So likewise in Spain, Mariana de Rebus, Hisp. lib. 13, cap. 7.
all the Kings of Castile are likewise by this Rule Usurpers, since the time of
Sancho III, who succeeded to the Crown after the death of Alphonso V his
Father, who had bequeathed it to Alphonso and Ferdinand de la Cerda, his
Grandsons by Ferdinand his eldest Son, who died before him: Yet notwithstanding
this Testament, and their Right, as representing their Father the elder
Brother, Sancho their Uncle was admitted as King by the Estates of Castile; and
his Descendants hold that Kingdom by no better Right to this day. Nor is this a
thing stale or forgotten; for the Dukes of Medina Coeli, on whom (by Marriage
of the Heiress of the House de la Cerda) the right descends, do constantly put
in their Claim upon the death of every King of Spain; and the answer is, The
place is full. Nor can those of this Author's opinion plead possession, or the
several Laws that have been made to confirm the Crown to the first Usurpers and
their Descendants: for it will be replied out of this Author, p. 70. That the
right Heir having the Fatherly Power in him, and so having his Authority from
God, no inferior Power can make any Law of Prescription against him, and
Nullum tempus ocurrit Regi: And this were to make the Crown elective and
disposable according to the Will of the Estates or People. I shall now return
to the Author's distinction, and show that his distinguishing the Laws or
Commands of Usurpers into indifferent or not indifferent, signifies nothing:
for suppose that an Usurper, as several have been in England and other
Kingdoms, either dares not, or thinks it not for his interest to alter the form
of the Government, but is contented for his own safety to govern upon the same
Terms his Predecessors did, and so will not raise any Money, or make new Laws
without the consent of the Estates, whom he summons for that purpose; Now they
must either obey his Writs of Summons, or they must not: if they do not obey
them, he will perhaps be encouraged to take their Goods by force (perhaps by a
standing Army which he may have ready in pay) and then say it is long of their
own stubbornness, who would not give it him freely when they might have done
it; and they shall likewise be without these good Laws the Author supposes he
may make: but if they meet, he will not let them sit, unless they first by some
Oath or Recognition acknowledge his Title to be good, and own him as their
lawful Prince. Now what shall they do in this case? they must either lose their
Liberties, and alter the form of the Government, or acknowledge him to the
prejudice of their lawful Prince. But if the Laws are once made, and they
appear evidently for the good of the Commonwealth, they then are no longer
indifferent, since all private Interests are to give place to the public Good
of the Commonwealth; since in the instance before given of the Father of a
Family's being driven out of doors by a Robber, no doubt but every Member of
the Family ought to obey this Rogue in case the house should be on fire or
ready to fall, and he would take upon him to give orders for the quenching or
securing it from falling; for they did this not to own his Authority, but from
the obligation they owe to their Father or Master, who would have done the
same, had he been at home. So to obey Laws made by an Usurper that tend to the
apparent benefit of the Commonwealth, is not to acknowledge these usurped
Powers as lawful. I do less understand the force of another distinction he
makes use of, p. 155. That an Usurper is so far to be obeyed, as may tend to
the preservation of a man's King and Father, nay sometimes even to the
preservation of the Usurper himself; when probably he may thereby be reserved
to the correction or mercy of his true Superior. For how Obedience to an
Usurper can tend to the preservation of the lawful Prince, I understand not.
And as for the other instance of preserving the person of the Usurper for the
mercy or correction of the true Superior, it had been a very good pretense for
Obedience to Cromwell and the Rump; nay, to fight for them, since this was but
to preserve them for his Majesty's mercy or correction another time, though
their Power might have continued until now; since they had a Possession by the
permissive Will of God, which how long it would endure, no body could tell.
Such untoward things are Arguments drawn from false Principles, that they fly
in the faces of those that make use of them, and will either reduce them to
absurdities, or else prove weapons against themselves.

But I shall now come to his last Refuge, when he can no longer evade, but that
by the Peoples ignorance of Adam's right Heir, or of the Heirs to the last
Prince, the supreme Power is devolved upon the People, who may choose what kind
of Government they please, ( Patriarch. p. 21.) This he denies, saying, [ That
in such cases the Kingly Power escheats to the Fathers or independent Heads of
Families. The same Answer he gives to this Objection in his Anarchy of a
limited Monarchy, p. 272. where he replies (very pleasantly) That no King can
die without an Heir, as long as there is one man living in the world; it may be
the Heir may be unknown to the People, but that is no fault in Nature, but the
negligence of the People whom it concerns.] So that it seems the next Heir
being often not to be known, any man, when the Prince dies, may step into the
Throne; and if he have Power enough, is next Heir: for a King can never die
without an Heir, as long as any one man is left alive in the world; and who can
disprove him that he is not the man? So that the power he has given to his
Masters of Families to choose an Heir, or one to ease them of their Fatherly
Power, signifies nothing: For this Usurper that can first seize it, may be
right Heir to Adam for ought any body knows. And certainly having Possession,
which is the permissive will of God, he has a better Right than any other, as
we have often heard before: And are told farther in the Anarchy of a limited
Monarchy, p. 273. That if the true Heir of the Crown come to be dispossessed,
in such cases the Subjects Obedience to the Fatherly Power must go along and
wait upon Gods Providence; who only has Right to give and take away Kingdoms,
and thereby adopt Subjects into the Obedience of another Fatherly Power. So
that Man is not only a Creature who is his Goods that can first catch him,
but, according to this Author, is in a worse condition than Brutes: for whereas
if a Dog be taken up by a Stranger, and a Collar clapped about his neck, and so
led away, it is left to Jowler's discretion how far he will obey his new
Master; and as he may either stay with him, if he likes his Quarters, and finds
himself well used, so surely he may without any sin, know his halter (nay bite
the fingers of this Usurper of his Liberty) and run away. But poor Man does not
only fall to the first Occupant, whom he may not either obey or disobey, as he
finds it most conduce to his interest and preservation, but is peg'd down to an
absolute Obedience, and obliged in Conscience to obey this Usurper (let him use
him well or ill) with the same respect and duty as if he were his Father: Which
I think God was a better friend to Mankind than ever to intend. But to return
to the subject from whence we digressed, our Author, for fear he should seem by
admission of a Power in Fathers of Families to choose a Head or Prince over
them, Anarchy of limited Monarchy, p. 272.
and to have granted it to them as the whole People, he distinguishes, saying,
It does not escheat to the whole People, but only to the supreme Heads and
Fathers of Families; not as they are the People, but quatenus Fathers of the
People, over whom they have a supreaem Power devolved unto them after the death
of their Sovereign. Chief Fathers in Scripture are accounted all the People, as
all the Children of Israel, as all the Congregation, as the Text plainly
expounds it self, 2 Chronicles. 1.2. where Solomon speaks to all Israel, that is, to
the Captains, the Judges, and to every Governor, the chief of the Fathers; and
so the Elders of Israel are expounded to be the Chief of the Fathers of the
Children of Israel, 1 King. 8.1. and 2 Chronicles. 5.2.

By all which it appears, that the Author allows in this case the Government
escheats to part, but not to all the People, or whole multitude of Men, Women,
and Children taken together, to choose what Government they please. And indeed
in this sense there was never any Democracy or Government of the People in
nature: for though a Democracy may be defined to be that kind of Government
where the supreme Power is in a Council or Assembly consisting of all the
Citizens: And although it does not less concern the Women and Children in that
kind of Government to be happier than in others, yet who ever thought it a new
sort of Commonwealth, and not a perfect Democracy, though Women, Children, and
Slaves were excluded the public Councils and Assemblies? And therefore if it
be esteemed a perfect Democracy (and was so at Athens, which all must grant to
have been so) where only Free men, or at their own dispose, and such who were
supposed at first to have by their meeting together instituted this Government,
which is likewise continued by those who have succeeded into their Places and
Rights: I see no reason why these should not be looked upon as representing the
whole promiscuous body of the People, to whom the Power devolves upon the want
of a Successor. For it is likely that Commonwealths were first instituted by
Fathers of Families, having Wives, Children, and Slaves under their Domestic
Government; whom nevertheless they would neither equal with themselves, by
admitting them to a Vote in the Government, neither yet would abdicate their
power over them. But then the Author urges, Anarchy of a limited Monarchy, p.
270, 271.
If Infants and Children be concluded by the Votes of their Parents, this
destroys the whole Cause: for if it be allowed that the Acts of Parents bind
their Children, then farewell the Doctrine of the natural freedom of Mankind.
Where subjection of Children to Parents is natural, there can be no natural
freedom: and if any reply, that all Children shall not be bound by their
Parents consents, but only those that are under age; it must be considered,
that in Nature there is no Nonage. If a man be not born free, she does not
assign him any othere time when he shall attain his freedom: or if she did,
then Children attaining that age, should be discharged of their Parents
contract. So that in conclusion, if it be imagined that the People were but
once free from subjection by Nature, it will prove a mere impossibility ever
lawfully to introduce any kind of Government whatsoever, without apparent wrong
to a multitude of People. It is farther observable, that ordinarily Children
and Servants are a far greater number than Parents and Masters; and for the
major part of these to be able to vote and appoint what Government or
Governors their Fathers and Masters shall be subject to, is most unnatural,
and in effect to give the Children the government over their Parents.

To which Objection I reply, 1. That the Author is here mistaken, and that
there is really an Age of Nonage in nature (as has been already proved) in
which though the Child be indeed free, yet (by reason of his own want of
strength and discretion to judge what is necessary for his own good and
preservation) is obliged to submit himself to his Parents judgment in all
things conducing to that end. 2. That Children, neither Infants or others, are
obliged to the Acts or Agreements of their Ancestors in the state of Nature,
farther than it conduces to their benefit or preservation. So that if a married
man out of a Commonwealth, should sell or yield himself to a Master of a Family
for a Slave, upon condition that his Master should provide him all the
necessaries of life (without which such a grant or sale of a man's self cannot
be supposed good) certainly if he had then no Children, this could not bind his
Issue that was to be born, so that they should be perpetual Slaves to all
Generations; since natural Equity, and the favor of Liberty, will interpret,
that the Aliment which the Master affords the Children of this Slave, are
understood to be contained under that provision which the Master is obliged to
make for him and his, by virtue of their Contract. Or admit that there was no
express provision made in the Conditions for the maintenance of the Children,
yet in this case, I see no Right the Master can claim in the persons of these
Children, longer than 'till he has satisfied himself out of their labor for
the charges he has been at in feeding and providing for them; which may very
well be by twenty five years of age (as I have already proved.) So that about
that time I see no reason why such Children may not lawfully shift for
themselves, if they do not like their Master. And if any Friend of theirs
undertake to satisfy their Master before that time, I think they are free,
though he should refuse to accept it, since it was lawfully tendered. Indeed
for Slaves taken in a just War, there may be some appearance of reason, why
their Children should also be Slaves, since the Parents accepted of their lives
upon that condition that they should live in perpetual servitude, and their
Master undertook to maintain them upon no other consideration: So that these
Children do implicitly owe their lives to their Master, since he might by the
Laws of War have slain their Parents, and so they could never have been born.
But I will not assert, that even this slavery is perpetual in relation to the
Children: But as for Subjects, though they are not directly or expressly bound
by the Acts or Consents of their Ancestors, who first instituted the
Government, yet indirectly or consequentially they are obliged to stand to what
their Ancestors have done; For since, as I said before, no man will deny to
accept of the Promise or Conditions of his Ancestor, if it be for his
advantage, and since the Institution of Government was for the common good of
mankind in general; so this or that particular Government being for the
preservation and security of every Subject that enjoys the privileges thereof,
no man can believe that the Posterity of those that first instituted this
Government, will go about to undo what their Ancestors have done so much for
their benefit, and reduce all things to the state of Nature again. So that as
long as they submit to, and enjoy the benefits of the Government which was
first established by the consent of their Forefathers, they are supposed to
yield a tacit Assent to those Compacts which they long since made, and
implicitly become Subjects to that Government under which they were born. So
that those that first instituted Government in any Country, have no necessity
expressly to promise or engage for the Subjection and Obedience of their
Children, or those who should succeed them. And if any private persons will not
own this Government, and so take upon to resist it, pretending they are not
obliged by the Compacts of their Forefathers to obey it as established by them;
such persons, if they enter into a state of War, or make Confederacies to that
end, may justly be looked upon as Enemies to the Government, and punished
accordingly, since they will go about to disturb the common Peace and
Tranquillity of the Nation for their own private Discontents or Advantage: for
the People being once entered into Society, can never be supposed to alter their
Judgments all at once without very good cause, much less to die, though the
particular persons that constituted it do: for as a River is still esteemed the
same as long as the water runs in the same Channel, though the same individual
water never stays in the same place, but one part still pushes out another; so
those are not less to be esteemed in the politic capacity (of a Civil State)
the same people, than those by whom the Commonwealth was at first founded. And
though it is true that Governments may have been at first begun by Fathers of
Families and other Freemen, who first submitted their Wills to that of one
person or more, and so the Women, Children, and Servants, who had had no Votes
in its Institution, might be supposed as represented by their Husbands,
Fathers, and Masters: And since they enjoy all the common benefits of the
Commonwealth, and are likewise capable of enjoying all those privileges and
advantages which are proper and peculiar to Free Subjects, whenever they come
to be at their own disposal, and that they owe their breeding up and
preservation to its protection; they may well be looked upon as under an higher
Obligation in Conscience and Gratitude to this Government, than Strangers of
another Country, who only staying there for a time to pursue their own
Occasions, and having no Right to the same privileges and advantages of the
Commonwealth, do only owe a passive obedience to its Laws.

But to let you see more plainly, that upon such a devolution of the Government
as the Author grants, not only the Masters of Families, as Fathers, ought to
have Votes, but all others that are at their own dispose; I will ask any of his
opinion, what he thinks of a single man living in a house alone, or with a
Wife, without either Children or Servants, or perhaps boarding in another man's
house for their money, why they should not have Votes as well as those that are
his independent Fathers and Masters? I can see no reason, nor I believe they
neither. So though the Author by the words Supreme and Independent Heads of
Families, seems to exclude all Sons from having Votes whilst their Fathers are
alive, although they are married, and have separated into distinct Families;
yet since I have proved that neither Paternal Authority nor Filial Subjection
is absolute or perpetual in the state of Nature (into which the Commonwealth is
by the death of the Prince now supposed to be resolved) and if it were
otherwise, yet unless they will void all those Laws and Constitutions that have
been before settled both for descent of Inheritances, and the distinguishing of
Property. So that if these Laws stand in force during this interregnum (unless
they will fall to absolute confusion) these Sons so making diverse Families, and
having Estates distinct from their Fathers, ought likewise to have Votes in the
Government, upon the Authors own principles, since the Laws of the Country
have set them free from all Paternal subjection, more than what the Rules of
Piety and Gratitude oblige them to. And as for such Sons as (though of mature
age, yet) remain as Servants in their Fathers Families, and so are under a
greater subjection than those that are separated from it; I see no reason why
they may not appoint their Father, as him they could best trust, to vote for
them, and represent them in the choice of a Governor; and then they are as
much obliged as any man can be by the act of a person whom he has empowered to
act for him, or as these Fathers of Families would be by Representatives of
their own choosing: it being morally impossible, if this devolution of the
Government should happen in a populous Country, for all the Authors independent
Heads or Fathers of Families, ever to meet in Person to choose a King; these
being vastly numerous, and divided from each other at great distances. Anarchy
of a mixed Monarch. p. 269
So that all the Author's Objections against a mixed Popular Election will prove
as strong against this of Fathers alone: For how, except by some secret
miraculous instinct, should they all meet at one time and place? What one Head
of a Family or Company, less than the whole Body of these Fathers of the
People, can have power to appoint either time or place of Election, where they
are all free and independent by Nature? and without a lawful Summons, it is
most unjust to bind those that are absent. So neither can the whole Body of
the Fathers of Families summon it self: One man is sick, another is lame, a
third is aged, and a fourth (though a Father of a Family, may be under years of
discretion, or not in his right senses) and many more may have business of
their own which they cannot leave, to run two or three hundred miles up to the
chief City to choose a King. So that either the People may elect, or else his
Fathers of Families cannot, for the same reasons. And if the major part of
these Fathers should agree to choose Representatives, how can this Agreement of
the major part bind the minor that did not consent, Patriarcha, page 44. Where
the Arguments against Elections by a major part, are proposed at large.
since according to the Authors principles, in Assemblies that take their
original from the Law of Nature, no one man or multitude can give away the
Right of another? So that though the Author seems to have been so goodnatured
as to have given these independent Fathers of Families a Power in this case of
Escheat to choose a Governor, yet all this signifies nothing, since they can
never all meet or agree to choose Representatives: They are still like to be his
Slaves who can make a Party strong enough to seize the Government, and usurp an
Authority over them: Whom yet they must obey, since he either is or represents
the right Heir of Adam; and so no body has a better Right than himself, who is
in by the permissive Will of God; which how long it will last, no body can
tell. And God does but adopt Subjects into the obedience of another Fatherly
Power, or else they must fall into a downright Anarchy, and every Father of a
Family may set up for an absolute Prince. But to return whither we have
digressed; for I have said this, only to show that this Authors principles (as
well as those of others) contradict themselves in this subject; and either
these Fathers of Families are the People, and consequently cannot, according to
this Author, ever meet or agree to choose a Prince; or else the whole People
may as well. But since it may be objected, that it does not serve to find out
truth, or settle the Question in hand, barely to recriminate and show the same
flaws in his Principles as he finds in those of others; Patriarcha, p. 41.
let us see if his Objections against Bellarmine and Suarez, and all those who
place Supreme Power in the People, be such terrible things, that the poor
Jesuits are absolutely run down in this Dispute. He therefore first asks, If
their meaning be, that there is but one and the same Power in all the People of
the World, so that no Power can be granted, except all the men upon the Earth
meet and agree to choose a Governor? To which Suarez answers, That it is scarce
possible, nor yet expedient, that all the men in the world should be gathered
together into one Community. It is likelier that either never, or for a very
short time, this Power was in this manner in the whole Multitude of men
collected together; but a little after the Creation men began to be divided
into several Commonwealths, and this distinct Power was in each of them. To
which our Author replies, That this Answer of scarce possible, nor yet
expedient, etc. begets a new doubt how this distinct Power comes to each
particular Community, when God gave it to the whole Multitude only, and not to
any particular Assembly. Can they show or prove, that ever the whole Multitude
met, and divided this Power which God gave them in gross, by breaking it into
parcels, and by appointing a distinct Power to each Commonwealth? Without such
a Compact, I cannot see (according to their own Principles) how there can be an
Election of a Magistrate in any Commonwealth, but a mere Usurpation upon the
Privilege of the World. If any think that particular Multitudes at their own
discretion had power to divide themselves into several Commonwealths, those
that think so, have neither Reason nor Proof for so thinking: and thereby a Gap
is opened for every petty factious Multitude to make more Commonwealths than
there be Families in the world.

In which Dispute I conceive the Jesuit has gone too far, in asserting an
undivided Sovereignty in the whole Multitude collected together before any
Civil Government instituted; That being only the Compact or Agreement of those
that entered into it, and binding none else at first. So likewise this is a mere
Chimera of the Author's, that Adam or Noah were absolute Monarchs and Heirs of
the World, so that no man could withdraw themselves from the Obedience of their
right Heirs, without being guilty of Rebellion. Whereas I have already proved,
that all the Sons of Noah, and their Descendants, were independent Governors
of their Families, without any subordination to the eldest Son or Heir. And if
every Brother had a Right to set up an Independent Family or Principality
distinct from that of the eldest, I would fain know what became of this
absolute Right of Adam or Noah, and by what authority this undivided
Sovereignty which God had conferred on Noah, was thus crumbled into parcels. If
by Gods appointment, then it seems God did not countenance this notion of the
right Heir of the world: If they did it of their own heads, then all the
ancient Patriarchs, or first Peoplers of the world, were guilty of Rebellion
and Usurpation against their elder Brother and his Descendants. But if the
Author's Friends think he has the advantage, because I grant that the World
was peopled after the Flood under the conduct or government of distinct Heads
or Fathers of Families; this does not grant any natural Right in those Heads of
Families to have an absolute power over their Descendants, since perhaps God
divided the Language of the World by so many Tribes or Families, for the better
conservation of the mutual Love and Concord of near Relations, since men would
more readily obey their Ancestor or common Father, than a mere stranger; or for
other reasons best known to his infinite Wisdom. So that there was a necessity
that those of the same Stock should upon the dispersion march off together,
since none else understood one another. Yet the Scripture does not tell us
whether in this division and plantation of the World, the Headship of these
Families was according to eldership of birth, or whether they elected the
fittest man of their Tribe or Family to be their Leader: And if the eldest were
the man, it was not from any Right over them, but either of reverence to his
Wisdom, or to avoid the Dissentions that might arise by other kind of choice on
Eldership; though indeed it confers no Right of it self, yet is often preferred
as a kind of natural Lot. So that every one of these Heads of Families being
independent from each other, they could never agree upon a Ruler over them, but
by Compact among themselves: And if so, he was their Leader that all the rest
liked and agreed upon. So that there needed no Compact of all the People of the
world, since every Father of a Family being independent upon any man else, had
a power to confer his Authority of governing himself and his Family upon whom
he pleased: which Power, whether, and how far it was from God, and what kind of
Authority it was, we shall examine hereafter. So that though I grant all
Government might be at first instituted by Fathers of Families, yet this does
not prove any despotick Power that such Fathers had over their Children or
Descendants; and so consequently could confer no such Authority over them. So
that all the rest of the Authors Queries about the distinct power of the
Multitude vanish, since though there never was any Government where all the
promiscuous Rabble of Women and Children had Votes, as being not capable of it,
yet it does not for all that prove all legal. Civil Government does not owe his
Original to the consent of the People, since the Fathers of Families, or
Freemen at their own dispose, were really and indeed all the People that needed
to have Votes; since Women, as being concluded by their Husbands, and being
commonly unfit for civil business, and Children in their Fathers Families being
under the notion of Servants, and without any Property in Goods or Land, had no
reason to have Votes in the Institution of the Government.

So likewise all the Authors Objections and Cavils, p. 44. how the greater part
of a Multitude could overrule the rest in the state of Nature, signify
nothing; since if many men meet to choose a Governor, the first Question must
be, whether the Votes of the major part shall not conclude the rest; and then
all that agree that they shall, are bound by their own consent; and those that
will not agree to it, are still in the state of Nature toward all the rest, and
are free to go and set up a Government by themselves, that they all can agree
to Nemine Contradicente. And if they disturb those that have agreed, that they
will be concluded by the majority, they may be lawfully used as Enemies. And
for Proxies or Representatives, though the beginnings of most Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, like the head of Nilus, are hard to be traced up to their Heads
or Fountains, and no man can positively tell the manner of their beginning; yet
if they began from some small quantity of men collected into one Army or City,
there needed no Proxies at all, since every man might give his Vote himself.
But since the Author puts me to name any Commonwealth out of History, where the
Multitude, or so much as the greatest part of it ever consented, either by
Voice or Proxies, to the election of a Prince; I will name him two
Commonwealths: The first was Rome, where all the People or Freemen consented to
the election of Romulus, being formerly proposed. See Dionysius Halicarnasseus,
lib. 3. And the second shall be that of Venice, where though it is true the
whole promiscuous Rabble did not choose a Prince, yet all the Masters of
Families, or Freemen at their own dispose, had a Vote in the choice of the
first Duke and Senate; which plainly proves some Governments to have had their
beginning by the consent of the People. And though some Governments have begun
by Conquest, yet since those Conquerours could never perform this without men
over which they were not always born Monarchs, it must necessarily follow, that
those Soldiers or Volunteers had no obligation to serve them, but from their
own agreements with their General, and for those advantages he proposed to them
in the share of those Conquests they should make. Read likewise our Historians
of the manner of Will. the Conquerors coming over, and you will find those
that helped him in that expedition were Volunteers, to whom he promised a share
of his Conquests; which he after made good to them.
Thus were the Goths, Vandals, and our Saxon Kingdoms erected by such Generals
of Armies, who not being Kings at home, nor able to subsist there, were forced
to seek their fortunes abroad; which when they had obtained, they could have no
farther Right over the men they brought with them, than what sprung from their
mutual Compacts and Consents. And as for Proxies, as there was no need of them
in the instituting of those Commonwealths we read of, since taking their
Original from all the People of one City or Army, they might easily give their
Votes themselves; but where the People or Masters of Families are more numerous
and dispersed than can well meet all together, it is impossible, upon the
Authors Concession of an Escheat of the Crown, that ever a new Monarch can be
chosen without their making Representatives. As for what he says about the
silent Acceptance or tacit Consent (or non-contradiction) of the People, no
man will say that it alone confers a Right, where there was none before; as in
the case of Conquerours or Usurpers, whom perhaps People dare not speak
against: So likewise a tacit Consent to a Government, whether Paternal or
Civil, justly instituted, does confer a Right, as I have already granted, and
shall now farther show in answer to the Authors Objections. The Author urges
farther, That if Children under years of discretion, and Servants, are not
absolutely and in Conscience obliged to submit to the Votes of their Fathers
and Masters in the choice of the Government, farther than they receive benefit
and advantage by it; then every man is at liberty that does not like the
Government, Anarchy of a mixed Monarchy, p. 268.
to be of what Kingdom he pleases: and so every petty Company has a Right to
make a Kingdom by it self; and not only every City, but every Village, and
every Family, nay, and every particular man would have a liberty to choose
himself to be his own King if he pleased; and he were a madman, that being by
Nature free, would choose any man but himself to be his Governor; and so no man
would be tied to obey the Government farther than he found it for his interest
and advantage, and consequently would think he might lawfully resist it
whenever he found it impose upon him what he did not like, or was contrary to
his interest.

In answer to which, I grant, first, That every Possessor of a propriety in
Land or Goods in any Government, is not only bound to obey, but likewise to
maintain it; since those that first instituted the Government, did likewise tie
themselves and all those that should at any time possess those Lands or Goods,
to the maintenance of the Government which they had established: And it is just
and reasonable, that those that claim under such first possessors, should, if
they like to enjoy the Lands or Goods, perform the Conditions annexed to them;
since men may by their own private Deeds, much more by a common consent, change
their Estates with what Conditions they please; which those that afterward
come to enjoy the same under their Title, are certainly bound in Law and
Conscience to make good. Secondly, As for all others who possessing no share in
the Lands or Goods of a Kingdom, yet enjoy the common benefits of the
Government, I conceive they are likewise bound to obey and maintain it as first
instituted, for the reasons before given. So on the other side, if they do not
like the Government they live under, the world is wide enough, and they may
remove themselves elsewhere: for I cannot think that the positive Laws of any
Government do oblige any man in Conscience (who is not a slave by his own act
or fault) never to go out of the Country where he was born, or can oblige him
to return again if he once go out of it, or can hinder him from becoming a
Subject to another Prince or Commonwealth, unless he have taken an Oath of
Allegiance to the Prince where he was born, and then he is tied by his Oath not
to act any thing contrary thereunto: And if one man may do this, why not more,
and so on to an indefinite number? But if any Lawyer tells me there is a native
Allegiance due by the Laws of diverse Countries precedent to any Oath, and that
in some Countries (as anciently in England, and in Russia at this day) there
are Laws that no man shall travel out of the Kingdom without leave; I suppose
these are but positive Laws, and as such bind only to a submission to the
punishment as to forfeiture of Estate, or the like, but do not bind the
Conscience to observe them farther than as it is convinced the thing commanded
is more than indifferent in its own nature, and conduces to the good of Mankind
in general, or of the whole Commonwealth in particular. Nor indeed was this
notion of a native Allegiance known to our Saxon Ancestors, since they counted
no man an absolute Subject until he was sworn in the Tourn or Court of
Frankpledge, and was entered into a decenary or Tything. And if it be objected,
that upon these Terms the major part of a people may go away and leave the
Government without defense; that is not likely, nor so much as to be supposed,
as long as the Country continues habitable, and the Government tolerable for
the Subjects to live under: which if it prove otherwise, I see no reason that
God should have ordained any Country for a common Bridewel, where men should be
obliged in Conscience to drudge, be oppressed, and ill-used all days of their
lives without remedy. And as for the other part of the bad consequences the
Author insists will follow, if this natural freedom of Mankind be allowed, for
which you may consult his Anarchy of a mixed Monarchy, where you will see them
at large, p. 268, 269. Every petty Company has a Right to make a Kingdom by it
self, etc. I shall answer him as briefly as I can. The Author discourses after
that rate, that one would think, if it were not for his Principle of
Patriarchal Power, men could not subsist, his being the foundation of all Civil
Government and Property. As for the first absurdity that will follow upon the
supposal of the Peoples power, That any man might be his own King; I would ask
the Author, What if any man, being weary of the world, will withdraw into some
Desert? I think he has then no other Governor than Adam had: Nor is this
unlawful; or else all the ancient Hermits, who in times of persecution retired
into Deserts, sinned in so doing. But for the absurdities that follow the
supposal of a natural state of Freedom, As that every particular City or Family
may choose what Government they please, if they do not like what is already
established; I have already granted, that where a Commonwealth is established,
and men are come out of the state of Nature, and constitute one Politic Body,
all the Members of it are obliged in Conscience to maintain this Government
according to its first Institution. But if it be to be constituted anew, as
upon his Escheat of the Crown among the Fathers of Families, Who are to choose
one? who must take upon him this Fatherly Power over them? The inconvenience
will be the same upon his own Principles: For all Cities, Towns, and Families
consting of so many independent Heads of Families, if the major part of an
Assembly cannot conclude the minor (as this Author supposes) then though all
the Fathers of Families in a Nation should agree in the choice of a King, and
but those of one Town or Family dissent, these Dissenters, if they do not like
the Prince the rest have elected, may certainly (if they are able) divide from
them, and set up a distinct Government of their own; since all these Fathers of
Families being alike free and independent, can in the state of Nature claim no
Superiority over each other. So that the Author, from his own Principles, falls
into the same inconveniences which he finds fault with in those of others;
whereas indeed there is no absurdity in this Supposition.

I shall now consider in the last place that part of his Hypothesis (
Patriarch. p. 21.) where he supposes, That all such prime Heads and Fathers of
Families have power to consent in the uniting or conferring their Fatherly
Right of Sovereign Authority on whom they please; and he that is so elected,
claims not his Power as a Donative from the People, but as being substituted
properly by God, from whom he receives his Royal Charter of an universal
Father, though testified by the ministry of the Heads of the People. I have
already pulled up the foundations of this Notion in the beginning of these
Observations, by showing that God has not ordained or conferred any such Power
on any particular Father or other Relation, and therefore neither on all the
Fathers of Nations or Countries taken together, they not having any Ownership
or Property in their Childrens persons, but a Right to govern and direct them
for their benefit and preservation; which Fatherly Right cannot be transferred
to another, much less survive his person, as I have already proved. Yet to
render this as clear as may be, granting him what he contends for, that this
Fatherly Power may be transferred to another; I should be glad to know, though
the Monarch so nominated by them may have a supreme Power over all their
Children and Servants, yet whence does he derive this Right of commanding
absolutely over the Persons and Estates of these Fathers of Families
themselves: Not from succession from Adam; for his right Heir cannot now be
known: nor from their transferring the power of governing their own persons
upon him; for then this Right commences from their own Act or Election, and not
from the Fatherly power supposed to be at first conferred on Adam. And if they
transfer only their Fatherly or Masterly Authority upon this new Monarch, then
he has only a Right to govern their Children and Servants, the Persons and
Estates of these Fathers not being included in this Grant. And again, if this
Election in the state of Nature could confer a Right, then this Monarch must
owe his Power to these Fathers of Families; and so these being (as I have
already proved) the representative Body of the People, he must receive his
Authority as a Donative from them; which he will by no means admit of. But
since he will have him properly and immediately substituted by God, from whom
he receives his Power of an universal Father, then these Fathers of Families do
not create or constitute the Monarch, but only are Instruments or Ministers to
put him in possession: and if so, it is the possession of the Crown, and not
their Election, that gives him this Right. But (as the Author words it) He
receives from God this Charter of an universal Father. Upon which Principle,
see not to what purpose this Nomination or Election ^rves; for if any body
during this interregnum, can by ^rce or fraud slip into the Throne, he is more
pro^rly Gods Substitute, and to be obeyed accordingly, ^an if he had come in by
their Nomination or Ele^ion, since he is in possession by the immediate Will
(...) God, and declared by the success. So that these ^athers are in a fine
case, after all their Privilege to ^ect, since whoever can usurp this
Authority over ^em, must immediately be their Father and Master, ^hether they
ever give their consents or not: For ^is Author says, Obedience to Government,
p. 66, 67.
Paternal Power cannot (...) lost; it may be either transferred or u^rped, but
never lost. But I have suf^ciently exposed the absurdity of this ^otion before,
in what I have said about Obedience (...) Usurpers, and shall lay it more open
when I come (...) show in what sense Princes owe their Authority to God.

Therefore, since these Fathers of Families had in the ^ate of Nature an
absolute Power of governing themselves, I shall now enquire in the next place,
Whether ^ey may not pass over this Power upon some certain Conditions, and
reserving some Rights and Privileges (...) themselves and Children, upon the
making of the Compact with their new Prince. Secondly, How the per^n so elected
owes his Authority to them, and in what ^ense to God. As to the first, I see no
reason but that ^hese Fathers of Families may, if their number be not ^oo
great, agree to govern all alike together; and that whoever is a Master of a
distinct Family, or a single ^an at his own dispose, and not a Servant, shall
have (...) Vote in the Government, and that the major part of ^he Votes shall
conclude all the rest, and then it will be ^s perfect a Democracy as ever was;
since, as I have granted already, there was never such a Governmen^ where all
Women and Children promiscuously ha^ Votes with their Husbands, Fathers, or
Brothers. S^ that if ever there was any such thing as a Democrac^ in the world,
this would be one. Or lastly, if they man all govern themselves, they may as
well agree to chus^ a certain number of their own Body to represent them and to
meet in a common Council or Assembly, an^ to govern them either for life or
yearly, as they sha^ make the Conditions with them; and then this Government
will become an Aristocracy, where a few o^ those that are reputed the best do
govern, though by a^ Power derived from these Fathers of Families. An^ if they
may bestow this Power upon more than one under certain Conditions, I see no
reason why they may not do the same, if they confer it upon one man after the
same manner, either by making a Compact with him upon his accepting the
Government, how much (...) this Power he shall exercise, and how much they will
reserve to themselves. If they agree that he shall have no more but a
Presidency in their Council in time o^ Peace, and shall not have any power more
than that, unless in time of War; he then is the Mouth of the Senate in time of
Peace, and their General in War. And of this kind was the Lacedemonian King:
And in modern times the ancient Dukes of Venice, when they went out to War: And
so are those Caciques that the Indians in the Caribbee Islands and Brasile
choose to be their Leaders in War, but in Peace have little or no power. So
likewise these Masters of Families or Freemen agreeing with him that they would
choose for their Prince, what Power he should exercise or they would confer upon
him; as suppose that he should not condemn any of them to death, unless many of
the same condition with himself find him guilty; or that he should not make any
Laws or levy Taxes for the public Charges of the Commonwealth, but what ^hey
propose to him; and that he swear for himself and his Posterity to observe
these Conditions: There will then be produced a Limited Kingdom, consisting ^f
a Prince as the Head of all Civil Power, and of an Aristocratical or
Democratical Council, according as that Assembly consists either of the whole,
or but of the People. And that such a Government is no Soloecism in Politics,
I shall prove farther when I come to make some Observations upon this Authors
Treatise of the Anarchy of a mixed Monarchy. Nor can any man imagine from the
Privileges of the Nobility and People that ^re found to have been almost the
same in all these Northern Kingdoms of Europe, as ancient as the Government,
could ever have owed their Original to any other Cause than the Original
Constitution of the Government. And if these Fathers of Families may ^imit the
power they confer upon their new Prince, upon this Escheat of the Sovereign
Power, and retain some of it to themselves; they might do the same upon the
first institution of the Government, either as when so many Masters of Families
who had before lived apart and without any dependence upon each other, did
agree in the state of Nature to erect a Civil Government among them; or else
when a Colony or Army of men was led out by some particular Captains or Leaders
for the conquest of a foreign Country, which when conquered and settled, every
free Soldier in the Army would certainly have as good a Vote in the crcating
of their General to be their King, as their Captain or Colonel; since they all
were at first but Volunteers, and followed these Captains not from any Civil
Authority they had over them, but by their own consent. But since the Author
will by all means have it, that these Fathers of Families must needs transfer
their power upon one man absolutely, who must be endued with all this power,
without any reservation; I shall now give you his best Arguments for this
absolute Monarchy, and try whether they are unanswerable or not.

Patriarch. p. 49. His first reason for it, is built upon Bellarmine's
Concession, That God when he made all mankind of one man, did seem openly to
signify, that he rather approved the government of one man than of many. This
had been somewhat of an Argument, if Adam's power had been purely Monarchical
over Eve and all his Children and Descendants, as it was not; but if it had,
Gods bare Approbation lays no Obligation for all mankind to practice it now,
any more than it is a good Argument to say, that it is now not only lawful,
but necessary for men to marry their Sisters, because God approved of that way
of propagation of mankind at first. Secondly, God declared his Will, when he
endues not only Men, but all Creatures with a natural Propensity to Monarchy;
neither can it be doubted but a natural Propensity is to be referred to God,
who is the Author of Nature. What he means by a Propensity in all Creatures to
Monarchy, I understand not; neither know I any Monarchy among Brutes, besides
that of the stronger over the weaker; and in that Authors sense, the
master-Buck in a Herd of Deer, the master-Bull in that of Cows, and the
Bell-weather of the Flock, are all of them so many Monarchs, endued with
Fatherly Authority over the Herd; or else, which is as good, are Usurpers of
that Authority, and so the Herd are all bound in Conscience to submit to them.
As for the Monarchical Government of Bees, whether under a King or Queen, I
doubt it would pose even those Vertuosi who have glass-Hives, to prove their
Government an absolute Monarchy both in War and Peace; and that none of the
Princes of the Blood or other Bee-grandees have any share in it; or that never
a Be in the Hive dare place any Honey in the Combs, or eat a drop of what ^e
has gathered her self, without the Queens orders. ^ut if the Government of
Bees be Monarchical, and that ^ere a good Argument for Monarchy, then that of
^mmets might be so for a Democracy, since most Na^uralists not being able to
distinguish any Kings or ^rinces in the Ant-hill, do suppose them to be a
Com^onwealth. But Raillery apart, I would be glad to ^e fully satisfied whether
Mankind naturally incline to ^e governed by an absolute Monarchy. It is true,
the ^reatest part of the Eastern Governments in the world ^e absolute Monarchs;
but the Author cannot bring his as an Argument of any Propensity, according to
his ^rinciples: For if all of them were founded upon the ^ight of Fatherhood,
or else the Usurpation of that Right; his proves rather a natural Obligation to
this kind of ^overnment, than a Propensity: for an Obligation ^nnot be drawn
from a bare Propensity; Since then (...) man would have an Obligation to drink
Wine, be^use as soon as he tastes it he has a Propensity to it, and perhaps may
take so much of it until he be drunk, and then sick, and so this Propensity may
turn to a ^urfeit. So some Nations (as Rome for example) ^aving taken a Cup too
much of Monarchy, this Sur^it produced an absolute aversion, hatred, and a
pro^ensity to the contrary extreme. But as the Eastern ^ations have inclined to
an Absolute, so have the We^ern either to Commonwealths or limited Kingdoms.
^itness the Grecians of old, and the modern Kingdoms ^f the Gothic Model; as
also those petty Governments ^f several Nations in America. His third Reason
is, that God confirmed Monarchy to be the best Government, (...) that
Commonweal which he instituted among the He^rews; which was not Aristocratical
(as Calvin says) ^ut plainly Monarchical. If the Author here means be^re they
desired a King, it is true that God himself was their King, and governed them
upon extraordinary occasions, by men divinely assisted or inspired (...) and
such were the Judges whom God raised up to deliver them from the slavery and
oppression of their Neighbors; and being looked upon as having a great portion
of the Spirit of God, did likewise judge the People, that is, decide difficult
Cases by way of Appeal in time of peace. But that the Government was purely
Aristocratical, this Author himself confesses even when he denies it: He tells
us, p. 50. at the time when Scripture says, There was no King in Israel, but
that every man did that which was right in his own eyes, even then the
Israelites were under the Kingly Government of the Fathers of particular
Families: for i^ the consultation for providing Wives for the Benjamites, we
find the Elders of the Congregation bare the only sway, Judge. 21.16. Now what
is an Aristocracy, if this be not? viz. an Assembly of the Elders or chief of
the Fathers (that is, the best men) meeting, consulting and resolving of
public business. What power these Fathers of Families had at home, is not
declared, whether it was independent, or else did submit to the government of
its own Tribe: But that it was Aristocratical, is apparent, if Josephus
understood any thing o^ the History or Antiquities of his own Country, which he
undertook expressly to write of: For Antiq. lib. 4. cap. he brings in Samuel
speaking to this effect to the People (desiring a King) An Aristocracy is the
best Government, neither should you require any other sort of Government. But
as for the Kings which God gave them afterward, there is nothing to be drawn
from thence for this Authors advantage; for he himself tells us, there is no
use to be made of it: Vid. His Observations upon Milton, p. 20.
For speaking against Milton's sense of the words in Deuteronomy. 17.14. he says, Can
the foretelling or the forewarning the Israelites of a wanton wicked desire of
theirs (i. e. of a King) which God himself condemned, be an Argument that God
gave or granted them a Right to do such a wicked thing? Or can the narration
and reproving of a future Fact, be a donation and approving of a present Right?
or the permission of a sin be made a commission for the doing of it? So that it
seems sometimes when it makes against the Author's sense, God is so far from
approving Kingly Government, that it is a sin for the People so much as to
desire it. But it is likewise as great a Question, whether after Kingly
Government was established, it was likewise absolute, so that the King might
put any body to death, right or wrong: For we find, 1 Samuel 14.45. the People
rescued Jonathan out of the hands of his Father Saul, and would not permit him
to be put to death for his breach of the rash Vow which Saul had made; nor is
it imputed to the People, that is, the Army, for a sin. Neither could Ahab take
away Naboth's Vineyard and his Life together, but by color of Law, and a legal
Trial. Neither could King Zedekiah save Jeremy the Prophet from the power of
the Princes who cast him into the Dungeon: for Jer. 38. v. 5. Zedekiah said,
Behold, he is in your hand; for the King is not he that can do any thing
against you. His fourth reason is, that God in Scripture mentions not, nor
takes notice of any other Government than Monarchical. This is but a Negative
Argument at best, the Scriptures not being written to teach us Politics, but
to declare God's Will, and to show us his merciful and gracious dealing with
the Jews, notwithstanding all their backslidings, and rebellions against his
Commandments. His fifth reason is, that Aristotle says in his Ethics, chap.
11. That Monarchy is the best form of Government, and a Popular Estate the
worst: The words are, (...). Which, though true, does not enforce any
Obligation to the one more than the other: for though a man be obliged to his
own preservation, yet he himself is the only Judge of the means; and if he
err, and use the worst means for the best, they are not in fault if they acted
as well as they could, and to the best of their knowledge, for that end.
Neither does it follow, that there are no more sorts of Government than these
two to be chosen. Nor is it any better Argument, that the world for a long time
knew no other sort of Government but only Monarchy; and that the Platforms of
Commonwealths were hatched amongst a few Cities in Greece, and that they were
first governed by Kings, until the wantonness, ambition, or faction of the
People made them attempt news kinds of Regiment. But let any one read the Greek
Histories, and he will find the cruelty and tyranny of Kings did more
frequently give occasion to the People to run into Commonwealths, than either
the ambition or faction of the People. And as for the antiquity of Monarchy,
the alteration of it rather makes against him, since the whole Body of a People
seldom alter a Government, unless they find themselves hurt by it, and that it
proved inconvenient for them. I shall not dispute which is the better
Government, Monarchy or Commonwealth, since in my own judgment I incline to the
former, where the Monarch is good. And though I will not affirm, as the Author
does, Directions for Obedience, p. 71.
That even the Power which God himself exercises over mankind, is by the
Right of Fatherhood, as he is both King and Father of us all: Since besides his
absolute power, and his being the sole cause of our production, he is also
endued with that infinite Wisdom and Goodness, that he still orders all things
for the good of his Subjects, and so has besides his Power, the highest Right
to govern, as the best and most perfect being: So likewise Monarchs, as far as
they imitate the divine Wisdom and Beneficence, have the like Right to be
called Gods Lieutenants. Nor shall I trouble my self, as the Author does, ( p.
67. and so on to 73.) to compare the Mischiess and Inconveniences that have
been found in absolute Monarchical and Popular Government, there being various
Examples both of Cruelty and Injustice in both; and I think they are both the
aptest of any sorts of Governments to run into Extremes: and I know not whether
there have not been found out a Regal Government mixed with somewhat of an
Aristocracy or Democracy, which if truly observed, were freest from the
inconveniences of either. But this Author is so full of the mischiefs of
Commonwealths, that he sometimes mistakes in History, and makes those Disorders
to arise from the faults and licentiousness of the People, which proceeded
indeed from the Usurpation of their Power. Thus he makes it the height of the
Roman Liberty, that its Subjects might be killed by those that would; and sets
forth the Tyranny of Sylla as an effect of the Roman Freedom, when indeed it
was rather an effect of the absolute Monarchy usurped by Sylla during his
Dictatorship. So that Dionysius Halicarnasseus gives us his judgment of those
actions of Sylla, in these words: Lib. V. circa finem.
I would only show, that for these wickednesses the name of Dictator became
hateful: for all things seem good and profitable only whilst they are well
used, which if they come to be depraved by those that are in power, the same
things are counted wicked and unprofitable. So likewise ( p. 73.) he makes the
Multitude or People of Rome to have elected Nero, Heliogabalus, Otho, and
Vitellius for Emperors, and to have murdered Pertinax, Alexander Severus,
Gordiun, and the rest there named; whereas whoever reads the Historians of
those times, will find it was not the People or Senate, but the Army that
either elected or murdered Emperors: And as for Nero, the Senate had never
dared to have declared him a public Enemy, had he not become so odious and
intolerable, that nobody would take Arms for him; and that the Army under
Galba, which had revolted and chosen him Emperor, was then marching to Rome.
So that indeed these Emperors were torn in pieces by the Dogs they themselves
fed, and kept constantly in pay to prevent the People, who had not yet quite
forgot their former Liberty, from recovering it again. And the People of Rome
had just as great a hand in the setting up and putting down Emperors, as those
of Stambola have had in the deposing or setting up those Grand Seigniors which
the Janissaries (their Guards) have strangled of late years, setting up their
Uncles or Brothers in their rooms; or as the People of England had in setting
up either Oliver or his Son Richard for Protectors. But leaving these lesser
Mistakes, which I look upon only as the Transports of the Author's Resentments
against Popular Government, in which I shall not contradict him in the main;
only I would fain lay the Saddle upon the right Horse, and not blame them for
the faults committed by a standing Army which in those times domineered over
both Emperor and the People of Rome, and imposed upon them what Emperor they
pleased, though never so base and unworthy. I shall therefore in the last place
come to the second point I before proposed, whether the person on whom the
Fathers of Families upon this Escheat of the Crown confers their Authority, owe
the same to them, or else immediately to God. The Author (in the passage before
cited) will by no means grant, That the person so elected claims his Power from
the People, but as being substituted properly by God, from whom he receives his
Royal Charter of an universal Father, though testified by the Ministry of the
Heads of the People. Which Assertion is built upon grounds altogether false and
precarious, as I have already proved: For first, he here supposes, That God
has given by divine grant, all Fathers in the state of Nature, an absolute
despotick power over the persons of their Sons, so that they may sell or
otherwise transfer this Fatherly power to whom they please. And secondly, That
the Children are as much obliged to obey those to whom the Fathers transfer
this Right, as they were their Fathers themselves. Thirdly, That this Power so
transferred, does not properly derive it self from the Fathers who so pass over
their Fatherly power, but to God, who conferred it on them at first. In which
Hypothesis every one of the Propositions are false: For, first, I have proved
that no Father has by any divine Grant or Charter, an absolute despotick power
over the person of his Son: Or, secondly, that God has given Fathers a power
to bequeath or transfer their Authority to another, so that the Grantee should
by this Assignement succeed to all the Rights of a Father: and therefore the
two former being false, the last of Princes receiving their power immediately
from God, which is built upon them, must be so too. And besides, it is evident,
that these Fathers do not only here pass over a Fatherly power of governing of
their Wives and Children, but likewise that of governing themselves, not as
Fathers, but as men; since they must transfer this power, whether they had
Wives or Children or not, else they might only pass over to this new Monarch
their power over their Wives and Children, and reserve the power of governing
themselves still: So that it is plain, there is a power different from that of
a Father, to be transferred. But if it may be replied, They may choose
themselves a Father if they please; indeed I have heard of a man's adopting of a
Son, which still must be by this Son's own consent; yet I never heard of a
Son's adopting himself a Father, or that a Father, which is a natural Relation,
can be created at man's pleasure: it is true, a Lord or Master may, but he
cannot thereby challenge that natural Reverence and Gratitude due only to a
Father. So that if Fathers have a power of governing themselves and their
actions in the state of Nature, and that they can confer this Right on any
other, it is evident they do not confer this as a Paternal power on their
Monarch, which the Author supposes to be granted by God to all Fathers.

We shall now come to the second Head at first proposed, and examine what power
a Master of a separate Family has over his Slaves or Servants in the state of
Nature. First, As for hired Servants, though it is true they may submit
themselves to the will and disposal of another what Diet they shall eat, and
what Clothes they shall wear, what work they shall do, and what hours of rest
or sleep they shall have to themselves; and that the Master may beat or correct
him if he do amiss, and through wilfulness or negligence disobey his Masters
commands; and that these are the Conditions that most hired Servants, being
part of their Masters Family, do serve upon: yet is this not so properly an
absolute Obedience, as a duty of Truth and Honesty in the Servant; since as he
is bound to perform his part of the Contract, so likewise is the Master to
perform what he has promised them, since this service is neither absolute nor
perpetual: so that when his time is out, he is free of course. And if in the
mean time the Master does not allow him sufficient Food, Clothes, or hours of
rest, so that he may be able to perform his work, this Servant in the state of
Nature (if he cannot persuade his Master to use him better) may without doubt
quit his service as soon as he can; since he was to yield his Master his Labor
upon certain Conditions, which not performed on the Masters part, the Servant
is not obliged any longer to perform his part of the Bargain, in living with
him or serving him. And as for those that have sold or yielded themselves up as
absolute perpetual Servants or Slaves to the government of another, I see no
reason why they may not in this state of Nature make certain Conditions with
their Master, before they will give themselves up to him, since if a man may
covenant with another upon what condition he will serve him for seven years,
why may he not do the same for his whole life? So that upon the nonperformance
of these Conditions, this kind of Servant has the same remedy against his Lord
as an hired Servant may have. And of this sort were our ancient English
Villains, who though they could claim no property against their Lords, either
in Goods or Lands; yet if the Lord killed his Villain, the Wife had an Appeal
of Murder of the death of her Husband. Since no man can be supposed so void of
common sense (unless an absolute Fool, and then he is not capable of making any
Bargain) to yield himself so absolutely up to another disposal, as to renounce
all hopes of safety or satisfaction in this life, or of future happiness in
that to come. So that I conceive that even a Slave (much more a Servant hired
upon certain Conditions) in the state of Nature, where he has no civil power
to whom to appeal for Justice, has as much Right as a Son or Child of the
Family, to defend his life, or what belongs to him, against the unjust violence
or rage of his Master. Nor do I think any places of Scripture, if well
considered, command the contrary: For as for the places in St. Paul's Epistles,
Ephesians. 6.5. Servants, be obedient to them that are your Masters according to
the flesh, with fear and trembling. And Coloss. 3.22. Servants, obey in all
things your Masters, etc. does not extend to all things that are, but only to
things lawful for them to do, that is, that were not against the Principles of
Christian Religion. And in this it is that St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.18,19. commands
Servants or Slaves (which there were all one) to be subject to their Masters,
not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. For this is
thank-worthy, or grateful, if a man for conscience toward God, (...), endure
grief, or trouble, suffering wrongfully. Which words seem to import, that
Servants ought to bear with a great deal of bad usage from their Masters; but
does not command them in the state of Nature to give up their Lives or Goods to
their Masters, without any resistance. But if any shall urge the Example of
Christ alleged in the third verse, who suffered (even to death) for us; I
conceive that does not extend to a suffering or submission unto all things, but
to such things for which Christ himself suffered, viz. for Conscience toward
God, that is, for matters of Religion; which is likewise most agreeable to the
sense of the words that follow: For what glory is it, if when you are beaten
for your faults, you take it patiently? but if when you do well, and take it
patiently, etc. Now who ever can imagine a Servant to be beaten for doing his
duty? Therefore doing well, here, signifies the profession of Christianity;
which they were not to deny, though they had unbelieving Masters. Therefore
since no interpretation of Scripture ought to be against Reason, that can never
tell a man that he ought to yield up himself so wholly to another disposal, as
to give his Master an absolute right and power over him to kill or maim him
without cause, or to be so basely and penuriously used as perpetually to suffer
hunger, cold, and nakedness, or the like; so that his life should rather become
a burden and a punishment, than a satisfaction. For since we have no notions of
happiness but in life, nor in that farther than it is accompanied with some
contentment of mind, no rational man can be supposed to consent to renounce all
the pleasures and ends thereof, (and which only make life desirable) much
less the Right of living and preserving himself. So that even such a Slave may
without doubt in the state of Nature, run away from his Master, and set himself
at liberty if he can, since his Master has not performed his part of that
tacit condition of his Service; which was, that this Master should for his
Labor provide him all the necessaries of life, and suffer him to enjoy the
ordinary satisfactions of it. Nor is the worst of Slaves, that is, one taken in
War, so absolutely at his Masters dispose, as that because he has him in his
power, he has therefore a Right to use him as he will: For first, as long as
the Conqueror keeps his Slave as a Prisoner, and makes him work in Fetters,
though he has given him his life for the present, yet there does not thence
arise any Obligation in the Slave to Obedience; so that the Slave may yet run
away if he can, nay, kill his Conqueror, unless he will come to other Terms
with him, and make him promise him his Service and Obedience upon the granting
him his Liberty and enjoyment of the ordinary Comforts of Life: And if he
cannot enjoy these, I believe there is no sober Planter in Barbados (who are
most of them the Assignees of Slaves taken in War) but will grant such a Slave
may lawfully run away if he can. Therefore it is not true what Mr. Hobbes says,
That no injury can be done to a Slave: for his reason is not valid, that
because a Servant has absolutely subjected his will to that of his Lords,
therefore whatever he does, he does it by his Master's will, in which his own
is included, so that volenti non fit injuria: this proves no more than that the
Slave has no just reason of complaint though his Master give him Victuals that
does not suit with his palate, orprescribe him Work which may not please his
humor. So on the other side, what rational man will affirm, that this Slave
has given up the natural Rights of living, and being preserved as a man, but
that injury may be done to this Slave as any other Servant, if the Task imposed
upon him be beyond his strength to perform, or if he be beaten or like to be
put to death without cause, or that he has not Food sufficient to enable him
to do his work? for he may still require at his Masters hands the usage of a
man, and of a rational Creature. So likewise though this property in the person
of a Slave taken in War, may be assigned over to another, yet the Right of
commanding a Slave by his own consent, cannot be so, farther than it was agreed
upon in the Bargain between him and his Lord: for if he convenanted to be a
Slave only to his Lord and no man else, the Lord cannot in justice assign nor
sell him to another, without his consent, nor leave him to his Heirs; since
there might be certain peculiar reasons wherefore a man might subject himself
to this man, and not to another. So likewise in absolute Empires which began
purely from Conquest, though it is taken for granted that they may be aliened
at the Will of the Conqueror, yet it is otherwise in Subjects who have
submitted themselves upon certain Conditions, and who have some Liberties
remaining to them; and much more in those Kingdoms which are limited by their
Institution: for there, not properly the Persons of the men, but the Right of
governing them, is said to be transferred as far as it is accompanied with the
Honors and Profits annexed to it. For although a Prince may say of his
Subject, He is my Man, yet this Property in him is much different from that
whereby a Prince calls his Horse his own: for in the first sense he means no
more than that the Right of governing this man belongs to me, and not to
another, yet cannot be extended as far as he pleases; but that Property which
is attributed to a Beast or other Goods, includes a Right of using or consuming
that thing as he will himself, without any other reason than that it is his
own. But although the Laws of Humanity do not permit, that however a man has
carried himself toward us, all Remains of that Primitive Equality between men
should be quite extinguished toward him; and after a man has entered into a
state of Peace with us, that he should be dealt with as a Brute or inanimate
thing: though it is true that the Cruelty and Avarice of diverse Nations has
proceeded so far, that Slaves are reckoned amongst Houshold-goods, and are
ordered not so much by Command, as by the force of an absolute Dominion and
Property; yet this is not from the Law of Nature, but the Civil Law of that
particular Commonwealth. So that though I grant by the Roman Civil Law, a man
might have said of a Slave in the same sense as of a Beast, This is mine; yet
this was not from the Laws of Nature, but Custom of that Empire, who taking
many Captives in the Wars, almost all their Servants consisted at first of
such: Yet this is not allowed of in our Law, nor yet in France and other
Countries. And this will serve to demonstrate what this Author lays down in his
Preface to his Observations on Aristotle's Politics to be false, That Adam was
a Father, King, and Lord over his Family, and that a Son, Subject, and Slave,
or Servant, were all one at first; since it may hereby appear that there is a
real difference in Nature between every one of them. And though the express
names of Subject, Tyrant, and Slave, be not found in Scripture, yet the things
are, and that as plainly described as if they had been called so; though the
Hebrew being a barren Language, has not distinct words for them, without
Epithites or Circumlocutions: For (1.) As to Servants, it is apparent out of
the Law of Moses, Exodus 21. v. 2. Levit. 25.39.44. Deuteronomy. 15.12. there is a vast
difference between Hebrew Servants and those that were of other Nations; these
latter only being called Bondservants, whose service was perpetual, and who
were as a Possession and Inheritance to their Lords; whereas the former were
not to be made to serve with that Rigor, but only as hired Servants to be set
free in the seventh or Sabbatical year. And it is frequent in the Law as well
as Prophets, to make mention of the Wages of an Hireling. So that nothing is
plainer, than that even among the Jews, there was a difference between hired
Servants, Hebrew Servants for years, and foreign Slaves for ever. And before
that, when Jacob served Laban for his two Daughters, it is evident that there
was then a distinction between an hired Servant and a Slave, since there was a
Contract for what Wages Jacob should serve him: And though Laban, for ought
appears, according to the custom of those times, was an Independent Father of a
Family, as well as Jacob was afterward, and consequently a Prince, as this
Author needs will have it; yet we do not find it charged upon Jacob as a
Crime, no not by Laban himself, but only as a matter of unkindness, that he
had stolen away from him with his Daughters and the Goods he had yearned in his
service. So likewise, though the word Tyrant is not found expressly in
Scripture, yet the thing it self is, if a Tyrant be one who abusus his Kingly
Power to the Oppression of his Subjects; or else Pharaoh in Egypt, and those
Kings who after the Israelites coming out of Egypt so cruelly oppressed them,
were all good and lawful Monarchs, and had as much Authority as their own
Princes which God set over them: and it had been a wicked thing in them to have
resisted them and driven them out as they did, whenever they were able; since
they were in possession, according to this Author, by the permissive Will of
God. Having now shown the difference of the Power of a Master of a Family, from
that of a Father, and that the Right which a Father has in his Children, is
diverse from that which he has in his Servants or Slaves; I will now consider
in the last place the Power which Adam had, or any other Husband now has over
his Wife in the state of Nature.

I have already proved that the Authority of the Husband over the Wife,
commences from that Contract we call Marriage; and though by the Word of God
the Woman is made subject to the Man, yet the reason of that subjection
naturally depends upon the Man's being commonly stronger both in body and mind
than the Woman; and where that ceases, the subjection will likewise of course
cease, even amongst us: For we see that if a Husband be a foolish or a careless
man, and either cannot or will not govern his Family and Estate, the Wife may
and does, and oftentimes him into the Bargain: Nor does any one find fault
with her for so doing, since somebody must govern the Concerns of the Family;
and if the man either cannot or will not, who has more Right or Interest to do
it, than her, who has an equal share in the happiness and well-being of her
Family and Children? Neither can there be at once two absolute Heads in the
same house commanding contradictory things, without confusion, since the
Children and Servants could never tell whom to obey. So that even this
subjection of the woman's will to the man's, commanded by Scripture, is still
with a supposition that the man is capable or willing to govern: for if he be
not, he loses this Prerogative of course. But suppose he is able to govern her
and the Family, the Question is, What kind of Power he has over her, as a
Husband, in the state of Nature? I grant, that if she made it part of her
Bargain to be so absolutely subject to him as that he might command her in all
things as a Slave, and make her do what work he pleased to appoint, and that he
may either turn her away, or put her to death, if he find her imbezilling his
Goods or committing Adultery; the woman in this case is bound by her Contract,
as another Servant, who makes her self so by her own act or consent. But this
is not the Question, but what power the man has naturally over his Wife, as a
Husband, supposing no such Conditions or Bargain were made at the Marriage. It
is true indeed that the Wife ought to be subject to the Husband in all things
tending to the good and preservation of her Children and Family, or else the
Family would have two Heads (as I said before.) But it does not therefore
follow, that he has such a despotick power over her, that she may in no case
judge when he abuses his Fatherly or Husbandly power: For suppose the Father of
a Family, in the state of Nature, should in a mad or drunken fit go about to
kill or maim herself or one of his innocent Children, can any body think this
were Rebellion against the Monarch of the Family, for the Wife to rescue her
innocent Child or self out of his hands by force, if she could not otherwise
make him be at quiet? Or suppose the Husband in such a fit should command his
Wife to deliver him a sum of money which she had in her keeping, when she was
morally sure that he would presently play it or otherwise squander it away;
will any rational man affirm that a Wife may not deny to deliver her Husband
his own money in such circumstances? So that it is evident, she never so
absolutely submitted her will to his, as not to reserve to her self the faculty
of a rational woman, as not to judge when her Husband would evidently destroy
her self or Children, or absolutely ruin the Family, when he was not in a
capacity ^o govern himself. So likewise if the Husband command her to do any
thing against her Conscience, or ^he Laws of Nature, she is not obliged to obey
him: For though the Wife in all matters peculiar to the Marriage Bed, and in
all other things that relate to the ^ell-ordering the Family, is obliged to
submit her will ^o that of her Husband; yet it does not therefore fol^ow that
she is an absolute Slave, to be commanded or ^ompelled in all actions not
tending to this end. And (...) it be objected, that as Commonwealths cannot be
^overned without some coactive Empire, so Marriage cannot well subsist by a
bare Compact, or the power ^f Friendship alone, to oblige the Wife to her duty,
in ^ase she prove disobedient. As I do not deny but persaps it may be lawful
for the Husband, as Head of the ^amily, in some cases, if the Wife prove
palpably ob^inate and disobedient to his reasonable commands, and will not
hearken to Reason, to compel her by cor^ection; and the rather, since Christ
has taken away ^he liberty of Divorce, whereby a man might be rid of (...)
cross Wife (as of an ill Servant) if she did not ^nend her manners; and
therefore he has no way else ^ mend her, if she will not do her duty by
persuasion and fair means: Yet this Power is very rarely to be ^sed, since it
is only some women that either need or ^ill endure to be so handled; and all
discreet and ra^onal Wives, as well as Servants, will do their duty without it.
Yet this Example of the absolute Obedi^ce of Subjects in a Commonwealth, does
not agree with that of a Wife to her Husband, as Head of the ^amily; since
Families (especially those who consist ^f a good number of Children and
Servants) may ^ave a twofold end: the one peculiar to it self, the other common
with that of Civil Governmments. The ^ommon end is considered in that defense
and security, resulting from the conjunction of many into one Body; in which,
although an absolute Empire be necessary, yet since the Wife being but one weak
woman, can contribute but very little to this end, it may very well suffice to
the peace and unity of the Family, if she be tied to her Husband only by a
simple Compact by way of Friendship, without any despotick power over her. But
the peculiar ends of Matrimony, which are the procreation and breeding up of
Children, and providing things necessary for the Family, may well enough be
obtained, although the Husband be not invested with this despotick power (which
supposes that of life and death, or other grievous punishments) and though the
Wife be tied by her Compact only and the Bonds of Amity; of which Compact the
Husband being the Principal, does imitate that of an unequal League between
Civil States, in which the Husband being the Head, the Wife owes him all due
respect and observance; and he on the other side owes her maintenance and
protection. Therefore I am not of the opinion of some, who will have the
Husband, in the state of Nature, to be endued with an absolute power of life
and death over his Wife; and that in this consists the very quintessence of
Marital power, because, forsooth, that all Empire, when it is in its proper
subject, and neither is exercised precariously by any man, nor circumscribed by
any superior Power, does always import jus vitae and necis over the Subject.
But this is not so: for a man, in the state of Nature, may become part of
another Family, and yet make i^ in his Bargain that the Master of this Family
shall not put him to death or misuse, unless it be for Crimes that deserve
death by the Law of God or Nature, or become a public Enemy. And the
Supposition is false, which first supposes such an absolute Empire to be in the
Husband, as in the proper Subject; neither is there any absolute power of life
and death necessary to the ends of Marriage: for if the woman commit small
faults, and will not be amended, the Husband may correct her; if greater (as
suppose Adultery) he may put her away, and likewise choose whether he will
provide for the Children which he has reason to believe he did not get
himself. If she murder her Children, or commit any other abominable sin against
Nature, she may justly be cut off from the Family, and punished as a common
Enemy to Mankind; and so she might be if she had not been his Wife; but
Servant, or other Member of the Family. Yet I do not affirm, that this
despotick Empire, or power of life and death, is against the Laws of Nature, or
inconsistent with the state of Matrimony, any more than the absolute power of a
good Prince should destroy the love of his Subjects toward him, or the
reverential fear we ought to have of God, destroy our love of him. Therefore as
I have allowed that the woman may confer such a power on her Husband over her
self, in the state of Nature; so I grant this absolute power may likewise be
conferred on Husbands by the Civil Laws of particular Commonwealths. Thus it is
murder for a man in England to kill his Wife taken in the very act of Adultery;
but it is not so in Spain, Italy, and most other Countries, if he kill his Wife
if he find her alone in another man's company, though it cannot be proved they
have done any thing clse to deserve it.

Having now gone over the whole power of the Head of a separate Family, as a
Father, Husband, and Master, and proved that no man is a Slave by Nature, or
without his own Consent (as a Slave by Compact) or without his fault, as a
Slave taken in a just War; and that no Master of a Family has such Right in
the person of one of these, but that he may do him injury if he take away his
life, or punish him without cause; and that such even such, a Slave may
lawfully set himself free, if the Master do not perform his part of the
Bargain. And having in the last place shown what power a Husband has over his
Wife in the state of Nature, and from whence it takes its Original; it is now
time to answer those Arguments and Objections made by this Author and others,
That the Prince or Governor so elected by the Fathers of Families, or Frcemen
at their own dispose (which I hold to be equivalent to the whole People) has
not only his Nomination from them, but that it is from God alone that he
derives his Sovereign Power and Authority, with which he is endued upon his
first acceptance of the Supreme Power; and if he should accept it with any
limitation, it were to restrain that Power which God has conferred upon him by
his being made the Supreme Magistrate, and would hinder him from performing
that great Duty as he ought. In answer to which I have already proved, that no
such unlimited Power was conferred by God to any private man in the state of
Nature, as a Father, Husband, or Master; and therefore could not be given to
any Civil Sovereign, who is supposed to have no more power than the Father of
the Family had before. A second Objection is, That no particular man has in
the state of Nature any power over his own life, and therefore cannot have any
over the life of another man; and if one man has not this power, neither have
the People (which is but a universal consisting of singulars) any such power,
and consequently cannot confer it on any other man: therefore every Prince must
have this Sovereign Power of life and death, not from the People, but from God.
In answer to which, I shall first of all deny the consequence, that because God
has not given a man a power over his own life, therefore he can have none over
the person of another. For God gave man a Right to preserve, but not to destroy
himself, and so cannot dispose of his own life whenever he is weary of it.
Therefore since the first Law of Nature is Self-preservation, it is lawful for
a man to use all means conducing to this end, that do not prejudice another
man's Right in his particular life or happiness; so that if any man assault me
in the state of Nature, I may defend my self, and consequently kill the
Assailant, if I cannot otherwise escape. But perhaps it will be replied, that
the intention here is not principally to kill the man, if it may be otherwise
avoided; and that this Right is given men only to preserve their lives from
being taken away at another man's pleasure, but that no private man has power
to revenge an injury done to another or ones self, in the state of Nature, with
death, but God, or him to whom God has committed this power, according to St.
Paul, Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, etc. I shall prove
that this place does not destroy that which I maintain: for I grant that all
Revenge taken, as the satisfaction some men take in the very doing evil or
prejudice to another, is unlawful, even by the light of Nature. Secondly,
Likewise where Magistracy is instituted, who is to bear the Sword for the
punishment of evil doers? I grant all return of like for like to be unlawful,
since he is appointed as a public Judge to right those that are injured, and
maintain the common Peace. But no Text forbids men to punish injuries done
either to themselves or those they have a concern for, in the state of Nature;
for this is not Revenge, but a natural Punishment to deter men from committing
violent and unjust actions that disturb the peace of humane Society, since the
wrong doer declares himself thereby a public Enemy to all Mankind. And on this
account Cain feared that (not his Father only, hut) every one that met him,
would slay him, that is, punish him for the death of their Brother or Kinsman.
And if this were unlawful, then all War must be so in the state of Nature; and
Princes being always in that state in respect of each other, could never make
any War for the gaining of Rights usurped, or to punish for Injuries received.
So that this power which a man in some cases has over the life of another, is
only given him by God for the common good and preservation of Mankind, of
which every particular person is a part: and so this power conferred upon the
supreme Magistrate is no more, nor extends higher than that, though there are
more things requisite to the public peace and safety of a Civil Government,
than are to humane Society in the state of Nature: And from hence do supreme
Powers derive their Right of making positive Laws, and ordaining higher
Punishments for Offenses than the Laws of God or Nature do expressly appoint, as
for Thest, Coining, and the like. Nor is the Antecedent true, that no man in
the state of Nature has a power to dispose of his own life. For though it may
be true that no man has a Right to make away himself whenever he dislikes his
being here; yet it does not therefore follow, but that for a greater good to
the public, any man, nay a Prince himself may lay down his life for his
Peoples good: And therefore I doubt not but the Example of Codrus the Athenian
King was not only lawful, but highly commendable, in facrificing his life for
the good and safety of his People, supposing that all their Estates and
Liberties depended upon that one Battle; much more for a private man to lay
down his life to save some public person highly useful to humane Society. And
this much does the Apostle Paul himself seem to admit, Romans 5.7. when he says,
For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for a good man
some would even dare to die. Where by a righteous man, Expositors understand
one who had sufficiently done his duty in an ordinary private capacity, yet
contributed little to the public good; whereas by a good man, is understood
some person highly useful and beneficial to others; and for such a one a man
may not only dare to die, but actually lay down his life if occasion be. A
second Objection is, That if the supreme Magistrates Authority be derived from
the People, then this Authority must be either inferior or superior to it: If
inferior, how can the People be commanded or governed by that which is
inferior to its self? If superior, how can the Effect be more noble than the
Gause, since neither any particular Person nor the whole Multitude had
Sovereign Authority, and therefore could not confer it upon others. To this I
answer, That this Sovereignty being but the submission of the Wills of the
Persons that institute it to the Will of him on whom they confer it, that he
should thereby make use of all their Powers for the common good of them all;
and being therefore not any physical but moral Quality, may be produced in
another by their Compact, who had it not formally in themselves before: As from
the Voices of diverse men singing together, there may arise a Harmony which was
not in their particular Voices alone, though each of these Voices must be
musical to produce it. So every particular person having before, in the state
of Nature, a Right to preserve himself and to govern his own actions, when many
men join together to confer this care upon one or more, there arises a
Political Power indeed more noble, yet of the same kind with the other: for if
the singulars had it not before in some measure, the universal could not have
it all. So that it is absurd to allege, that Sovereignty is not derived from
men, because it cannot be found among a man's natural powers or faculties in the
same manner, as it is in the supreme Magistrate, as if there were no other than
Physical Qualities in nature; yet even in Physics, admitting Epicurus
Hypotheses of Atoms to be true, there will arise from their conjunction that
quality in bodies which we call divisibility, and yet each particular Atome
considered apart, being indivisible, had it not alone. But to answer a
distinction they use in this matter between the immediate efficient and the
immediate constituent modus of Sovereignty; they confess indeed, That by this
Election and Transferring of the Power of the Fathers of Families, the Civil
Sovereign is declared, but that it is from God alone that he receives his
Sovereign Authority. If they mean by this transferring of Fatherly Power, any
absolute Power which God has by any Law divine or natural, conferred upon the
Fathers over their Children and Families; I have already proved, that this
Fatherly power is neither absolute, nor assigneable to another. If they mean
any other Sovereignty distinct from this, then they must needs conceive this as
an abstracted Ens, or Physical quality, which is immediately produced by God,
and conferred upon the person of the Sovereign at his Election or Declaration:
but I see no reason of constituting here more Causes than needs (as one
efficient, and the other secundary) or why God should do that by an
extraordinary unintelligible way of acting, which he may perform by a plain and
easy one, since it is contrary to his other methods of acting in the course of
Nature: For frustra fit per plura, quod potest fieri per pauciora; and
supposing as I have already proved (and as diverse who are sufficiently for
Kingly Power do admit) that the People or Heads of Families have a freedom of
setting up what kind of Government they please, either Monarchical or other;
and if there were none other but Aristocracies or Democracies in the world, I
would fain know what then would become of this notional Majesty or Sovereignty?
Now if any man should ask them where this abstracted Sovereignty exists before
it finds a King to settle upon, and whether it be a Substance or an Accident:
if the latter, how it can subsist without its Subject? or if the former, when
it was created whether it was at the beginning of the world, or like the Souls
of men, creando infunditur, and infundendo creatur? or whether there be one
single Soul of Sovereignty diffused all over the world, which being
distributed, does, as it were, animate so many Kings? Also whether this Majesty
dies with the Monarch, or else survives him as the Soul does the Body, and by a
new Metempsychosis immediately transfuses it self into his Successor. If the
Gentlemen of this Author's Principles please but to consider these
difficulties, I Will undertake they will find them as hard to be resolved as any
the Author has proposed about all the Peoples agreeing or being the cause of
this Sovereignty: But I will not deny that God is properly the original and
efficient Cause of Sovereignty as of all good things, and particularly of that
power whereby every individual Freeman in the state of Nature, has a power to
dispose of his actions for his own preservation and the common good of mankind.
And the particular powers of many men being put together, constitute that which
we call a Politic or Civil Power. And therefore his last Objection is easily
answered, That if the People be any Cause of Sovereignty or Civil Power, they
must have received this power from God, by which they can confer it on any
other: But it can no way be proved that they received it from God; for God
having, as I said, imprinted upon man's Soul such a tender care of his own good
and preservation, and has likewise enjoined him to preserve Peace and Order
amongst men, in order to the common good and preservation of mankind, and has
likewise given him reason to find out all means necessary for this end, amongst
which the constitution of Civil Government must be reckoned as the principal;
who can doubt but the faculty of constituting of Civil Government likewise
proceeds from God the Author of Truth and giver of all good things? Thus the
invention of Clothes, Fire, and Houses, proceed from God, though they were
found out by man as his Instrument, for a help to his necessities and natural
weakness. See Garcilasso de Vega 's History of Peru.
And as in some Countries there is little or no need of Clothes or Houses,
where the weather is always warm and serene; so likewise God has not imposed
upon any People an absolute Obligation of constituting any Civil Government at
all, if they can live without it, or at least of its exercising farther than
they have need of. Thus among the West-Indians, in several parts of America,
See Lerius Hist. Brafile, cap. 18. History of the Caribbe Islands, lib. 11. c.
19.
where they have no distinct propriety in Land, more than in their little
Gardens, and Cabins, (which in Countries so slenderly inhabited as those, where
Land is worth nothing) every man enjoys, by a tacit consent, a living upon
Venison, Fish, or other Animals, and Fruits which the Woods produce; they need
no Chattels, nor Dishes, but a few Earthen-pots or Cups of Calebasses, besides
their Bows and Arrows, and Fishing-tackle, which every man knows how to make
for himself. So likewise having no need of Clothes, and living but from hand to
mouth, and taking care only to provide mere necessaries of life, as they never
have any superfluities, so they have no Disputes about them: and most of their
things being easy to be provided, they are seldom known to steal them one from
each other; and if a man catch another stealing any thing from him, he will be
sure to beat the Thief soundly, or may be mark him with the sharp Tooth of a
Beast they call an Agoutye (which is the disgracefullest punishment any man can
suffer:) so that one of the main ends of a supreme power among us, viz. to
decide Controversies about Property, and punish Thieves, are there of no use.
And as for other Injuries, such as Maims, Adultery, and the like, they have no
certain Judges for any of these things; every man that is injured in any of
these cases, being his own Judge and Executioner, observing that Law of an Eye
for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; only in Adultery the man has power to
kill both his Wife and the Adulterer, if taken in the act; and in Murder, and
great Hurts or Maims, where the party injured is not able to revenge himself,
his near Relations will not fail to do it; and if they should omit, they would
be looked upon as Cowards or infamous: so that being naturally loving to each
other, and having no words of disgrace to quarrel about, and other Quarrels
happening but seldom, and no man maintaining or taking the part of the
wrong-doer, or revenging the death of a Murderer or Adulterer, they have lived
many Ages without any common Power to keep them at peace among themselves; and
yet they have much fewer Crimes committed amongst them than us. It is true,
they have Captains or Cacicks among them, but they have no power but in time of
War; and when the Expedition is ended, though they pay them reverence and
respect, and make them preside in all their Councils and Assemblies, yet they
have no Authority in time of Peace to punish or question any man. So that if
they lived in Islands which were either far distant from others, or else were
inaccessible, and would make no foreign Expeditions, they would not need so much
as this Cacick, and so could live together without any other Government than
that of the Fathers of Families over their Wives and Children. But perhaps it
will be said, these are Man-eaters and barbarous People, and so are not to be
quoted as Examples for the rest of mankind. It is true, the Brasilians eat
their Enemies taken in War, but the Caribbes do not. But as for the Observation
of the other Laws of Nature, I will leave it to any man to judge which part of
mankind observe them best; those that can live peaceably together without
either Judge or Gallows, or we that can scarce be at quiet, though we have
them. But I have done this, only to show an intelligent Reader what are the
true reasons of the necessity of a Civil Power amongst us that have a full
propriety in all Lands and Goods by the particular Laws of our Countries.

Having now I hope dispatched the first part of my intended Task, which was to
prove that the Author's Hypothesis concerning the Monarchical Despotick Power
of Adam over his Wife, Children, or Descendants, is altogether vain, and
without just grounds either from Scripture or Reason; and consequently that
neither any Fathers of Families, nor the Princes as representing them, can from
divine Grant deduce any such absolute Power or Right over their Children or
Subjects: I shall not trouble my self with the answering of the rest of this
Treatise, having gone a good way in the second Chapter, and answered his most
material Objections about the Peoples conferring Sovereignty; so that the rest
is of small consequence. I shall not need to examine whether the Jews chose the
King, or God, since that Government being purely Theocratical, it concerns
other Nations not at all; much less shall I vindicate the Form of the Roman
Commonwealth, or dispute whether they were more happy under Kings or Emperors,
or whether Democracies or Tyrannies are best; or affirm that the People can
correct their King, or that there e're have been any Tyrants in England since
the Conquest, since they are all either foreign to this purpose, or else
signify nothing when his foundations are pulled up. As for what he says
concerning a limited or mixed Monarchy, I shall reserve all that is needful to
be observed upon that subject, until I come to consider the Author's Treatise
called, The Anarchy of a limited Monarchy; where all or the greatest part of
what he has here written, is there repeated. As for ^his third Chapter, since
Divinity is not my Profession, and that the Texts of S. S. he there quotes,
have been debated by so many Expositors both in English and Latin, I count
needless to repeat out of others what sense they may bear, though I do not
approve of the Author's interpretation, who would have them applied alike to
all Princes, whether good or bad, lawful or unlawful; since upon those
Principles there can be no difference between a just Prince and a Tyrant, or
between a lawful Monarch and an Usurper. Nor shall I meddle with what he says
concerning the Kings Power and Prerogative, though I think there are diverse
things which he there says, that are false and of very ill consequence; yet
since I confine my self purely to the Laws of Nature and Reason, I shall leave
it to other more able Pens, and better skilled in the Laws and Customs of this
Kingdom, to give him such an answer as they deserve. Neither would I be thought
to encourage Princes to stretch their Power to the utmost limits, nor yet to
stir up Subjects to take Arms as soon as ever they think themselves injured,
since the Populace is but too apt, where they are left to be their own Judges,
to pronounce Sentence in there own favor. Therefore, quitting all these as
unnecessary Disputes, I shall now proceed to take a short view of the rest of
those Errors and Mistakes which remain yet to be observed in his other
Miscellany-Treatises first published.

CHAP. III.
I Desire the Reader in the first place to take notice that I wholly pass by
the first Treatise called, The Freeholders Grand Inquest, since I confess my
self no Lawyer verst enough in the learning of Records, to answer him in his
own way; I shall therefore leave him to those that have made it their business:
And as for great part of it concerning the Antiquity and Power of the Commons
in Parliament distinct from that of the Peers or Inheritable Nobility, I shall
refer the Reader to Mr. Petyts learned Treatise of the Rights of the Commons of
England, See likewise a late Treatise, entitled Jani Anglorum facies nova,
written by a young Gentleman of great Learning and Ingenuity.
where all Objections against it are in my opinion fully answered. Therefore I
shall begin with his Observations upon Aristotle's Politics; which I shall not
dwell long upon, since I look upon that as one of the confusedest Pieces he
has written: Nor is it my business, as that great Author said once in the case
of Plato, to defend Aristotle, but Truth. I shall likewise pass by the Preface,
since it contains nothing considerable but his Hypothesis of Adam's Monarchy;
of which there needs no more to be said. And as for the places out of St. Paul
and Peter, it not being my design to write Divinity-Lectures, I shall refer
the Reader to the learned Commentators; only I shall take notice that his
Assertion, That these Apostles wrote their Epistles when the name of the
Authority and People of Rome was still in being, though the Emperors had
usurped a Military Power: and yet though the Government was for a long time, in
most things, in the Senate and People of Rome; yet for all this, neither of the
two Apostles take notice of any such Popular Government; and our Savior
himself divides all between God and Caesar, and ^llows nothing to the People.
All which, though but a Negative Argument against Popular Government, and ^o
not conclusive, yet the foundation of it is not true: For though in Rome there
remained a shadow of the Power in the Senate, yet it was only in such cases as
^he then Emperors committed to their judgment (as ^he Kings of France do now
make use of the Parliament of Paris) only to ease themselves of diverse
troublesome Causes, or to take off the odium from themselves, as in the
condemnation of Sejanus and diverse other Conspirators against them; and yet
they reserved the last Appeal to themselves in Cases both Civil and Capital, as
may be observed in St. Paul's appeal to Caesar: and it is certain that the
Roman Emperors in those times put men to death as often as they had a mind to
it, by their own power made what Edicts they pleased, and appointed Proconsuls
and Governors of Provinces as often as they saw it convenient, and had all
Money coined with their Image or Superscription, and received and disposed of
all Tributes and public Taxes. And yet this Author doubts whether Tiberius,
Claudius, or Nero were absolute Monarchs, when they had all the Prerogatives
that a Monarch could have.

I come now to the Author's Observations on Aristotle's Politics. It will be
easy to prove that he makes use of him in all places that make for his
Hypothesis, but takes no notice of those that make against it (a usual course
among Writers, especially in Politics or Divinity:) Nor does he only do this,
but likewise oftentimes perverts Aristotle's sense to make it subservient to
his own; of which I shall produce these instances. In his first Quotation, p.
3. he renders these words, (...) for the eldest in every house is King: Whereas
(...) does not here signify to be an absolute Monarch, but to govern as a
Master of a Family or chief Ruler; a power fa^ short of that of an absolute
Monarch: And so Lambinus has rendered it in his Version. So likewise he has
misplaced these words, (...), and makes them to come in as a reason of what he
says before concerning a perfect Monarchy; whereas this sentence precedes the
former, and there are three or four sentences between them: and therefore it
cannot serve for a Consequent, where it is really an Antecedent. Nor is this
sentence truly rendered by the Author, For a King according to Law, makes no
kind of Government; whereas he should have said, No distinct species of
Government: for so are these last words to be rendered, (...) or else he would
make Aristotle contradict himself, if after he had spoke so much in other Vid.
3 Pol. c. 14. Speaking of the ancient Heroical Kingdoms.
places of a King according to Law, he should make it no kind of Government at
all. So likewise p. 4. he misrenders these words: (...), That of all
Governments Monarchy is the best, and a Popular State the worst: Whereas any
one but meanly skilled in Greek, knows that (...) does not signify Monarchy,
but Kingship; and (...) is not a Popular Estate, but an Aristocratical
Commonwealth, and in the same Chapter put in opposition to (...). I shall not
trouble my self to inquire whether Aristotle distinguishes well between an
Aristocracy and an Oligarchy, or between an Oligarchy and a Democracy; or
whether he do well to exclude Artificers from any Vote in the Government: These
I shall leave to be defended by those that are greater admirers of him than my
self; only I will see that (if I can) he have fair play, and not that sense
put upon him that he never meant. And therefore I shall turn over to p. 12.
where he quotes another place out of Aristotle's fourth Book, cap. 13. That the
first Commonwealth among the Grecians, after Kingdoms, was made of those that
waged War: From whence he would infer, That the Grecians, after they left off
to be governed by Kings, fell to be governed by an Army: So that any Nation or
Kingdom that is not charged with the keeping of a King, must perpetually be at
the charge of paying and keeping of an Army. Which, though it happened true
during the corrupt Oligarchy of the Rump, which was ^ut an armed Faction
contrary to the sense of this Nation; yet is not a necessary Consequent of all
Commonwealths: Neither is it the Author's sense in this place, as may appear by
what he says before, and what ^ollows these words, That he meant no such thing,
a standing Army in constant Pay being a thing unknown among the Greek
Commonwealths, where every Freeman served in person as a Horseman or on foot,
according to his ability, as any that reads those Histories may easily observe;
and a Guard of Strangers, or a constant standing Army, was ever held the Body
of Tyranny (as it still continues in all absolute Monar^hies from France to
China.) But to return to Aristle in the place before cited by the Author, where
speaking just before of the Government of the Maleans and other Greek
Commonwealths, he says, That their Government consisted not only of those
Footmen that bore Arms, but of those that had served in the Army: And then
follows these words quoted by the Author, (...). So the words (...), are not
well rendered by those that waged War, since they should rather be rendered by
those that went to the Wars; this Force not being to defend them from their own
Citizens, but Neighbors with whom they were still at Wars: for it appears that
not only those had a share in the Government who were actually in Arms, but
those also that had served in the Army; for Aristotle says immediately after,
That their Strength consisted chiefly at first of Horsemen, and that as the
Commonwealths increased in the strength and number of them that were of ability
or substance to bear Arms, the Administration of the Commonwealth was
communicated to more. From whence it appears, that (as also at first among the
Romans) they only had a Voice in their Councils or Assemblies, who were able
to maintain themselves in the Wars at their own charge: As amongst us none have
a Vote to choose Parliament Men, but Freeholders; or as in old times, none but
those who served in the Wars in person, had Votes in the Withena Gemote, or
Great Council: And yet this was no standing Army no more than those in Greece.
So likewise neither are these words fairly rendered in the same page, (...),
(and that in a Popular State) The Sovereign Power is in the Sword, and those
that are possessed of the Arms; but are thus to be rendered, In this kind of
Government ( i. e. Popular) those govern and have greatest Power, who bear Arms
and fight for the rest (which is but reasonable.) I shall not trouble my self
with the rest of those Contradictions and Faults he find^ with Aristotle, since
I look upon this Treatise of Politics as the most confused he has writ; only
it seems this Author did but skim over Aristotle, when he so confidently
asserts, That the natural Right of the People to found or elect their own kind
of Government, is not once disputed by him. which whether he asserts or no, let
these words judge, lib. 5. Pol. cap. 10. (...). Which may be thus Englished:
But of Kingdoms by descent, this may be supposed the cause of their
dissolution, besides those al^ ready mentioned, viz. when it happens to many of
them, who not being endued with the power of a Tyrant, but only with a Kingly
Authority, become contemned whilst they will unjustly abuse their Subjects; for
then there is an easy dissolution of the Government; for he is not a true King
over those that like not his Government, but a Tyrant. P. 20, and 21. He finds
fault with Aristotle for making the main distinction between right Forms of
Government, and those that are imperfect or corrupt, to consist solely in this,
That where the profit of the governed is respected, there is a right
Government; but where the profit of the Governors is only regarded, there is
a corruption or transgression of Government. By this it is supposed by
Aristotle that there may be a Government (which he calls a Tyranny) only for
the benefit of the Governor. That this Supposition is false, may be proved
from Aristotle himself, to instance in the point of Tyranny. And therefore the
Author endeavors to make him contradict himself thus: Tyranny (says
Aristotle, lib. 3. cap. 7.) is a Despotical or Masterly Monarchy, Now he
confesses, l. 3. c. 6. That in truth the Masterly Government is profitable
both to the Servant by nature, and the Master by nature: And he yields a solid
reason for it, viz. It is not possible, if the Servant be destroyed, the
Mastership can be saved. Whence it may be inferred, That if the Masterly
Government of Tyrants cannot be safe without the preservation of them whom they
govern, it will follow, That a Tyrant cannot govern for his own profit only.
And thus his main definition of Tyranny fails, as being grounded on an
impossible Supposition. By his own confession, no Example can be shown of any
such Government that ever was in the world, as Aristotle describes Tyranny to
be: for under the worst of Kings, though many particular men have unjustly
suffered, yet the Multitude, or People in general, have found benefit and
profit by the Government.

If Aristotle were alive, I doubt he would say this Author played the Sophister
with him, and did not only misquote his words, but pervert his meaning. For
first, Aristotle does not say in that place he quotes, (or in any other that I
know of) That Tyranny is a Despotical or Masterly Monarchy: And therefore all
he builds upon this Concession is false. It is true indeed, Aristotle says,
That the Government of the Master is profitable both to the Servant by nature,
and the Master by nature, (that is, upon his supposition that they are either
so by nature.) But the Author omits what immediately follows, because it would
vindicate Aristotle's true meaning: for his next words are, Nevertheless it (i.
e. the Masterly power) regards chiefly the profit of the Master, and of the
Servant but by accident; but Ecumenical Government, or that of a Master over
the Wife, Children, and Servants, is for their sakes whom he governs, and for
the common good of them all. Hence it appears plainly, that Aristotle, when he
says that a Tyranny is for the benefit of the Governor alone, he does not mean
that the Subjects can have no benefit at all by it, since it is the Tyrants
interest they should live and get Children, or else he would quickly want
Subjects. Thus the Children of Israel, under the Tyranny of Pharaoh, had Meat,
Drink, and Clothes, and were not so low kept but they got Children apace; and
yet we find God thought them oppressed, and heard their cry. But Aristotle clears
the point, when he distinguishes an absolute Masterly power over a Slave, from
that of a Father of a Family; the Master in the former considering only his
own profit, and the preservation of the Slave but by accident; and so an
ill-natured brutish Master takes care of the life of his Slave that works in
the Mines or Sugar-works in the Indies, not out of any love to the person of
the Slave, but because he cannot subsist without him. So a Grasier or Butcher
takes care of his Cattle that they thrive and do well (as they call it) yet
every body knows that they take this care only for their Carcasses, which
yield them so much ready money at the Market. So that indeed a Tyrant only
considers his own good in the welfare of his Subjects, and looks upon them as
no better than brute Beasts, in which he has an absolute property to shear or
kill, as he thinks it most conduces to his own profit; without considering to
what end he is set over them: As the Grand Seignior makes use of the bodies of
his poor Christian-slaves (for Subjects I cannot call them) to fill up Ditches,
and to blunt the edge of his Enemies Swords. But that all Kings are bound to
preserve the Lands, Goods, and Lives of their Subjects, the Author himself
confesses, ( Patriarcha, p. 94.) Though not by any municipal Law, so much as
the natural Law of a Father, which binds them to ratify the Acts of their
Forefathers and Predecessors in things necessary for the public good of their
Subjects. So then I hope there is some difference between the Government of a
Father over his Children, and that of an absolute Lord over his Slaves,
notwithstanding our Author's Quotation out of Aristotle, whereby he would make
them all one, viz. That a Kingdom will be a Fatherly Government: Which is true,
if you take it in the best sense, for that affection that Kings like Fathers
should have for their Subjects: And so it is plain Aristotle intended it, by
the words immediately foregoing, thus; For the Society of a Father with his
Sons, has an appearance of a Kingdom; not that it is so indeed. But to make an
end with Aristotle, I will give you one place more which the Author does not
quote fairly; Anarchy of a limited Monarchy, p. 294.
where Aristotle reckoning up the several sorts of Monarchies, The last (says
he) is the Heroic, which flourished in Heroical times; to whom the People did
The Greek word is (...), of their own accord.
willingly obey, and they were paternal and (...). Which confutes the Author's
fancy, that a King according to Law makes no kind of Government.
legal. And then reckoning up the occasions and reasons of their Obedience, he
concludes thus: (...), And these were chosen Kings by the consent of those that
were willing (Lambinus renders it, a voluntariis) and left the Kingdom so
obtained to their Children. Which whole sentence is omitted by the Author,
because it makes against his Hypothesis, and proves that the most ancient
Kingdoms began by Election of the People. So true is that excellent Simile of
the elder Dr. Don's, That Sentences of good Authors, whilst they remain in
their proper place, like the hairs of an Horses tail, concenter in one root of
strength and ornament; but pulled out one by one, serve only to make Snares.
And indeed he has made use of Aristotle as Lawyers do of their Adversaries
Evidence; where it makes for them they allow it, and make use of it; but where
it is against them, it is false, or signifies nothing.

I shall now cursorily look over the rest of this Discourse; where ( p. 23.)
though it be true what Aristotle says, That the People must act as a Monarch,
and become as one Person, before it can govern: So after they are so united
into one Senate or Council, it is no good Argument to say, That the whole
Multitude does not govern where the major part only rules, because many of the
Multitude that are so assembled, are so far from having any part in the
Government, that they themselves are governed against, and often contrary to
their wills; those people (to contract it) being the major part in one Vote,
that are perhaps of another opinion in another: and so every change of business
begets a new major part. For though it is true, every individual person does
not actually agree to every Vote, yet implicitly he does, since at the first
institution of the Government, the first Compact was, That the agreement of the
major part should conclude the whole Assembly; and whoever either then would
not, or now refuses to be so concluded, is still in the state of Nature, in
respect of all the rest, and is not to be looked upon as a Member of that
Commonwealth, but as an Enemy, and a Covenant-breaker.

I shall not quarrel with the Author, if he hold that Monarchy does most
conduce to the main ends of Government, Religion toward God, and Peace toward
men; since I agree with him, that absolute Monarchy (if a man could be sure the
Monarch would still continue prudent and just) were the best sort of Government
for mankind. Only I cannot but smile to find the Author ( p. 27.) so much
admire the high respect the great Turk pays the Mufti or chief Bishop, as he
calls him, (where by the by, I never heard the Turkish Church Government was
Episcopal before) yet every printed Relation can tell us, that this wonderful
Reverence is but a mere piece of Pageantry, the Idol being of his own making,
and whom he again unmakes at his pleasure; a sort of Ordination I suppose the
Author would not allow to those of an indelible Character. It is true indeed
what the Author affirms, ( p. 29.) That Rome, being in any desperate condition,
was still forced to fly to Monarchy, choosing a Dictator with absolute Power:
Yet this was only as a General in time of War, or some great civil Commotion
being very near it; where it must be confessed that the absolute power of one is
best at such times, which needed a speedy Remedy: And argues no more the Romans
good opinion of Monarchy, than it does any man's approbation of Martial Law;
which though perhaps the best that can be used in War, it will not therefore
follow that it were to be chosen in times of Peace, no more than because Brandy
may do a man good when he is sick in his stomach, therefore he ought to drink
it constantly. So that as one benefit of the Dictatorship was the help it gave
them upon an Extremity, so the next happiness they wished for after that was
over was, that the Dictator would lay down his Office again. And the People of
Rome were never more tyrannized over and oppressed, than when these Dictators
held their Power by force, contrary to their Institution, and longer than there
was need of them; as may be seen in the Examples of Sylla and Caesar. But the
Consuls, though they had in many things (especially in calling the Senate, and
in commanding the Army) a Kingly power, yet it was not absolute, but was liable
to be questioned by the Senate and People; as any man that reads the Roman
History may observe. [ See the Oration of Valerius in Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus, lib. 7. upon the difference between the Senate and People.] I
shall not now stay to dispute whether the People of Rome did well or ill in
expelling Tarquin; but besides his personal faults, he was never their lawful
King having ascended the Throne by the murder of his Father-in-Law Servius
Tullius, and kept it by the power of a standing Army, without the due Election
of the Senate and People; which was contrary to the Institution of that
Kingdom, which was Elective.

The Author ( p. 32.) makes a great difficulty to grant the Roman Commonwealth
to be Popular: It is true, it was not so absolutely, but was mixed with an
Aristocracy in the Government of the Senate, and with Regal power in the
Authority of the Consuls; yet it is plain, the supreme Power remained in the
Body of the People: And though by the unequal division of the Centuries, it is
true, the greater part of the common People were seldom admitted to vote, being
concluded by the major part of the first 97 Centuries, who consisted of the
better and richer men; yet this inequality begot the Tributa Comitia, which
(with the Author's good leave) was more absolute than the former Co^itia
Centuriata: For Dion. Halicarnas. lib. 9. relating ^he original of these
Tributa Comitia, and how they ^iffered from the other, says, That the latter
were trans^cted in one day without any Auspicia, and could make (...) Law at
once without any precedent Senatus Consul^um; which the Curiata Comitia could
not. And though it is true that the power of making War and Peace, and creating
of Magistrates, remained in the Comitia Curiata, yet the judging of great and
capital Crimes, and of altering and making Laws, remained ^n the Tributa
Comitia; as may be observed in the ^anishment of Coriolanus, and other
punishments by them inflicted; and all Appeals were to this Assembly. Yet
granting that the force of the Government lay in ^he Curiata Comitia, or better
sort of Citizens, yet it was still vertually in the common People, who resumed
^t when they would. And it was to this whole Body ^f the People that Valerius
Publicola used, when Con^ul, to make the Lictors abase his Fasces, and in that
sufficiently acknowledged where the Sovereign Power ^esided.

I shall not trouble my self farther to defend the Mo^el of the Roman
Commonwealth, which I look upon ^s one of the most unequal and irregular that
ever were; and if it had not been for the excellent Temper, admirable
Discipline, and exact Education of that People, it was impossible it could ever
have lasted ^o long: In which when they began to grow remiss through Riches and
Luxury, their Commonwealth soon fell to pieces, being indeed never well
compacted ^t first. Much less shall I take upon me to defend a Popular
Government, where the mixed Multitude, without any Representatives, consult of
Affairs, or make Laws. Any man that will but read Thucydides and Livy, will see
enough of it.

As for the Author's Arguments against the People^ being able to agree to
institute any Government a^ all, they are most of them but mere Wrangling, and
have been answered in the foregoing Observations, and so need not be repeated.
I shall likewise pass by the Author's Directions for Obedience to Government in
doubtful times, since I have already taken notice of all that is considerable
in it.

CHAP. IV.
I Shall therefore in the next place look over his miscellany observations. (1)
Upon diverse modern Authors. As for Mr. Hob's Leviathan. I shall leave them to
decide the controversy as they please, and refer it to the readers judgment
who has the better on it: For in many things I think neither of them are in the
right: only it is a hundred pitties Mr. Hobs did not consult the Author, and
take in his Patriarcal Hypothesis, and then all his rights of exercising
Sovereign Tyranny would have gone down well enough. But for my part I neither
like the foundation nor the building which Mr. Hobs has set up, and therefore
shall here leave the Author to build and pull down as he pleases without my
intermedling.

And less shall I take upon me to vindicate Milton, since that were at once to
defend downright Murder and Rebellion. So that I shall turn over to his
observations upon Grotius, an Author of greater learning, and better
reputation, than either of them. Where I shall not trouble my self to defend
the manifold distinctions, P. 37.
and contradictions of the old Civil Lawyers about the Law of Nature, and the
Law of Nations; or whether the natural, and Moral law be all one, it is
sufficient if Grotius's didifinition of the law of Nature be true: Nor does it
signify any thing whether the word Law of nature be found in Scripture; Yet I
think Thomas Aquinas may well enough be defended, that there is such a thing
too proved from 11. Romans v. 14, 15. For though he does not say expressly that
nature is a Law unto them, but they are a law unto themselves, yet certainly
Saint Paul's meaning is to the same: For if the Gentiles by nature did the
things contained in the law, and so were a law unto themselves, I know not what
else he can mean by their doing by nature the things contained in the law, but
their living according to the Laws of nature or right reason, which (all
rational men are sensible of as soon as they come of an age able to exert this
faculty and so) becomes by nature a Law unto themselves; neither can this be
custom, since Saint Paul says they do so by nature etc. the things contained in
the Law.

Neither do I see any Reason why Grotius is to be blamed for not taking his
Hypothesis concerning the Original of Mankind, of Dominion, and Property out of
Genesis, since writing of the rights of Peace and War according to the laws of
nature, and the general consent of civilized Nations, and not according to any
revealed Will, or Law of God he was not bound (nay it was contrary to his
purpose) to make use of Scripture farther than to confirm what could be made
out from natural reason alone, for to have done otherwise had been to have
written a treatise of cases of Conscience in Divinity, and not of right and
wrong by the laws of nature. So that though he sometimes make use of Texts of
Scripture, yet it is either to strengthen those, or else to answer some
objections that may be drawn from thence against his conclusions. And therefore
he was not obliged to take notice, whether God gave a beginning to Mankind from
one man, or more at once, since it might if he had pleased have been either
way. Nor yet did he dream of Adams Monarchy over the whole Creation before he
had any Subjects to command, nor of his being sole Lord Proprietor and first
occupant of all the earth, and of all the Creatures in it, when neither he, nor
his Children ever knew, nor made any use of the 1000. parts; of them, these
were Notions too fine spun for a man of his solid judgment ever to light on, so
therefore we must be beholding to our Author and some English Divines for this
admirable discovery. Yet as I doubt not but if that great man were alive, he
could well enough defend himself by that great reason, and learning he was
Master of, against what ever this Author or some other lesser Scriblers could
reasonably object against a work of that nature; yet I doubt not but most of
those things the Author observes as errors, may be well enough defended by one
of far meaner parts, and less learning than Grotius himself; so that I am not
convinced that he either forgets or contradicts himself (as our Author will
needs have him) when he refers alieni abstinentia or abstaining from that which
belongs to another, P. 59.
to consist with a sociable community of all things, because says the Author,
where there is Community, there can be neither meum nor tuum, nor yet alienum;
and if there be no alienum, there can be no alieni abstinentia, and so likewise
by the Law of nature, men ought to stand to bargains, but if all things were
common by nature how could there be any bargains.

In answer to which, it will appear that a Propriety of occupancy or the
personal possession of things and applying it to the use of one or more men
while they have need of it, may very well consist with community, and is
absolutely necessary to the preservation of Mankind: As for Example, a Theater
is in Common to all that have a right of coming thither, but no man can say
that one place in it is more his than another, until he is seated in it, and
then that place is so much his, that whilst the Play lasts no man can without
injury put him out of it; so likewise supposing the Earth and fruits thereof to
have been at first bestowed in Common on all its inhabitants; yet since Gods
first Command to man was, increase and multiply, if he has a right to perform
the end, he has certainly a right to the means of his preservation, and the
propagation of his species, so that though the fruits of the earth, or beasts,
for food were all in common, yet when once any man had by his own labor
acquired such a proportion of either as would serve the necessities of himself,
and Family, they became so much his own, as that no man could without manifest
injustice rob him of these necessities of life; and this sort of Community was
most Primitive, and Natural, being still retained among the Americans to this
day, the rest of the Country lying still in common, neither can any Indian
prescribe to this or that Tree, that grows out of his own Garden, or to any of
the wild Beasts, that this is his more than another, until he has either
gathered those or killed the other, and then all look upon it as robbery to
take from each other, what they are once possessed of; so likewise in this
state of Community, if an Indian make a bargain with another to give him some
of his venizon for such a proportion of maiz or roots, there is never an honest
Indian but will judge the taker bound to make good his bargain without any
dispute; so likewise if any two or more of them make a bargain to go a hunting,
or fishing together, upon condition that the Venizon, or Fish that they shall
take be equally divided amongst them all, I think every one of them will think
himself wronged if one of them cheat or steal from the rest before the quarry
come to be divided. So that you may see how true it is which this Author
affirms, that if all things were common by nature there could be no contracts,
agreeable to which is the Hypothesis laid down by Grotius; 'that God imediately
after the Creation did bestow upon Mankind in general a right over all things
of an inserior nature, from whence it came to pass, that presently every man
might take what he would for his own occasions, and that such an universal
right was instead of property, for what every man so took, another could not
take from him but by injury.

But it seems our Author will have this repugnant to Scripture, P. 46.
because Mr. Seldom in his Mare clausum (from I know not what Tradition of the
Rabbis,) ' supposes that Adam by donation from God, Genesis 1.28. was made
general Lord of all things, not without such a private dominion to himself as
(without his grant) did exclude his Children; and that by donation, assgnation,
or some kind of cession (before he was dead or left any heir to succeed him)
his Children had their distinct territories by private dominion; Abel had his
flocks, and pastures for them; Cane had his fields for Corn, and the land of
Nod where he built himself a City.

For the confutation of which opinion, I have already proved that Adams
absolute dominion over the lives and persons of his Children is not to be
deduced from that place of Genesis, before cited by Mr. Seldom. Let us now
consider whether Adam had by these words an absolute dominion over the world
and all things therein, distinct from that of his wife and Children, the words
are Male and Female created he them, and God blessed them, and God said unto
them, be fruitful and multiiply and replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and
have do minion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowel of the Air; and
over every living thing that moves upon the face of the Waters.) From whence
it may be observed, 1. That though these words are placed before the making of
Eve by a Prolepsis (very usual in Scripture) yet it is apparent that they must
have been spoken after it, by these words male and female created he them,
since Moses could not speak of a Female until the woman was made. 2. That this
Dominion over the creatures is given unto them both jointly, the grant of the
Dominion as well as the blessing being given alike to them. And God blessed
them, and said unto them etc. 3. That it does not appear that this Dominion was
personal to Adam and Eve alone, exclusivly to their Children, and descendents,
so that none of them could eat, or dispose of any fruits of the Earth for the
supplying of the necessities of nature without their leave, for the words are
general, Male and Female created he them; and so seem, though spoke to the
persons of Adam and Eve as the Protoplasts of Mankind to relate to all the
Males, and Females that ever should be born. 4. That this Dominion was not
absolute to dispose of the Creatures as they pleased, since the previledge of
using them for food was not given until after the flood. So if these words in
Genesis do not prove an absolute Dominion in Adam, over all things, I do not
see any other place that can; for though it is true that God after the fall
made the woman subject to her husband; yet I do not see why she should
therefore loose her right of preserving her self by the fruits of the earth, or
her using any of the Creatures, suppose the milk of a Cow without her husbands
consent. For if Adam had been at any time in an ill humor (all the things in
the world being his) should he have but forbid her to eat any of them without
his leave, our great Grandmother might have starved without all remedy.

So likewise had he been at any time angry with any of his Sons, and had forbid
them to touch so much as an Apple, they must either have perished, or if they
had filled their bellys, been at once guilty of Theft, and disobedience; so
that it had been in his power without any violence to have taken away their
lives when he pleased. But I cannot think it rational, neither is it consonant
to Scripture, that God gave Adam such a despotick power over all things; for
since all the Children of Adam had as much right to their lives as Adam had
himself, it must likewise follow, that they had as good a right to the fruits
of the earth, which were then the only means to maintain it, and consequently
might have filled their bellies when they pleased with any of the natural
products of the earth, without their Fathers leave; for the Psalmist says, God
gave the Earth to the Children of men, that is, not to any one man, nor yet
absolutely in common, but to be either divided, or used in common, as they
should find it stand best with their convenience and way of living; so that I
shall not much dispute with the Author whether Cain, and Abel had their
separate Pastures for their Flocks by the Assignment of their Father; though I
believe it will be a pretty hard task to prove that Cain, when he ran away for
his brothers murder, enjoyed the land of Nod, where he built a City by his
fathers settlement. But though Mr. Seldom, and the Author agree very well about
the distinct Dominion of Adam, yet they do not so concerning that of Noah, and
his Sons, whom Mr. Seldom, (and I think with very good reason) from Genesis IX. 2.
Will have to be joint Commonors with their Father in the dominion of the world
and all its creatures; but the Author says, that the Text does not warrant it.
'For though the Sons are mentioned in the blessing, yet it may be best
understood with a subordination, or benediction in succession, the blessing
might be fulfilled, if the Sons either under or after their Father enjoyed a
private dominion: It is apparent that the words rather warrant the contrary.
For the Text does not mention any blessing in subordination but is alike in
present to Noah and his Sons, for God spoke to Noah and to his Sons, and so is
their power over the creatures: as appears v. 3. Every moving thing that
lives, shall be meat for you; even as the green herb, that is (the fruits
granted to Adam before) have I given you (in the plural number) all things. As
for this Authors other argument from the private dominion of Adam, it might be
good against Mr. Seldom, who had admitted it before, but is none against those
that do not believe any such grant. As for Noah's being sole heir of the world,
he takes that for granted (which is no law of nature) that in the state of
nature one man is more an heir to his Father (or any other relation) than
another; but having confuted that opinion already, I need say no more of it
here.

Mr. Seldens account of the original of Propriety, 'After Noah is, that in
distributing Territories, the consent of Mankind passing their promise or
compact (which did also bind their Posterity) did intervene so, that men
departed from their common right of Communion of those things, which were so
distributed to particular Lords and Masters. But the Author replys, that this
distribution by the consent of Mankind we must take upon trust, for there is
not the least proof of it out of Antiquity: If by Antiquity he means profane
Authors, all of them; both Historians and Poets that have writ of this subject
are for a primitive Community of all things, necessary for the life of Man: As
any man that considers what the Poets say concerning the golden Age, whose
chief happiness they place in men's enjoyment of the fruits of the earth in
Common, nor does Lactantius Li. V. Inst. Cap. 5. one of the learned of the
Fathers interpret those passages otherwise. If by antiquity he means proof out
of Scripture; that neither makes for or against this opinion, the Scriptures
not being written to show us the originals either of Government, or Propriety,
any more than to teach men Chemistry or Astronomy, though there be some so
sottish to think they thus find some grounds for their Fancies in those
studies; yet it appears that the land of Canaan was all, or most of it in
Common in Abraham's time, or else he could never have lived, and kept his flocks
upon it as a separate Master of a Family, without becoming subject to any other
Prince. But however I look upon this Tradition delivered by the Greek and Latin
Authors every whit as good as that Jewish one which Mr. Seldom quotes out of
Eusebius, and Cednenus: though he does not lay any stress upon it. But our
Author admits it as an undeniable Record. That Noah himself as Lord of all was
Author of the distribution of the world, and of all private dominion, and that
by an appointment of an oracle from God he did confirm this Distribution by
'his last Will and Testament, which at his death he left in the hands of Shem,
his eldest Son, and also warned all his Sons that none of them should invade
any of their brothers dominions, or injure one another, because from thence
discord, and civil war, would ensue. Its not likely that the Ancient Jews
should know any thing of this Will of Noah's, for if they had, so diligent an
Author, and so well versed in the Jewish Antiquities as Josephus, would not
have omitted so famous a piece of history. 2. The Rahbins themselves, and
consequently our Fathers of the Church are not agreed whether Shem or Japhet
were the eldest. For though it is true that St. Austin and those Fathers that
follow the vulgar translation, made Shem the eldest; yet St. Chrysostom, and
all the Fathers of the Greek Church, who therein follow the LXX. Versior, as of
greater Antiquity and Authority, are for Japhets being the eldest brother: So
that this Testament being left in Shems hands is a mere Rabinical invention, it
being much to be doubted whether Letters, much more Wills in writing were in
fashion, in Noah's days, and if Noah left no Will, which no Jury can now
decide) then the world was left to Noah's Sons, Grandchildren in Common to be
divided according to their several occasions, since they all three had equal
right to it: But it seems a weak Hypothesis if it serve the Authors present
purpose shall be received, though it contradict his other Principles: For in
his Patriarcha and other of his treatises he makes Adam sole Monarch of the
World, and that this right descended wholly and entirely to Adam's right heir;
But here we find Noah turns the Propriety and Dominion of the world into an
absolute gavel-kind, and distributing the Earth among his three Sons, makes
them all Heirs and Monarchs alike, so that Shem the elder is here disinhereted
not only of his entire Dominion in the world, but also of his natural right of
Lording it over the rest of his brethren, so that whereas the whole world
should have been his, if his Father had not made this unlucky Will, he is fain
to be content with a third part. I shall pass by other impossibilities in this
fancy of Noah's Will, as how Noah should by revelation make a distribution of
the Earth among his Sons, when he never had discovered a hundredth part of it.
Josephus, and the Fathers not supposing him ever to have descended from the
Mountains of Ararat into the Plains all his life time. But to pass over such
Romantic fancies, let us come to the Authors more solid Arguments: Why
Dominion, and Property could not be introduced by the voluntary consent of Men,
and therefore must needs (P. 70.) have begun from Noah's appointment. Toward the
end of these observations he puts this Quere. 'If it were a thing so voluntary,
and at the pleasure of men, when they were free, to put themselves under
subjection, why may not they as voluntarily leave this subjection when they
please, and be free again? If they had a liberty to change their natural
freedom, into a voluntary subjection, there is a stronger reason that they may
change their voluntary subjection into natural freedom, since it is as lawful
for men to alter their wills as their judgments. To which it may be ^nswered,
that the same reason that made men in^itute civil Government, and Property at
first, the ^me likewise obliges them to maintain it, being once ^stituted in
the state in which they find it: For since ^e Common good of Mankind, is the
highest end a ^nan can propose to himself, and the common good ^f the City, or
Commonwealth where he lives, the ^reatest subordinate end next to that, and
that both Government, and Property were at first introduced ^y common consent
for the good of those humane ^ocieties that first agreed to it, every
succeeding member of that Commonwealth, or civil society, though born never so
many ages after, is as much ob^iged to the observation thereof, as they that
first in^tituted it; and though some men either by their own fault, and the
carelessness, or prodigality of their Ancestors, may perhaps be now under such
Circumstances by reason of their poverty, as that civil Government may appear
inconvenient for them, and the Property now established contrary to their
interests, as having perhaps little share either in lands, or goods, he is not
therefore at liberty to resist the Government, and to change the course of this
Property already established; and this is by the laws of nature, without any
Divine revelation: since no man can disturb the ^general Peace of humane
society for his own private ^advantage, or security, without transgressing the
natu^al laws of God, by bringing all things into as far as ^in him lies out of
the settled course they now are in, into a state of Anarchy and confusion, which
having once ^entred into War, this violent usurper of another man's rights can
be no more sure to keep what he has unjustly gotten, than he was, from whom he
took it: and consequently can never be in security until he have again entered
into the same compacts for establishing both Government and Propriety, which
his Ancestors did at first: So that there can rationally no peace nor settled
security be expected as long as he detains that which he at first took from
another by force.

As for the other difficulty he makes, P. 70.
How all the men in the world should agree in one mind, and at one instant of
time to change the natural Community of all things into a private Domminion,
for without such an unanimous consent, it was not possible for Community to be
altered; for if but one man in the world had dissented, the alteration had been
unjust, because that man by the law of nature had a right to the common use of
all things in the world; so that to have given a Propriety of any one thing to
any other had been to have rohbed him of his right to the common use of all
things: which objection likewise is thus farther urged by another Author, That
the nature of things in common is such, that there is not the least Atome in
them, but every member of the Community has a share in it, so that no man
could appropriate, or enclose any thing to himself without a wrong to the
whole, or if all the rest had agreed to it, that one man who refused this
enclosure, might have broken open all theirs.

Which had been no difficulty at all, if the Author had but considered what
kind of right God had bestowed upon Mankind at first, which was not an absolute
positive, or unalterable communion of every man pro indiviso, every blade of
grass in the world: (for such as a Fiction of our Laws suppose, among Tenants
in common) for then the Products of the earth could have contributed nothing to
the ends for which they were designed by God viz. the preservation and
Propagation of the species of Mankind, since no man could have eat any thing
which another might not have pulled out of his mouth, pretending he could not
eat without his leave, because he had a share in it, and so upon this
principle, no man now being able to de^ive a title from Adam, could at this day
possess any thing (suppose in America) by a right of possession or occupancy
which another might not without any wrong or injustice take from him; nor was
it a positive or unalterable community of things; for then if it had been so
ordained it had been part of the law of nature, and no Property could ever have
been introduced, though all Mankind had consented to it. Therefore it follows
that God bestowed no more upon any particular man than what would serve for the
preservation of himself, and propagation of his species, and only in that
manner as might prove subservient to that design, which being supposed it is
evident that before compacts there might be a negative, though not a positive
communion of things; that is all things being exposed to all men (as meat is at
an ordinary) they did not belong to this person more than to another; for
seeing things are not of any use or bene^ice unless applied to men's particular
necessities, and that this grant of those things necessary for life would prove
altogether in vain, were it lawful for others to take from us, those things
which we have already seized on, therefore man being a rational creature, and
being able to foresee future inconveniences, or to draw a consequence from that
which he has found by experience, the first natural law must be the erecting
of this Principle of Reason, Not to do to another that which I would not have
done to my self in the same Circumstances; Therefore, if it be rational for me
to desire my own preservation, and to enjoy the means to it, it is likewise
rational to permit another man to do the like, since he has as much right to
his being as I have to my own; so that if a man have already seized any of
those common things for his own use, though he does not actually then use them,
those things cannot be taken from him without injury; and if any man will call
this first principle of natural Justice, a true agreement of Mankind, I shall
not gainsay it, since such an agreement is but a rational assent of every
particular man's understanding that the abstaining from the doing such a things
is every private man's interest, and likewise for the good of humane society.
Thus among the Indians, few or none steal from each other (though they have no
stone walls nor Locks to secure their things in) because they know Theft would
bring in perpetual War, and confusion among them; and therefore it is all their
interests to join against Thest, not only as a breaker of the laws of nature,
but an infringer of this tacit agreement: But that this Principle belongs to
man considered purely as a rational creature that is able to draw true
conclusions from true Premises, appears from the condition of Children, Fools,
and Mad-folks, which though they have in many things an imperfect reason, and a
sense o^ their present appetites, or desires, yet not being able to make any
judgment of the reasons or consequences of actions, are not to be reckoned in
the rank of rational creatures, so that it is evident that God intended
occupancy or possession should concern a right among men to things that were
before in common (...) yet so, that this occupancy does not give a man a right
to more than is really necessary, and which he can apply to the necessities of
himself and Family (...) Therefore this natural Propriety in things much less,
that which is introduced by Law, or common consent, cannot exclude that natural
right every man has to his own preservation, and the means thereof; so that no
man can be obliged in Conscience; or commits a sin, if in a case of extreme
necessity, (even ready to perish) he makes use of some of the superfluous
necessaries of life which another man may have laid by for the future uses of
himself, and Family, and that were without his consent, if it can by no other
means be obtained, (...) that the things the necessitous person takes are not
^mediately necessary for the preservation of the lives of the Possessors, and
his Family; (for in this case this necessity is to be preferred before all
others) therefore this right of self preservation is still supposed in all
humane compacts, or laws about the division, and distribution of things; so
that when our own and all other laws are so favorable that they do not esteem
those guilty of theft that take only victuals in case of extreme necessity,
though without the owner's consent, and though the person that takes them be so
poor that he cannot make satisfaction for what he has so taken, it being
sufficient that he is supposed willing to do it if ever he comes to be able: So
likewise since the Earth was first Peopled by distinct Families, or companies
of men, all of whom had a right to the necessities of life, (which are indeed
no other than the products of the Earth) these coming to inhabit such and such
tracts of ground, it was in their power, either to live in common upon such
things as the earth produced of it self, or else to divide to every man his
share which another should have no right in: Thus the Indians in America (as I
said before) have all the Country in common among them (except the sites of
their houses and Gardens) but our Planters rather choose to allot every man his
share, it being that which suits best with that way of life they have been used
to in their own Country; and as they think will most conduce to their common
Peace, and advantage; not but that they might if they had pleased have occupied
such a tract of land, which those Indians made no use of, in common with them,
there being no more Obligation upon them to come to a more distinct division
than there does upon the Indians themselves; so on the other side after these
Planters have divided thi^ ^occupied land into as many shares as will serve t^
^ecessities of each man's Family, It is an injury not only in any of those that
agreed to this division, but in any Indian who is at peace with them (that is,
has never declared any war) to break up this enclosure, or take away any thing
that is there planted without the consent of the owner. For since the owner
has possessed himself of this land, and bestowed his Labor and Industry upon
it, and that the other has no right to any more of the products of the earth,
than that may serve for the subsistence of himself and his Family, and that
there is more ground lost where he may procure himself the like necessaries if
he please, he has no right to take away this land from the owner without his
consent, since he has the same right to this Field, as the other has to his
Cottage or Garden. And if such an occupancy will not create a Propriety,
certainly all the Nations in the world are in an ill condition; For since none
of them can now convey their Titles to the Country they possess from any one of
Noah's Sons if occupancy or possession be no good Title, then the rest of
Mankind may upon the Authors own Principles come in for a share wherever they
please; for certainly all the land that then remained undiscovered (which could
not be less than two parts of three) and consequently undivided amongst Noah's
Sons, must afterward fall either to the first occupiers, or all the rest of
Mankind must still have a right in it. So there is no need either of supposing
the original of Property to have proceeded from Noah and his Sons, or else from
the common consent of all mankind at once, since no man has a natural right to
any more things than he could make use of, nor any right at all to those he had
no need of, nor had actualy seized, for his own use: This being I hope thus far
cleared, I will not take upon me to maintain what Grotius asserts, that after
Property was once introduced, it was against the law of nature to use
community, since neither community, nor Property are by the absolute law of
nature, [God having bestowed the fruits of the Earth on the Sons of Men for
their uses] but as for manner of using them, whether in Propriety or in common,
he left it to the discretions of those several parcels of Mankind who agreed to
live together in civil society or commonwealth, as it might either way conduce
to their particular way of living, or common safety and interest: For as where
a Country is thinly peopled, and produces all the necessaries for life only by
the labor of the Inhabitants in hunting, fishing, and the like employments of
that life which we call barbarous, because it does not exercise it self in day
Labor, and that the People do neither need nor desire those superfluous things
that others do, there is no need of enclosing or appropriating any more Land
than they really make use of, more being but a burden to them, so likewise
where the People are more than the Country can well maintain from its own
Products, there will presently arise a necessity of division of lands in the
first place; and of Trade abroad in the next; or else the People must either
discharge themselves into their neighbors territories, or live by robbing, or
playing the Pirates upon their neighbors, as appears by Tartars, Arabs and
Algerines; and consequently when a Country is once divided, and a great many
are without any share of land, there must b^ laws made to maintain this
Propriety, and punishments ordained for them that disturb it; and this i^ the
true reason why there is an absolute necessity for a division of lands in
Holland, but not so in Surinam The nature and original of Propriety being thus
laid open, the other small Objections against this Primitive Community which
some men draw out of Scripture will easily be answered; as first how Adam's
Children could have any right to any of the things of the world, since that the
world and all things in it were given by God to Adam and Eve, before their
Children were born; and so being born after this grant, they could have no
farther interest in any thing than their Parents pleased to allow them, to whom
all things were granted before: As for this particular grant or Dominion of
Adam, I have all ready shown its weakness, and that the Grant was not Personal
to Adam, and Eve alone, but to all Mankind, though made to them as the
Protoplasts or representatives thereof; and as for the right of occupancy, I
have already laid down, that no man in the state of nature, has a right to
more land or territory than he can well manure for the necessities of himself
and Family; that is, can reduce into actual possession, otherwise a man that
first sets his foot on an uninhabited Island, would have an absolute right to
the whole, though it were a Thousand miles long, or to all the Territory he
could discover with his Eyes, so that no man could make use of one foot of
land, in that Island but by his permission.

But another Objection is, That even in the state of Innocence there neither
ought, nor could have been such a Community, because since all order is
agreeable to right reason, and the best order of possessing the things, which
were granted by God to Mankind, was only proper to that ^ate, in which the
abstaining from that which was ano^ers might best be practiced: Since that Law
must be ^rit upon men's minds even before the fall, at least before ^e law
given, thou shall not steal, by which there is esta^lisht a certain and
distinct Propriety to every man in the ^ings he possesses. In answer to which
it may be re^lyed, that no man can tell what kind of life men ^ould have led,
had they continued in the state of ^nnocency; or whether Propriety or Community
^ould have suited best with their way of life, though rather incline to the
latter, since there had been ^o need of enclosure, the Earth producing all
things ^eedfull for the life of man without his labors, and going naked, could
need no more things than what were merely necessary; but after the fall (...)
until which they needed no laws as being unca^able of sinning) these
Commandments thou shall ^ot steal, nor covet thy neighbors goods, did take
^lace even during this Communion of things: For ^he same law of Nature or
Reason, that now forbids ^en to covet or take from each other any of those
things which he enjoys by the laws of the Commonwealth where he lives, does
before the institution ^f the laws about an absolute Property, likewise for^id
the taking away from any man those things, which were necessary for the
subsistence of himself, ^r Family, and was either actually possessed ^f, as
being in his hands, or lying in his pre^ence, or to such things as he had
perhaps laid by for ^uture occasions; nor is there any more obliga^ion upon
Mankind from these Commandments, ^hou shall not steal, thou shall not covet, to
institute ^n absolute distinct Property in all things, than ^here is that we
should still have slaves among us, because the Jews seldom using any other
servants, God commands them that they should not covet such (...) slave, any
more than his Ox, or his Als: For the Law was only intended to take place, as
far as the Subject was capable. Having now answered all the considerable
Arguments that can be made against the possibility of a primitive Communion. I
hope this great difficulty which has puzzled some Divines, which is prior in
nature, Propriety or civil Government is now cleared, since it is apparent,
Propriety, understood either as the application of natural things to the uses
of particular Men, or else as the general agreement of many men in the division
of a Teritory, or Kingdom, must be before Government, one main end of which is
to maintain the Dominion or Property before agreed on.

Having run over all that is most considerable in these observations, both
concerning the natural Dominion of Adam, and consequently shown the original of
Dominion and Property, I shall concern my self very little, in the difference
between the Author, and Grotius, concerning the Power of the people to resist
and punish Kings, in which I shall say no more, than that a Prince who is
subject to be so punished, is not really a King, in the sense that the word
King ought to be understood, since a King is properly one that has no
Superior, and consequently is not capable of Punishment; all punishments as I
said before, being properly the effects of a Superior, over an Inferior; so
that the Kings of Sparta were no more than Generals of the Army, and if the
Duke of Venice should have the title of King given him to morrow, he would
still be but the Head of the Senate, since the one was liable to be put to
death by the Ephori, as the other is still by the Counsel of Ten. But if there
are any such desperate inconveniences (as the Author mentions) that attend this
Doctrine of natural freedom, and Community of all things, it is more than I can
find, or I believe any man else, that will consider the nature of mankind; and
when that is done, if things are contra^ry to his notions of them; it is not
his declaiming will alter men's Judgments, much less the nature of the things
themselves.

As for Grotius's three ways whereby Supreme Power may be had, Obs. P. 63.
as 1. By full right of Propriety. 2. By an usufructuary, and 3. By a temporary
right, I think in most things Grotius may very well be defended, though not in
all. For whereas he acknowledges two ways, whereby a King may obtain a full
right of Propriety, in a Kingdom: That is either by a just war, or by donation
from the People. I do not see the Author finds fault with him upon any just
grounds, because he has not shown how a War can be just without a precedent
Title in the Conqueror, as if no war could be just, nor no Conquest made
without such a precedent Title: For all men know that a war may commence upon
other scores, than old Titles, and in such wars the Prince, or State that has
the right of their side, may prosecute this war, either until they gain this
first demand, or else absolutely subdue their Adversary. So that he mistakes ^n
saying, that Grotius will have a Title only to make the War just, so that all
he says upon this false supposition signifies just nothing, but as for what he
says about a Conqueror's having no new Title, but being remitted to his old
one, is true: Nor do I see any inconvenience from it. For if he were an absolve
Monarch before he were put out, he cannot Attain more than he had before; so if
he, or ^is Ancestors, had no absolute but a limited Power; ^e could be restored
to no more than the Constitu^ion of the Government will allow him. Nor did
Edward W. or Henry VII. though they first obtained the Crown by War, pretend to
more Power than their Predecessors. I shall not trouble my self about the
reasons the Author gives for it: But I think he is out in making it seem
impossible from what Grotius has said, for a Prince to gain a full right of
Propriety by a just War, for Grotius says the contrary; and allows that in some
cases a Prince may gain an absolute dominion by Conquest. But the Author makes
this Dilemma to bring Grotius to an absurdity: P. 64.
That if a King come i^ by Conquest, he must either conquer those people that
have a Governor, or those that have none: If they have no Governor, they are
a free People, and so the war will be unjust to Conquer those that are free.
But if the people Conquered have a Governor, that Governor has a Title or
not: If he have a Title it is an unjust War that takes the Kingdom from him: If
he have no title but only the possession of a Kingdom; yet it is unjust for any
other man, that wants a Title so to Conquer him that is in possession; for it
is a just rule, that where cases are alike, (...) that is in possession is in
the better condition: and for this he quotes Grotius himself, which he need not
have done, for he himself allows it for truth, only he will have all Usurpers
whatever to have a right, whether by Conquest or otherwise, which Grotius will
not As for the rest of this argument, See Directions (...) Obedience. P. 68. 69.
it i^ drawn from Principles never laid down nor maintained by Grotius: For
first i^ a People, that have no absolute Governor (as the Brasilians, and
Caraibees have non^ as I have already said) live peaceable and offen^ no body,
I think it unlawful to make war upon suc^ a People (as the Spaniards did)
without any cause b^ to make them slaves. But if such a People will joy^
together as they often do, under a Carak or Captain created by themselves, and
make an offensive Wa^ upon their neighbors, without just cause: I think they
may justly be Conquered, and become either slaves or subjects to the Conqueror,
as well as one single man in the same case, See Grotitius de I.B. Li. III. Cap.
7.
since both Grotius and all writers allow the taking of slaves in a just war,
but none ever made it alike reasonable, to make slaves of those that have done
them no injury. As for the other part of the Dilemma, where the People
Conquered have an absolute King, or Government, either by Title or Possession
Grotius likewise allows an absolute Conquest of such a People, provided the war
were just: Ib. Cap. 8.
For though the Governor, or Governors made the war, yet since the People
have transferred all their Power to them, and have agreed to authorize all
their actions, the subduing of the Forces, raised by this Governor is a
Conquest of the whole People, Ib. Cap. 8.
as Grotius allows the Conqueror either to reduce them to the condition of
Slaves or Subjects, which he pleases; and certainly where the Conqueror had a
right to subdue, the Conquered have likewise an obligation to obey. As for
Possession it is true, that it is unjust for another Man to Conquer him, that
has but a Possession of a Kingdom, if that be the only ground of the quarrel:
But neither Grotius, nor any reasonable man else, will allow the Conqueror of
such a Possessor that wants a Title, to have gained an absolute right over the
People, since the Usurper himself commanded them only by force, and that they
never confirmed his Title by any after consent. It Is true Grotius defines
public Subjection, to be that whereby a People yields it self up to the
Government of any one, or more men, or also to another People: But he limits
this Subjection to that which proceeds from consent, as he divides Subjection,
from consent into public, Lib. 11. Cap. 5.. 26.
and private, but does not exclude but allows Subjection without consent, as
often as he that deserved to loose his liberty, is reduced by force into the
Power of him who has a right to exact that Punishment; and who have this
right, viz. the Conquerors in a just War, he after shows us, Lib. III. Cap. 7.
8. So that it is evident that the Author never read Grotius carefully or else
misrepresents his sense on purpose, though I am so charitable as rather to
believe the former, than the latter. Obs. P. 66.
He likewise finds fault with Grotius for supposing, That some People for
avoiding a greater evil, do so yield themselves into another power as to
except nothing; for it would, says he, be considered how without war, any
People can be brought into such danger of life, as that because they can find
no other way of defending themselves, or because they are so pressed with
Poverty, as they cannot otherwise have means to sustain themselves, they are
forced to renounce all right of governing themselves, and deliver it to a King.
But since the Author could not understand how this can be without an actual
War, I will show those of his opinion several instances wherein it may and has
happend, that the People may renounce all rights of Property, or of Government
without any war, made upon them. The first instance shall be that of the
Egyptians, Genesis 47.
who when they had parted with their Cattle, and Flocks to Joseph for Bread,
were after forced to yield up their lands and bodies to Pharaoh, and to become
instead of Subjects, absolute Servants or Slaves, as appears by verse 19. Buy
us, and our land for Bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh;
who disposed of their persons as he thought fit, for verse 21. It is said, as
for the People, he removed them to Cities, from one end of the borders of
Egypt, even to the other end thereof; that is, he made Colonies of them, and
changed the places of their abode; or perhaps made them servants to work in
public works, or manufactures, so that they that dwelt in the North of Egypt
he removed into the South, that they might be out of their own Country, and
have less interest or temptation to challenge their own lands again, when the
Famine should be over. From whence it is clear that a People that were free
Subjects, may without a War give up themselves, and all that they have to the
Dominion of another; But since this instance may seem of too long standing, I
will produce one that may happen nearer home; suppose the States of Holland
being threatened by the French King, to make War upon them, if they do not give
up themselves to be his absolute Subjects, or suppose being Master at Sea, (as
God knows after the rate his power now increases, but that he may be so) he
threaten to cut their Banks and let in the Sea to drown them, and their
Country, if they will not yield it up to him; may they not if they find they
cannot resist him, submit themselves to him, and make the best terms they can
for themselves, and are they not then obliged by the Authors own Principles to
continue his Subjects? and yet here is no actual War, or inundation, but
threats only, to force them to this submission. So that the Authors Supposition
is false, that no case can happen but an actual War only, which can reduce a
People to such terms of extremity, as to compel them to an absolute
abnunciation of all Soveraignity, and so likewise is this consequence also
which he assumes from thence; then war which causes that necessity is the
prime means of extorting such Soveraignity, and not the free gift of the
People, who cannot otherwise choose but give away that Power, which they cannot
keep; for they might either leave their Country or bury themselves in it. But
it seems the Author had forgot his Logic, or else he would have remembered, to
distinguish between Causa sine qua non, and Causa efficiens, a cause which does
not properly give being to a thing, and yet without which it could not have
been produced: Thus a Slave at Argiers though it is the occasion of his
servitude his being taken Prisoner, yet the true Cause of his becoming a lawful
Servant to his taker, does not proceed from his conquering him, but from his
coming to Terms with him, that he shall be dismissed of his Fetters, or
Imprisonment, upon Condition he will serve faithfully and not run away, and all
Moralists consider those actions they call mixed; as when a Merchant flings his
goods over into the Sea to avoid being cast away among the number of the
Voluntary ones, though they commenced from some kind of force, since in this
case the Merchant might if he pleased keep his goods if he would venture his
life. So in many cases may a Conquered People, if they have never neither by
themselves, or their representatives owned the Conqueror. But as much as the
Author quarrels at the word usufructuary Right in Grotius, as too base to
express the Right of Kings, and as derogatory to the dignity of Supreme
Majesty; yet the the French are not so scruplous; but in the absolutest
Monarchy of Europe, plainly declare that their King has but an usufructuary
right to his Kingdom, and the Territories belonging thereunto, or that he can
any way charge them with his debts, or alienate, or dispose of them; without
the consent of the States of France, See Mezeray in the reign of this King.
1527.
and was so sol^mnly, declared by that great Assemby des notables called by K.
Francis the First, to give their Judgment of the Articles of Peace lately made
with the Emperor Charles V. at Madrid, their sense was, that Burgundy which by
those Articles was to be delivered up, was an inseparable Member of the Crown,
of which he was but the usufructuary, and so could not dispose of the one any
more than of the other; nor was this any new opinion, but as old as St. Lewis,
who being desired by the Emperor Frederic III. to restore the King of England
his just Rights, To which the said King replied, (whose words I will faithfully
translate (as they are in Matthew Paris p. 765. Anno Dom. 1249.) By the holy
Cross with which I am signed I would willingly do it, if my Counsel ( i. e. the
Estates) would permit it, because I love the King of England as my Cosen; but
it were hard at this very instant of my Pilgrimage ( viz. for the holy land) to
disturb the whole body of my Kingdom, by contradicting the Counsels of my
Mother, and all my Nobles, although the Intercessors are very dear to me;
neither is this to make a Kingdom all one with a Ferm (as the Author words it)
since in the civil Law it signifies not only one that barely receives the
rents, or profits, but likewise enjoys all other Prerogatives and advantages
that may accrue to him as the true owner, though he have not power to sell or
give it away; Nor I suppose will any French or English Subject (unless such
bigoted ones as the Author) acknowledge any Foreign Prince, or other Person
can obtain an absolute Dominion over them by Conquest. I am sure they were not
of that opinion between two hundred, and three hundred years ago, when the
King of England brought a plausible Title into France, and had it backed by
almost an entire Conquest of the whole Kingdom, and a formal setlement and
acknowledgment from Charles VI. then King and the greatest part of the Nobility
and Clergy of France at Paris: and yet after all this, the French had so little
Conscience as to proclaim Charles the Dauphin King of France, and to drive the
English out of the Country, and renounce their allegiance which they had sworn
to our Kings, Henry V. and VI. and yet the Author will have it to be but a
naked presumption in Grotius to suppose The Primary will of the People to have
been ever necessary, P. 69.
to bestow Supreme power in succession. But if the Author will not be content
that Kings shall have any less than absolute Propriety in the Crown, let us see
the consequences of this Doctrine; For the Crown must be of England in the
nature of an absolute Fee Simple, and is consequently chargeable by any act, or
alienable by the Testament of the King in being: So that then King John had
Power to make this Kingdom feudatary, and tributory to the Pope: and so the
Pope has still a good Title to it. And since Religion with these Gentlemen
diminishes nothing from the right, and absoluteness of Monarchy; the same King
might have made over his Kingdom to the Emperor of Moroco (as the Historians of
those times relate he would) and so the Sarracen Prince might have entered upon
the nonperformance of the Conditions, and have turned out his Vassal, and been
King here himself; which opinion how contrary it was to the notions which Kings
themselves had of the right to dispose of their Kingdoms, let any man consult
Matthew Paris, and he will see there what Phillip Agustus amongst other things
tells Wallo the Popes Legate, Anno 1216. P. 280.
that no King could give away his Kingdom without the consent of his Barons,
who are obliged to defend it, and all the Nobility there present began to cry
out at once, that they would assert this Privilege till death: That no King,
or Brince could by his sole Will, give away his Kingdom, or make it tributary,
by which the Nobles of the Kingdom might become Slaves. Nor did the English
Nobility think otherwise, since this was one of the causes of their taking Arms
against King John: Matt. Paris. 1245. p. 659. 666.
and afterward in his Sons reign, we find the Procurators of the Nobility and
People of England declare in the Council of Lions, quod universitas Regni
nunquam (i.e. Patres nobilium vel ipsi) never consented or would ever consent
to the tribute unjustly extorted by the Court of Rome: At which protestation
his Holiness was so confounded, that our Author tells us he never lift up his
Eyes, or had a word to reply.

And every Monarch has as absolute a Propriety in his Kingdom, as Noah had in
the World, as our Author supposes, I know no reason why the King may not
bequeath his Crown to which of his Sons he pleases, no matter whether lawfully
begot or not, since Princes are above all Terms, or positive Laws, or he may
divide it among them, as Noah did the World to his three Sons: So that upon
these grounds the Testament of Henry VIII. whereby he disinherited the Line of
Scotland; and that of Edward VI. whereby he excluded his Sisters from the Crown
should have been valid, but the Loyal Subjects of England believed that neither
of those Kings could disinherit the right Heir of the Crown by their Testaments
alone, but acknowledge them in the persons of Queen Mary, and King James
notwithstanding those pretended Wills. I have been the larger upon this Subject
that men that do not much consider, nor are versed in these matters, may see
the absurd, wicked consequences of this notion, of an absolute Propriety and
Dominion, to be inseparable from Monarchy: So that I doubt not but even those
very men who love a smatch of arbitrary Government, because it best suits with
their tempers, or interests, cannot away with it unmixt, when it comes to exert
all its Prerogatives: Thus some men think Musk, and Ambergreece mixed whith
other Ingredients makes an agreeable Perfume, which if held to their noses in
the Cod, or whole Lump, they are so far from thinking a good smell, that they
loath it.

I shall not affirm with Grotius That the Empire which is exercised by Kings,
does not cease to be the Empire of the People: For I suppose the People have
passed over all their present interest in it, to the Prince and his heirs, and
as long as that line lasts they have nothing to do with it, and consequently
cannot set up another Family over them; and so on the other side the King has
no such absolute Property, as that he can alter the succession otherwise than
the fundamental laws of the Monarchy did first appoint; which were made by
consent of all the Estates, and without which they cannot be altered; nor is
there any fear of a contradiction, as the Author supposes, [ That the
Succession must either hinder the right of Alienation which is in the People,
or the alienation must destroy the right of succession, which must attend upon
elected Kings. For we own no right of alienation in the People, as long as
there is a lawful Heir remaining and succeeding in his right, to whom the Crown
was first legally settled; nor yet does therefore the succession diminish the
right which the People had at first, but that it may arise and take place again
if the King should die without known heirs.

Having done with his observations upon Grotius, Chap. VI.
I am now come to his Anarchy of a limited or mixed Monarchy; in which (though I
shall not undertake to maintain all which our Author if whom he writes against
has laid down in this treatise, since many things in that it treats were
written according to Irene's notions during the late Wars) yet I hope I may be
able to show that this Doctrine of a limited Monarchy is not but of Yester^lay,
as our Author will have it: But that all the learned men in the laws and
constitutions of these Northern Kingdoms, have held it to be no such damnable
Doctrine, but that the contrary would introduce ^ll Tyranny, and Arbitrary
Government among them, which is at this day practiced in the Eastern parts of
the world.

But it seems the Author allows, 260.
that there may be a mixed Government; but not a mixed Monarchy, because the word
Monarchy is compounded of two Greek words (...) one alone, and (...) to Govern,
or Rule: and therefore Monarchy being the Government of one man alone cannot
admit of any limitation or mixture.

But what if one should say that all this is nothing but wrangling about words:
since why may not he be called a Monarch who has the Supreme, though not the
only Power in a Commonwealth, if the custom of that Country allow it him,
though his Power be limited or mixed, as well as for the Romans, to call their
Monarch but Imperator, or General: or for the Florentines, or Russians to call
their Monarch great Duke: Since it is not the names, but the exercise of the
power that creates the difference: Nor is it any more a Bull, or contradiction
than to call that which I now write out of, an Inkhorn, though perhaps it is
made either of Glass, or Metal; So the first Monarch being absolute, the Title
of Monarch, may now be by eustom well enough applied to those that are not
absolutely so; but to pass by such Grammar niceties, I shall endeavor to
vindicate the writer of this Treatise of Monarchy, whom the Author calls Mr.
Hunton, from giveing an Idea of a Government, which is nothing but mere Anarchy
and Fiction: and that there has been, and yet is such a kind of Government as
a limited Kingship; which if the Author is so dogged, as he will not allow it
the name of a Monarchy, we cannot help it, let his Friends give it a more
proper name if they please: As for what he will prove out of that Authors words
that every Monarch (even his limited Monarch) must have the Supreme Power of
the state in himself, so that his Power must no way be limited by any power
above his: For then he were no Monarch, but a subordinate Magistrate, is true;
yet I do not see that the Author contradicts himself as the observatour will
have him, when he tells us in the same Page, That in a moderate, or limited
Monarchy, the supreme power must be restrained by some law according to which
this power was given, and by direction of which this power must act: So that he
will have his Supreme Power not limited, and yet restrained: Is not a
restraint, a limitation? and if restrained, how is it Supreme? and if
restrained by some law, is not the Power of that law, and of them that made it
above his Supreme Power? and if by the direction of such law only he must
Govern, where is the Legislative Power, which is the chief of supreme Powers?
when the law must rule and govern the Monarch, and not the Monarch the law; he
has then at best but a gubernative or executive Power: and so proceeds to
quote this Authors own words at large, if his Authority transcends his bounds,
and if it command beyond the Law, and the Subject is not bound Legally to
subjection in such cases, and if the utmost extent of the Law of the land be
the measure of the limited Monarch's Power, and Subjects duty where shall we
find the Supreme, that Culmen, or apex potestatis that prime (...) which the
Author says must be in every Monarch, the word (...) which signifies,
Principality and Power, does also signify beginning, which does teach us that
by the word Prince, or Principality, or Principium or beginning of Government
is meant; this if it be given to the law, it robs the Monarch, and makes the
law the Primum Mobile; and so that which is but the instrument or servant to
the Monarch becomes the Master. In vindication therefore of Mr. Hunton, on whom
he makes these remarks, I shall in the first place grant that he has perhaps
spoke not so properly, in saying that the supreme Power must be restrained by
some law, whereas indeed he should rather have said limited by some law, since
the word restrained is of a harsh signification, and denotes something of a
certain force, the exercise of which this Author is altogether against in his
whole treatise of Monarchy; so that putting it thus, that the supreme Power (in
a limited Monarchy) must be limited by some Law, does not therefore place any
coercive power above his, who can call him to an account for his actions: But a
Power that may remonstrate to him where he has acted contrary to that Law, and
may by that law punish, not the Monarch, but his Ministers that have dared to
transgress those such known laws. For as for the Monarch himself, it is still
supposed that he in his own person can do no injury: So that he may still be
Supreme, and yet be limited, not by any power Superior to his own, but by his
laws (or declared Will) which he himself has made in the Assembly of his
Estates, and which he can not alter, but by the same form by which they were
constituted; and this sort of limitation may very well consist with a perfect
Monarchy. Thus the King of the Medapersians was an absolute Monarch, and alone
made laws, and yet we find in Dan. XII. that Darius was forced against his will
to cast Daniel into the Lions Den, for transgressing his own Decree, because
the Laws of the Medo-Persians did not alter, that it could not be dispensed
with by the King, when they were once made: Thus it is no derogation to God
himself to be bound by his own Oath, which from the immutability and perfection
of his nature he cannot afterward alter. See Heb. VI. from v. 16. to 17, 18.
That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie etc.
the two immutable things are first his own nature, and then the Oath, he swear
by himself, so that we see this restriction of Gods power by his Oath (which is
a law to him) is no derogation from his absolute Monarchy or Omnipotency; but
is consistent with it; therefore it does not follow that in all laws where the
law governs the Monarch, he has therefore but a Gubernative power: Or that if
the Sovereign Authority is limited by Law, it ceases to be Supreme, as I shall
by and by show more at large; in the mean time I shall not defend Mr. H.'s
opinion, when he says that in a mixed Monarchy, the Sovereign Power must be
originally in all the three Estates, or that the three Estates are all sharers
of the Supreme Power, only the primity of share in the Supreme power is in one:
For the Observator observes very well that this contradicts what he before
confessed, That the Power of Magistracy cannot well be divided; for it is one
simple thing, or indivisible beam of Divine perfection; yet he will for all
this allow his mixed Monarch but one share of the Supreme power, and gives
other shares to the Estates; and so destroys the very being of Monarchy, by
putting the Supreme power, or a part of it in the whole body or a part thereof;
Therefore I am so far of their opinion that held, the Supreme Power cannot well
be divided into several shares, since there is so great a conjunction between
all the parts of Sovereign power, that one part cannot be separated from the
other, but it will spoil the regular form of the Government, and set up an
irregular Commonwealth, which will scarce be able to hold well together. And
that this will be so in all Governments, see what Mr. Pufendorf has said in
that excellent work de Jure nature et Gentium discoursed upon this Subject;
Lib. IV. Cap. 7.. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
neither am I not here of Grotiu's mind, Lib. 1. Cap. 3.. 9. 17. Who supposes
the Supreme power to be divided: if a People yet free should command its future
King per modum manentis praecepti, after the manner of a lasting, or standing
Precept or Command; where it does not appear, how there can be a lasting
Command at that time when no Person has any longer a power of Commanding: For
every Command supposes a coactive force, to be exercised, when ever that
Precept is violated; therefore the People constituting a King, must either
retain this power against the King, or may not retain it; if the former, there
will remain only the empty name of a King; but the real Sovereignty will still
remain in the People; but if the latter be true, and they do not retain it;
this Precept or Command signifies nothing. So likewise in that same place, If
in the conferring of the royal power any thing be added, by which it may be
understood that the King may be compelled, or punished: For here it is true the
Sovereignty is not divided, but the people has it indeed altogether; For if
the People have a right of punishing the King upon any pretense whatever, there
is nothing conferred upon him, but the office of the first Magistrate in the
Commonwealth under the name of King, but the Royal Power will still remain in
the People; because (as I have already laid down) all punishment, quatenus as
such, must proceed from a Superior: But all compulsion is performed two ways,
either morally, or Physically, that is by way of Sovereign Authority, or by
force of Arms, or War; for there is no Authority can be morally supposed
against an Equal, considered as such; therefore when Grotius inferrs, that the
People may be at least equal to the King, because in some cases it may compel
him, he is likewise necessitated to grant that neither of them has any
Authority over the other, because it contradicts the nature of a Commonwealth:
Though compulsion by force of Arms as between Equals, or those who have no
Authority over each other, must be granted in the state of nature, in which we
will make use of Grotius's own Example; that a Creditor has naturally a right
of compelling the Debtor to pay his debts, although the Creditor has no right
to exact this of him by way of any authority thereby vested in himself:
otherways it were necessary that every one who owed another any thing, must
presently come under his power: therefore the Debtor must be compelled by the
Creditor to pay his debt, either by the assistance of some Judge (which cannot
be supposed between the King and People) or if they live in a natural liberty,
by force. But if we should allow this way of compulsion to the People, it will
follow that both the King and the People do still live in a natural liberty, or
mere state of nature; that is that the Commonwealth, is dissolved: Yet we will
grant Grotius this, that in all civil constitutions there is nothing absolutely
free from some inconveniences, therefore because of the inconveniences that
arise from this divided Sovereignty, it does not presently follow that there
can be no such Government or that it must presently fall to an absolute
Anarchy; for right is not to be measured from what pleases either this, or that
Author, but from his or their will, from whom this right at first began. So
likewise on the other side, it must be granted that if such division of the
Supreme Authority has been instituted by any People that people have not
constituted a Regular government but a politic body subject to perpetual
distempers.

Therefore supposing the most that can be required, that the King in a limited
Monarchy is he who alone gives the Essence and Authority to the Laws, though he
can make no other than what are offered him in the Assembly of his Estates; yet
if all Magistrates that put these Laws in execution are subordinate to him, and
depend upon him, this takes away that inconvenience this Author objects against
limited Monarchs: For he is truly Supreme, since he makes the laws, and is the
Fountain of all power in his Dominions; neither does this derogate from the
Supremacy of his Power that he is obliged either by original contract, or by
after promise, or condescent not to make any laws, or to levy any money, or
taxes from his Subjects, but what they shall offer him in the Assembly of his
Estates. For since all laws that are made in a Monarchy, are but the
declaration of the Monarchs will: and that he being but one man cannot declare
his will Physically to the senses of all his Subjects, but requires some
politic form, or manner of signifying this will to all that are to obey it,
which is various according to the several Customs, and constitutions of diverse
Kingdoms; therefore as in Monarchies where there are no use of Letters, Laws
can be no otherwise made, or promulgated, but by signifying the Monarchs will
to the subordinate Magistrates by word of mouth, by such Officers as must be
supposed to bring some sufficient token, that they come immediately from them,
and are sufficiently instructed in the matter he will have observed as a law,
which form can depend upon nothing but Custom, or the common consent of the
People to admit that for Law which shall be so promulgated, since they have no
infallible certainty, but that the Messenger may be sent by some body else that
has a mind to make alterations in the State without the Princes knowledge; or
else that the Messenger may mistake the Princes meaning, and report the law
wrong. So likewise in Kingdoms where laws are put into writing, there must be
some form, or rule agreed upon, both of making, and promulgating Laws: So
likewise in those we call limited Monarchies, the Custom or form is not to
admit any thing for a Law, or the authentic will of the Prince, but what his
Subjects have offered to him drawn up into form, and which he has passed into
a Law, by some token of consent before instituted in the presence of the
general Assembly of the Estates of his Kingdom: which course is absolutely the
best both for the Prince and People; For since the end of all laws (as of
Government it self) are the good of the people; so it is not likely that the
Subjects having the drawing up of the Laws, will offer any to the Prince that
they are not absolutely persuaded are for the benefit of the Commonwealth, nor
can that be any prejudice to the Prince's power, since no law can be made
unless he give it the stamp of his Royal Authority. Therefore though Forms are
not essential to the declareing of the will of a private man in the state of
nature, yet they must be in respect of that of such a Prince, since the power
of the former is natural and can influence only those that hear him, but that
of a Prince is artificial, or political as proceeding from compact, and is to
command even those that never saw him, or are like to come into his presence;
it is requisite that the ways of declaring his will be made so certain, that
the Subjects may have no reason to doubt of it: therefore there can no way be
found out which can more certainly assure all the Subjects both of the benefit,
and Authority of the Laws, than when a Prince voluntarily in a general Assembly
of all the Estates of his Kingdom, either by pronouncing of words, or by
touching the Bills offered him with his royal Scepter, (or any such like
Ceremony) declares he will have those Bills, or Writings promulgated and
observed as his Laws, or declared Will, which being once done in such a solemn
and public manner, takes away all suspicion that the Prince was not well
advised when he made them, or wrought upon by the flateries or insinuations of
Women or Favorites; Circumstances which being wanting in absolute Monarchies,
where the Prince's Edicts are perhaps either given out in have, or at second
hand to those who never see him, by Eunuchs, or Officers; who taking the
Monarch at some advantage, and makes him pass Commands which perhaps he does
not remember or repents of the next day; whereas in such a limited Monarchy, a
Prince does not only appear with greater Splendour and Authority, when in the
face of his Subjects he exercises the highest Act of Sovereignty in making
laws, but likewise assures them that he acts with an absolute freedom, when
having a liberty to deny, he yet grants the desires of his Subjects; yet so
establishes them for Laws, that they cannot be altered without their consents,
and by the same means by which they were first made: which being supposed may
serve to answer an Objection that some may make, that if this way of passing of
Laws, or the Princes declaring his will after this manner be but a matter of
form, or Circumstance, why may not this Monarch alter it at his pleasure, and
declare for the future (for example) that all laws shall be by him passed in
his privy Council, and then being openly proclaimed, and Copies recorded in all
Courts of Justice, shall be of the same Authority as if they had been passed in
the Assembly of Estates: To which the answer is obvious, that though it is true
the Monarchs passing of Laws, whether in the great Council, or in his privy
Council be but a matter of form, if the Legislative power remain wholly in
himself; yet since even the forms, and Circumstances in doing things are such
essential things without which business cannot be done; If therefore the people
made it part of their original Contract with their Prince at first, that he
should make no laws, but what should be of their proposing, and drawing up; and
that he might refuse if he pleased the whole, but should not alter any part of
it: This though in its self a matter of form, yet being at first so agreed is
indeed an original and fundamental constitution of the Government. Therefore
the Author is as much mistaken in his Divinity as his Law, when Patriarcha P.
97. Resolves the question in the affirmative, Whether it be a sin for a Subject
to disobey the King if he command any thing contrary to his Laws, That the
Subject ought to break the laws if his King command him: Where as as the Author
has put it, nothing is more contrary to Law and Reason, for so it would be no
sin for Soldiers or others, to give and take away men's Goods by force, or turn
them out of their houses, if they could produce the Kings Commission for it;
and consequently it was no sin in those Irish Rebels that acted by a
counterfeit Commission under Sr. Philim O Neal; for though it was forged (yet
the forgery being known but to very few) it was in respect of those who acted
by virtue thereof all one, as if it had been true and according to this Authors
Divinity, Part 1. Page 98.
They were obliged to rise and cut the throats of all the English Protestants,
since the King by his Commission commanding a man to serve him in the Wars, he
may not examine whether the War be just, or unjust, but must obey, since he
has no authority to judge of the causes of War; which if spoken of such Wars
as a King has a right to make, is true; but of all warin general, nothing is
more false, as appears by the instance before given; nor are the examples the
Author there brings at all satisfactory, as that not only in humane Laws, but
also in Divine a thing may be commanded contrary to law, and yet obedience to
such commands is necessary: the sanctifying the Sabbath is a Divine law; yet if
a Master command his Servant not to go to Church upon a Sabbath day, the best
Divines teach us, that the Servant must obey this Command though it may be
sinful, and unlawful in the Master, because the Servant has no authority or
liberty to examine or judge whether his Master sin or no in so commanding.
Where if the Author suppose, as I do not, that the Sunday (which he improperly
calls the Sabbath) cannot be sanctified without going to Church, or that going
to Church on that day is an indispensible duty, the Master commanding the
contrary ought no more to be obeyed, than if he should command his Servant to
rob, or steal for him; but if going to Church be a thing indifferent, or
dispensible at some times then the Author puts a Fallacy upon his Readers,
arguing from the nonperformance of a thing which is doubtful, or only
necessary secundum quid, in which case the Subject or Servant is bound to obey
Authority to a thing of another kind which is absolutely unlawful; Since it is
sinful, for any Subjects to obey the King's private or personal Commands in
things unlawful, and contrary to known positive laws: The laws only seting the
bounds of Property in all Commonwealths; so that though it be no sin in Turkey
or Muscovy for an Officer to go and setch any man's head by virtue of the Grand
Seigniors Commission, without any trial or accusation; I suppose any man that
valued his life, would say it were murder for any person to do the same by the
Kings bare Commission in England; and yet there is nothing but the Laws and
Customs of each Government that creates the difference: Not that I do affirm it
were a sin in all Cases for a Subject to obey the King though contrary to Law,
since there are some Laws which the King has power to dispense with, and
others which he has not, and others which he may dispense with, but yet only
for the public good, in cases of extreme necessity: But to affirm as the
Author does without any qualification or restriction, that it is a sin to
disobey the Kings personal Commands in all cases however issued out; favors of
Mr. Hobs Divinity as well as Law; nor does the Author himself when he has
thought better on it, Patriark. P. 99.
assert the Kings Prerogative to be above all laws but for the good of his
Subjects that are under the laws, and to defend the peoples rights (as was
acknowledged by his late Majesty in his speceh upon his answer to the Petition
of right: So it is true the King has a power to pardon all Felonies, and
Manslaughters, (and perhaps Murders too) yet supposing this power should be
exerted but for one year toward all Malefactors whatsoever, any man may easily
imagine what such a Prerogative would produce; So that the public good of the
Kingdom ought to be the rule of all such Commands, and where that fails the
right of commanding ceases. Ib. 99.
As for the instance of the Court of Chancery it is (not a breach of the Kings
Preogative) but part of the Common Law of this Kingdom, so no man that
understands any thing of Law or Reason, will affirm that it is a Court of that
exorbitant power, that it is limited by no rules or bounds, either of Common,
or Statute Law, or of the Laws of aequum, and bonum; or that every thing that a
Chancellor, who is keeper of the Kings Conscience, decrees, must be well, and
truly decreed, since this were to set up an absolute Tyrany. But I shall now
proceed to examine the rest of the reasons the Author gives, either in this
Treatise, or his Patriarcha against the possibility of a limited Monarchy.

He finds fault with Mr. H. P. 281.
'For asserting that a Monarch can have any limitation ab Externo: and that the
sole means of Sovereignty is consent and fundamental contract, which consent
puts them in their power which can be no more nor other than is conveyed to
them by such contract of subjection; upon which our Author inquires thus, if
the sole means of a limited Monarchy, be the consent and fundamental contract
of a Nation, how is it that he says a Monarch may be limited by after
condescent! is an after condescent all one with a fundamentnl contract, or with
an original, and radical constitution! why yet he tells us it is a secundary
original constitution: A secundary original, that is a second first: and if
that condescent be an act of Grace, does not this condesent to a limitation
come from the free determination of the Monarchs will! if he either formally,
or virtually (as the Author supposes) desert his absolute or Arbitrary power
which he has by conquest or other right.

Which last words of Mr. H. though I confess they are ill expressed, yet I see no
down right contradiction in the sense Mr. H. meant them. (if any man please to
consult him he there says) That a Monarch may either be limited by original
constitution, or an after condescent; therefore these words the sole means of
Sovereignty is the consent, and fundamental contract, is not meant of a limited
Monarchy any more than of another, but of any Sovereignty whatever. So likewife
though these words, a secundary original constitution may seem to be (...) and
to destroy each other, yet as the Author explains himself, you will find they
do not in sense; for he only supposes that a Prince who has an absolute
Arbitrary power, either by succession, or election, finding it not so safe and
easy as he conceives it would be for him, if he came to new terms with his
people, would desert some of that despotick power and govern by let rules, or
Laws, which he obliges himself and his Successors by Oath, or some other
conditions, never to make, or alter without the consent of his Subjects. I see
not why this may not in one sense be called a second original constitution; for
he was at first an absolute King by which was the original constitution, and
his coming to new Terms with them may be termed in respect of this a secundary
original constitution, or agreement, of the government though founded upon the
former old right which the Monarch had to govern: as for a King by Conquest, it
cannot indeed in respect of him be properly called a secundary constitution,
since the Conqueror had no right to clame an absolute subjection from the
Subjects until they submitted to him, so as that they might not drive him out
again, if they were able, until he came to some Terms with them. Thus I think
no sober man but will maintain, that the people of England might lawfully have
driven out William I. (called the Conqueror) supposing he had claimed by no
other title but Conquest alone, which when he had sworn to observe and maintain
all the Laws, and liberties of the people of England, and had been thereupon
Crowned, and received as King, and had quitted his pretensions by Conquest, or
force, and had taken the Oaths and homage of the Clergy, Nobility and People;
they could not then without Rebellion endeavor to do. And certainly had he not
thought his title by Conquest not so good as the other of King Edward's
Testament; he would never have quitted the former and sworn to observe the Laws
of his Predecessor; so likewise Henry I. Mat. Paris.
(from whom all the Kings and Queens of England have since claimed) upon his
Election and Coronation (for other title he had none) granted a Charter whereby
he renounced diverse illegal practices (which Flatterers may call Prerogatives)
which his Father, and brother had exercised contrary to King Edward's Laws, and
their own Coronation Oaths, so that here is an Example of one of the Authors
absolute Monarchs, who by a right of Conquest might pretend to the exercise of
an arbitrary power, yet renounced it, and only retained so much as might serve
for the well governing of his Subjects, and his own security. It is not
therefore true which this Author affirms, that this accepted of so much power
as the people pleased to give him, since they neither desired, nor did he grant
them any more but those just rights they had long before enjoyed under their
former Kings before his Father's coming into England. However I conceive this
wise Prince was of the opinion of Theopompus King of Lacedemon, Plut. in
Lycurgo.
who when his wife upbraided him that he would leave the royal dignity to his
Sons less than he found it, no, rather, replied he, greater, as more durable:
and therefore Plutarch in the same place ascribes the long continuance of the
Lacedemonian Kingdom to the limited power of their Kings, in these words. ('and
indeed when Envy is removed from Kings) together with excess of power, it
followed that they had no cause to fear that which happened to the Kings of the
Massenians, and Argives from their Subjects: But because this Author tells Mr.
H. that if we should ask what proofs or examples he has to justify his
Doctrine of a limited Monarchy in the Constitution, he would be as mute as a
fish; we will show two or three examples of the antiquity of such limited
Monarchies: though they were not of the same model with those that are at this
day found among the Germans, and other northern Nations descended from thence.
In Macedon the Kings descended of Caranus (as Callisthenes says in Arrian) did
obtain an Empire over the Macedonians, not by force but (...) by Law. So
Curtius Lib. IV. The Macedonians were used to Kingly Government, but in a
greater appearance of liberty than other Nations: For it is certain the lives
of their Subjects were not at their disposal: as appears from the same Author
Lib. VI. The Army by an ancient custom of the Macedonians did judge of Capital
causes (i. e. in time of War) but in peace it belonged to the People: the power
of their Kings signified little, unless his Authority was before of some force.
And this was by original constitution, for we do not find that ever the Kings
of Macedon altered any thing in their original constitution; yet they had the
Sovereignty in most things; and their persons were sacred. So likewise among
the ancient Romans, where Romulus from a Captain of Volunteers, became a King.
Dyonisius Halicar: Lib. II. Tells us that after Romulus had made a speech to
his Soldiers and followers to this effect, that he left it to them to consider
what Government they would choose; for whatsoever they pitched upon he should
submit to it, and though he did think himself unworthy the Principality; yet he
should not refuse to obey their Commands; concluding that he thought it an
Honor for him to have been declared the Leader of so great a Colony, and to
have a City called by his name. Whereupon the people after some deliberation
among themselves chose him their King, or limited Monarch, since both the
Senate and people had from the very beginning their particular shares in the
Government, the Senates making this great Counsel (which yet were for the
greater part of them chosen out of the Patricians by the Tribes, Dyon. Hal.
Lib. 11.
and Curiae) with these he consulted, and referred all business of lesser
moment which he did not care to dispatch himself; for be reserved to himself
the last Appeal in causes, and to be Pontifex Maximus, or Chief Priest, and
Preserver of the Laws and Customs of their Country, as also to be chief General
in War; but to the people were reserved these three Privileges, to create
Magistrates, to ordain Laws, and to decree Peace and War, the King referring it
to them; So that the Authority of the Senate did join in these things, though
this custom was changed, for now the Senate does not confirm the decrees of the
people, but the people those of the Senate: But he added both dignity, and
power to the Senate, that they should judge those things which the King referred
to them, by Major part of the votes. And this he borrowed from the Lacedemonian
Commonwealth, for the Lacedemonian Kings were not at their own liberty to do
whatever they pleased, but the Senate had power in matter appertaining to the
Commonwealth. But because these examples may seem too stale, or remote, Let us
now consider all the Kingdoms that have been erected upon the ruins of the
Roman Empire by those Northern Nations that overran it; and see if there were
so much as one Kingdom among them that was not limited: As for the Kingdoms of
the Goths, and Vandals erected in Italy Africa, and Spain, the Author confesses
they were limited, or rather mixed, since their Kings were deposed by the people
whenever they displeased them: So likewise for the Successors of those Gothic
Princes in Castile, Portugal, Arragon, and Navarre, and the other Kingdoms of
Spain: He that will read the histories of those Kingdoms, will find them to
have been all limited, or rather mixed, and to have had Assemblies of the
Estates, Mariana. Lib. XVIII.
without whose consent those Kings could anciently neither make Laws, nor raise
money upon their Subjects: and as for Arragon in particular they had a Popular
Magistrate called the chief Justiciary, who did in all cases oppose and cancel
the Orders and Judgments of the King himself where they exceeded the just
bounds of his power, and were contrary to the Laws, though indeed now since the
times of Ferdinand and Isabella, the Kings relying upon their own power by
reason of the Gold and Silver they received from the Judges, and the great
addition of Territories have presumed to infringe many of their Just rights,
and Privileges. And as for the Kingdoms erected by Francks in Germany and
Gaul, which we now call German Empire and Kingdom of France. As for the former
any one that willread the ancient French, and German Historians, will find that
the Kings of Germany could not do any thing of Moment, not so much as declare a
Successor without the consent of their Great Counsel of Nobility, and Clergy,
and as to the latter as absolute as it seems at present, it was a few ages
past, almost as much limited, if not more than its Neighbors: For the Kings of
France could not anciently make Laws, raise any public War, wherein the
Nobility, and people were bound to assist him, or Levy Taxes upon their
Subjects without the consent of the Estates; but those Assemblies being at
first discontinued by reason of the continual wars which Henry V. and Henry the
VI. Kings of England made upon them; Phil. Com. Livre. VI. Cap. 7.
to which Mezeray in his History tells us, France ows the loss of its
Liberties, and the change of its laws: In whose time they gave their King
Charles VII. a power to raise money without them; which trick when once found
out appeared so sweet to his Successors, that they would never fully part with
it again: and Lewis the XI. by weakening his Nobility and People by constant
Taxations, and maintaining Factions among them, bragged that he had meter les
Roys du France, Com. Live. V. Chap. XVIII.
brought the Kings of France. horse du Page. or out of worship Whereas the
Author last mentioned remarks that he might have said with more truth, (les
mettredu sense, horse et de la raison); and yet we find in the beginning of the
Reign of Charles VIII. the Assembly of the Estates gave that King the sum of
two Millions, and an half of Francks; and promised him after two years they
would supply him again: It seems Comines in the same place, did not look upon
this as a thing quite gone, and out of Fashion, since he then esteemed this as
the only just and Legal way of raising money in that Kingdom: as appears by
these words immediately after. Is it toward such Objects as these (meaning the
Nobility and People) that the King is to insist upon his Prerogative, and take
at his pleasure what they are ready to give! would it not be more just both
toward God and the World, to raise money this way than by Violence, and Force!
nor is there any Prince who can raise money any other way, unless by Violence,
and Force, and contrary to the Laws. So likewise in the same Chapter speaking
of those who were against the Assembly of the Estates at that time; that there
were some (but those neither considerable for quality or virtue) who said that
it was a diminution to the Kings Authority to talk of assembling the Estates,
and no less than Treason against him. But it is they themselves who commit that
crime against God, the King, and their Country, and those who use these
expressions are such as are in Authority without desert, unfit for any thing
but flattery, whispering trifles and stories into the ears of their Masters,
which makes them apprehensive of these Assemblies, lest they should take
cognizance of them, and their manners. But I suppose it was for such honest
expressions as these, that Katherine de Midices Queen of France said, that
Comines had made as many Heretics in Politics, as Calvin had done in
Religion; that is because he opened Men's Eyes, and made them understand a
little of that they call King-craft. But however in some Provinces of France,
as in Languedoc and Provence, though the King is never denied whatever he
please to demand; yet they still retain so much of the shadow of their ancient
Liberties as not to be taxed without the consent of the. Assembly of Estates
consisting of the Nobility, Clergy, and Burgesses of great Towns, and Cities,
which however is some ease to them, not to have their money taken by Edict. So
Hungary, which was erected by the Huns, a stirp of the European Scythians, by
which you may judge the ancient form of Government was much the same as that of
the Germans. All Histories grant that Kingdom to have been limited, and to be
of the same form with that of the other Northern Nations, nay which is more, to
have had a Palatine, who could hinder the King from ordaining any thing
contrary to the Laws: and as for Poland, the Author cannot deny but it is
limited in many things; but as he only takes notice of those things in which
the King has power, so he omits most of those in which he has none, as in
raising of money, or making laws without the consent of the Diet. So likewise in
Denmark the Author himself cannot deny but that Kingdom is limited, for he
could not before the late war with Sweden either make War or Peace, raise money
or make laws without the consent of his Senate, who were a constant
representative of all the Nobility. But for the Election of a new King, or for
the making of new Laws the whole body of the Nobility, and Clergy were to be
present and consent. As for Scotland the Government of it has always so much
resembled England, that it being now the same Prince, I shall not say more of
it, but that it has always been a limited, if not a mixed Government. In
Sweden the Kings power is much the same, only the Commons have representatives
in the assembly of Estates, which they had not in Poland and Denmark: But in
Denmark and Sweden the Kings (until of Late that they became Hereditary) were
never received or owned as Lawful, until they were Crowned and had Sworn to
observe and maintain the Laws of the Kingdom and privileges of the Nobility
and People. But the Author thinks he has gotten a great advantage, because he
finds that in Poland and Denmark, the Commons have no representatives in the
Assembly of Estates, and that therefore in some limited Monarchies the whole
Community in its underived Majesty do not ever convene to Justice. Which
signify little, for these that are now the Nobility may be Heirs to those that
once had the whole propriety of the Country in their hands, when these Kingdoms
were erected; and so tho the body of the People increased, yet the ancient
Nobility never admitted them into a share of the Government. As in Venice
without doubt all the Ancient Planters of those Islands had Votes in the
Government, and it was then popular, though it is now restrained to the ancient
Families, or those new ones they now admit, and is much such an other cavil as
that in England: Before the reduceing the Nobiles Minores to two Knights of the
Shire, the Commons had no Votes in the great Council, or Parliament, which
opinion see confuted in Mr. Petyt's Treatise of the ancient Rights of the
Commons of England, and in the learned Treatise, called Jani Anglorum facies
nova. And this appears more plainly in Denmark, where every Lord of a Manor,
or Territory is a Nobleman, and has a Vote in the Diet or Assembly of the
Estates, or else it might have begun as in Poland, which is but an Association
of so many petty Princes for mutual defense, under an Elective Head, who when
they entered into this Confederac, reserved to themselves the power they had
before over their Subjects and Vassals: which how absolute that was, any man
may find, that understands the Sclavonians Genius, in so much that from the
absolute Subjection of that People to their Lords we have the Word SLAVE to
this day: But the Author himself confesses the Kingdom of Poland to be limited,
but it is only by the Nobility; who are for all this forced to please the King,
and to second his will to avoid discord, which is very true, and is requisite
in all limited Governments, that the King, Nobility, and People should agree,
and as it is their duty to comply with his desires, as much as may be, without
giving up their liberties, lives, and fortunes, absolutely to his disposal: So
it is his, to answer his Peoples desires in all things which are for their
benefit: Not that I praise the Form of Government in Poland, since of all those
that own the name of King, I am so far of the Authors mind as to think it most
liable to Civil Dissentions. But before I dismiss this Subject, I must take
notice of a mistake in the last Page of this Authors present Treatise which is
that the People or Community in all these three Realms are as absolute Vassals
as any in the world, which is not true, unless it be affirmed of the Vilains Or
Vassals of the Nobility, which is granted are more absolute Vilains, than ours
were in England, but as for the free born, See Pontanus Hist. Dan. soterus de
Stat. Suecia.
or ordinary Freeholders in Denmark, and Sweden, and for the Merchants and
Artificers dwelling in Towns and Cities, they have all their distinct
privileges; and are free, both their Persons, and Fortunes, and cannot be
oppressed by the Nobility, nor taxed but by the Diet or Assembly of Estates:
but perhaps the Authors Friends may now cavil, and say that these are no
Monarchies at all, because a Monarchy is the Government of one alone, in which
neither Nobility nor People have any share; to which I shall say no more then
that these People call their Governments Monarchies, as participating more of
that then any other form; and they are owned to be true Kings all the world
over; and if the Gentlemen of the Authors opinion will quarrel about words, my
business is not to dispute from Grammar but reason; so that these Kingdoms may
be called Monarchies as they are in Europe; but if these Gentlemen think it not
fit to call them so, let them consider how much all this Authors discourse will
concern our Government in England; or elsewhere in Europe. Having now taken a
short view of the Ancient Governments of most of the Modern Kingdoms that have
been erected since the ruin of the Roman Empire; we will conclude with the
Government of our own Country, and inquire whether ever it were an absolute
despotick Monarchy or no. As for the Original of the Saxon Government, it is
evident out of Tacitus and other Authors, that the Ancient Germans, from whom
our Saxon Ancestors descended, and of which Nation they were a part, never knew
what belonged to an absolute despotick power in their Princes. And after the
Saxons coming in, and the Heptarchy having been erected in this Island, the
Ancient form of Government was not altered, as I shall prove by and by;
therefore though the Monkish Writers of those times, have been short and
obscure, in that which is most material in a History, viz. the form of their
Government, and manner of succession to the Crown amongst them; stuffing up
their books with unnecessary stories of miracles, and foundations of Churches,
and Abbeys: Yet so much is to be picked out of them, that the Government of the
West Saxons which was that on which our Monarchy is grafted, was not
despotical, but limited by Laws, that the King could not seize men's lands or
goods without Process; that he could not make Laws without the consent of his
Wittena Gemote, or Great Counsel: Nor take away men's lives, without a Legal
trial by their Peers, See. Mr. Petyt 's Preface to his forementioned Treatise.
and that this Government has never been altered, but confirmed by their
Successors both of the Danish and Norman Race; as appears by their Charters and
confirmations, and many confirmations of Magna Charta, and other Statutes; as
there is no man that is but moderately versed in the history, and Laws of his
Country, but very well knows: and that this opinion of Englands being a limited
Monarchy is no new one, but owned to be so by our Kings themselves: We may
appeal to the last words of Magna Charta it self, Concessimus etiam eisdem, pro
nobis et haeredibus nostris, quod nec nos nec haeredes nostri aliquid
perquiremus, per quod libertates in hac Charta contentae infringantur vel
infirmentur. Et si ab aliquo contra hoc aliquid perquisitum fuerit, nihil
valeat, et pro nullo habeatur. And this his late Majesty of blessed memory, who
best knew the extent of his own power, says in his Declaration from New Market
Martij, 9. 1641. That the Law to be the measure of his power; and if the Laws
are the measure of it, then his power is limited; for what is a Measure, but
the bounds or limits of the thing measured? So likewise in his Answer to both
Houses concerning the Militia, speaking of the men named by him, If more power
shall be thought fit to be granted to them, than by Law is in the Crown it
self; His Majesty holds it reasonable that the same be by Law first vested in
him, with power to transfer it to those persons. In which passage his Majesty
plainly grants, that the power of the Crown is limited by Law, and that the
King has no other Prerogatives then are vested in him thereby: Nor was this
any new Doctrine, or indicted by persons disaffected to Monarchy, and which had
but newly come off from the Parliament side, by the apparent Justice of his
late Majesty's Cause, as Mr. Hobs in his little Dialogue of the civil wars of
England does insinuate, but was the opinion of the ancient Lawyers many hundred
years ago: Bracton who lived in the time of H. 2. writes thus Li. I. Cap. 8.
Ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub homine sed sub Deo et Lege, quia Lex facit
Regem. Attribuit igitur Rex Legi, quod Lex attribuit Ei. viz. dominationem, et
potentiam. Non est enim Rex ubi dominatur voluntas, et non Lex. And Li. III
Cap. 9. Rex est ubi been Regit, Tyrannus dum populum sibi creditum violenta
opprimit dominatione, quod hoc sanxit lex humana, quod leges ligent suum
Laterem; if this be law we have a Tyrant as well described, as by any
difinition in Aristotle. Also that the King alone cannot make a Law. Li. I.
Cap. 1. So likewise the Lord Chancellor Fortescue in his excellent treatise de
laudibus Legum Angliae dedicated to Prince Edward only Son to Henry the VI. and
certainly writing to him whom it most concerned to know those Prerogatives he
might one day enjoy, he would not make them less than really they were. Cap. 9.
He instructs the Prince thus: non potest Rex Angliae ad libitum suum mutare
Leges Regni sui Principatu namque nedum regali, sed et politico ipse suo Populo
dominatur: Populus enim iis Legibus gubernatur quas ipse fert, cum Legis
vigorem habeat quicquid de consilio, et de consensu Magnatum et Reipublicae
communi sponsione authoritate Regis sive Principis praecedente just fuerit
difinitum, et approbatum. And the Parliament Roll. 18. E. 1. number. 41. (quoted in
Lord Cook's Inst. 4. pt.) acknowledges the same: Homines de Cheshire qui
onerati sunt de servientibns Pacis sustentandis, petunt exonerari de oneribus
Statuti: Winton' etc. The Kings Answer was, Rex non habet consilium mutandi
consuetudines, nec statuta revocandi. So likewise Cap. 18. speaking of the Laws
of England; non enim emanant illa a Principis solum voluntate, ut Leges in
Regnis quae tantum regaliter gubernantur, ubi quandoque statuta ita
constituentis procurant commoditatem singularem, quod in ejus subditor^m ipsum
redundant dispendium et jaciuram, sed concito reformari possunt dum non sine
Communitatis et Procerum regni illius assensu primitus emanarunt; so Cap. 13.
Et ut non potest caput corperis Physici nervos suos commutare neque membris
suis proprias vires, et propria sanguinis alimenta denegare, nec Rex qui caput
est corporis Politici, mutare potest Leges corporis illius, nec ejusdem Populi
substantias proprias substrabere reclamantibus iis, an invitis. And concludes
thus, habes jam Princeps, institutionis politici Regni formam, quam Rex ejus in
Leges ipsius aut subditos valeat exercere, ad rutelam namque legis, subditorum,
ac eorum corporum et bonorum, Rex hujusmodi erectus est: et ad hanc potestatem
a Populo effluxam ipse habet, quo ei non liceat potestate alia suo Populo
dominari. I had not been so large on a Subject which is so known and evident,
and which no sober man will deny, were it not for two reasons; the first is to
satisfy Divines, and men of other professions, who have not leisure to read old
Law Books, and perhaps may lie under some doubts what the true form of
Government of this Kingdom has ever been: and in the next place, to confute
the Author's Cavil, and other men's of his way to the contrary: Authority being
the best Judge in this Case, as Diogenes confuted Zenos's Arguments against
motion (not by disputeing) but walking: So now whether the Treatise this Author
writes against, be but a Platonic Monarchy, or a better piece of Poetry than
Policy I will not dispute; but this much I think I may safely affirm, that the
Government he describes is not a Creature to be found (God be thanked) on
English ground, and for those that so much admire it, let them go find it by
the banks of Nilus, or Ganges where the Sun (that late Emblem of universal
Monarchy) is so indulgent to the Creatures he produces, that those which he
cannot make grow here beyond an Eut, or Adder, are there made Crocodiles, and
Serpents that devour a man at a bit. So that if you should style them the
representatives of the Monarchs of those Climates, Travelers will say you do
not wrong them. I shall now proceed to answer the most material Objection of
this Authors, and not imitate him who in this Treatise passes by all the
Arguments which Mr. H. brings to prove that this is no absolute despotick, but
at least a limited Monarchy, as silently as Commentators do hard places that
puzle them. Let us therefore look back to his Patriarcha, where he gives us a
distinction of the Schoolmen, 'whereby they subject Kings to the directive,
but not to the coactive power of Laws, and is a confession that Kings are not
bound by the positive Laws of any Nation: Since the compulsory power of Laws of
that which properly makes Laws to be Laws, by binding men by rewards and
punishments to obedience; whereas the direction of the Law, is but like the
advice, and direction which the Kings Council gives the King, which no man says
is a Law to the King. Igrant this distinction, provided the Author will
likewise admit another, that though the King is not obliged by Laws, or to any
Judges of them as to Superiors; or as to the compulsory Power of them: Yet in
respect of God, and his own Conscience, he is still obliged to observe them,
and not to dispense with them in those cases which the Law does not give him a
power so to do; and since it is true that it is the rewards and punishments
annexed that give laws their Sanction, therefore there are certain rewards which
will naturally bless Princes that keep their Laws, such as peace of Conscience,
Security, the affections of their People etc. and if I call the contrary
effects to these natural punishments, that are commonly the consequences of the
breach of them, I think I should not speak absurdly; since the Author himself
tells us P. 93. Albeit Kings who make the Laws, are (as King James there
teaches us) above Laws, yet will they rule their Subjects by the Law, and a
King governing in a settled Kingdom leaves to be a King and degenerates into a
Tyrant so soon as he seems to rule (it is there printed in the Copy according,
which is nonsense) contrary to his Laws: and certainly a Tyrant can never
promise himself security, either from his own Conscience, or from Men; but
whereas he says the direction of the Law is only like the advice which the
Kings Council gives him, which no man says is a Law to him, is false; for the
Kings Council should never advise him to do that which he cannot whith a safe
Conscience perform; but the Kings Conscience can never advise him to break
those Laws that are the boundaries between his Prerogatives, and the Peoples
just Rights; and therefore though it is true in some cases where the King sees
the Law rigorous, or doubtful, he may mitigate or interpret the Execution
thereof by his Judges, to whom he has made over that power in the intervalls
of Parliament, and though perhaps some particular Statutes may be his Authority
be suspended, for causes best known to himself and Council; Yet this does not
extend to Laws of public concernment: and for that I will appeal to the
Conscience of any true Son of the Church of England, whether he thinks (for
Example) that the Proclamation for indulgence contrary to the Statute made
against Conventicles were binding or no: Neither is this that follows
consistent with what the Author has said before: That although a King do frame
all his Actions to be according to the Laws, yet he is not bound thereto but at
his good will, and for good Example, or so far forth as the general Law of the
safety of the Commonwealth does naturally bind him; For in such sort only
positive Laws may may be said to bind the King, not by being positive, but as
they are naturally the best, and only means for the preservation of the
Commonwealth! So that if a King thinks any, the firmest and most indispensible
Laws that have been made, (suppose, Magna Charta, or the Statute de Tallagio
non concedendo for example) not to be for the safety of the Commonweal, it is
but his declaring that he will have them no longer observed, and the work is
done, nor will this that follows help it, though true, that all Kings even
Tyrants and Conquerors are bound to preserve the Lands, Goods, Liberties and
lives of all their Subjects, not by any Municipal Laws so much as the natural
Law of a Father, which binds them to ratify the Acts of their Forefathers,
and Predecessors in things necessary for the public Good of the Subjects.

All which is very well, but if this Monarch thus succeeding in the place of
the natural Father, is the sole Judge of what things are necessary for the
common good, what if he have a mind to keep these Children (for Children, and
subjects, slaves are all one with this Author) as some unnatural Fathers do,
as cheap as they can, or to make the most of them, will let them enjoy no more
but the scanty necessaries of life; and will think fair water, brown bread and
wooden shoes sufficient for a Farmer, and 300 l. or 400 l. per annum enough in
Conscience for a Country Gentleman, or desiring to be absolute, (and therefore
to have a constant standing Army to raise money with) as some Monarchs do, and
being resolved that for the future all the just rights and privileges of his
Clergy Nobility and People shall signify nothing, will take all the overplus
of his Childrens Estates, eaving them no more then a poor and miserable
subsistence, he may lawfully do what he will with his own, and it is all his
upon the first intimation of his pleasure by Edict, or Proclamation: But
perhaps some honest Divine may start up and tell him he will be damned for thus
abusing his power, or breaking his Coronation Oath: what What if this Father of
his people shall laugh at him for a fool, and think himself too cunning to
believe any such thing, or what if his Son, or Successor be resolved not to run
his head any more into the snare of a Coronation Oath, but finding himself
invested in all the absolute power of his Predecessor without any unjust act
of his own (since we know Princes seldom loose any thing they have once got)
will exercise it as he pleases for his own humor or glory, and thinks himself
not obliged in Conscience to restore any of those rights his Predecessor has
ursuped upon his People. I know not what benefit this may be to the Prince, but
this I am sure of; it would very little mend the Subjects condition to be told
their former Monarch was damned, or that this may follow him; when they are now
slaves, nor is this a mere Chimera since a Neighboring people over against us,
lost their liberties by much such a kind of proceeding. And therefore this
Author has found out a very fit interpretation of the Kings Coronation Oath,
Vide Iuramenta Regis quando coronatur old Stat. ed 1556.
for whereas he used to Swear that he will cause equal and upright justice to
be administered in all his judgments, and to use discretion with mercy, and
truth according to his power, and that the just Laws and customs (quas vulgus
elegerit) I will not translate it shall choose to be observed, to the honor of
God. Yet our Author will have the King obliged to keep no laws but what he in
his discretion Judges to be upright, which is to make the Oath signify just
nothing, as I have proved already, wherein he abominably perverts the sense of
this Oath, for that which he puts first is really last. And the words by which
he Swears to observe the Laws, and customs, granted by King Edward, and other
his Predecessors, are absolute, and without any reservation, or restriction;
and as for the last clause where the King Swears to observe and protect justas
Leges, and consuetudines. (which he translates upright Laws and customs) this
word justas in this place is not put restrictively (as any man may see that
considers the sense of the words) but only by way of Epithet supposing that
the People would not choose any laws to be observed, but those that are just,
and upright, but the Author omits here quas populus Elegerit, as a sentence
that does not at all please him; though it be in all the Copies of the old
Coronation. Oaths of our Kings: and he may as well deny that they took any
other clause, as this: yet since the Author himself gives us an interpretation
of these words in his Freeholders inquest, page 62. which will by his own
showing make these clauses justas Leges, and consuetudines, not to extend to
all laws and customs in general, but those quas vulgus elegerit, that is as he
there interprets it the Customs which the vulgar shall choose, and it is the
vulgus or common people only who choose customs, common usage time out of mind
creates a custom, no where can so common a usage be found as among the vulgar,
etc. If a custom be common through the whole Kingdom, it is all one with the
common law in England, which is said to be common custom; that in plain terms
to maintain the customs which the vulgar shall choose, is the common Laws of
England, so that in the Authors own sense it shall not signify such Laws
which the King himself has already chosen, and established, but only those
which the people have chosen, and in this sense perhaps it was part of the Oath
of Richard II. to abolish all evil, unjust Laws; that is, evil vulgar customs,
and to abolish them whenever they should be offered him by bill. But I do not
read that any King or Queen since Richard II. took that clause he mentions, and
perhaps King Richard took it in the Authors sense, and found such interpreters
to his mind, and that made him prove such a King as he was, to endeavor to
destroy all the Laws and liberties of this Nation, burning and cancelling the
Records of Parliament, and indeed there was no need of any, if it be true which
he did not stick to affirm, that the Laws of of England were only to be found
in his head, or his breast; but the Author though he grants (for it were
undutiful to contradict so wise a King as King James,) that a King Governing in
a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant so soon as
he seems to rule contrary to his Laws, yet will by no means have this King
counted a Tyrant. But I will not trouble my self about trifles, much less
maintain that the Lords or Commons had any Authority to use King Richard as
they did; since it is a contradiction that any power should Judge that, on
which it depends and who dieing, that is immediately dissolved, since our Kings
have ever been trusted with the Prerogative of calling and dissolving
Parliaments, and certainly they can never be supposed to let them sit to depose
themselves. And of this opinion was Bracton lib. 1. cap. 8. Si autem ab eo
petatur cum (breve non currat contra ipsum) Locus erit supplicationi, quod
factum suum corrigat and emendat, quod si non fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad
paenam, quod Dominum expectet ultorem.

But to return where we left off, if it be granted that Kings do Swear to
observe all the laws of their Kingdoms, yet this Author is so good a casuist,
that he can as easily absolve their Consciences as the Pope himself; For says
he, Patriarch p. 97.
no man can think it reason that Kings should be more bound by their voluntary
Oaths then Common persons are by theirs, now if aprivate man make a contract,
either with or without an Oath, he is no farther bound then the equity and
justice of the contract ties him; for a man may have relief against an
unreasonable, and unjust promise, if either deceit or Error or force or fear
induced him thereunto: Or if it be hurtful or grievous in the performance; and
since the Laws in many cases give the King a Prerogative above common Persons,
I see no reason why he should be denied that Privilege which the meanest of his
Subjects does enjoy.

I know not to what end the Author writ this Paragrph, unless it were to make
the world believe, that when when Kings take their Coronation Oaths they do it
not freely; but only are drawn in, by the Bishops, or overawed by the great
Lords; that they do not understand what they do, and so are merely choused, or
frighted into it by Fraud, or Force. A very fine excuse for a Prince for so
solemn an action, and which he has had time enough to consider of, and advise
with his own Conscience, whether he may take it or no: That he can be said to
be induced by Fear or Force, who was a lawful King before, and only uses this
ceremony to let his Subjects see the reallity of his intentions toward them.
And that nothing shall prevail with him to break his Oath which he has made
before God. That he will preserve those Laws and rights of his Subjects, which
he does not grant but find them in possession of: But as for this relief
against an unreasonable, or unjust promise as the Author terms it. If by those
words he means a promise, or grant that may tend to some damage, or
inconvenience of the Promiser or Grantor, to some right or Jurisdiction that
the Grantor might have enjoyed, had it not been granted away, either by his
Ancestors, or himself; If the Promise were full, and perfect, or the grant not
obtained either by fear, force, or Fraud; all Civilians, and Divines hold that
the Promiser, or Grantor is obliged to the Promise, and cannot take away the
thing granted, though it were in his power so to do. For David makes it part of
the Character of the upright man, Psalm. XV. 4.
and who shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle, that swears to his own hurt, and
changes not. But our Author has found a way to set all men loose from their
Oaths, or contracts if they be any thing grievous, or hurtful in the
performance, that is if the Promiser, or Grantor think it so: and Kings must
have at least as much, and in most cases a greater Prerogative than common
Persons. 'It was a thousand pitties this Author was not Confessor to King H.
III. He might then have saved him the sending to Rome for a dispensation of his
Oath for the observance of Magna charta, which he had made before in Parliament
at Oxford. Anno Regni. 21. and taught him and all Princes else a nearer way to
be freed from their Coronation Oaths, if ever they find them uneafie to them.

But Edward 1. that great Prince was of another mind, who in his Letter to the
Pope concerning the Tribure granted by King John. Mat. Paris. P. 435.
Et super hoc nequiverimus ejusdem deliberationem habere cum Prelatis et
proceribus ante dictis, sine quorum Communicato Concilio Sanctitati vestrae non
possumus respondere, et jure jurando Coronatione nostra praestito sumus
astricti, quod Jura Regni servabimus illibita, nec aliquid quod Diadema tangat
regni ejusdem absque ipsorum re quisito comsilio facimus. So likewise that
Victorious Prince Edward III. in the preamble to the new Statute of Provisors
Anno Regni. 25. Which Statute viz. repealing a former Law viz. 35. Edward. I.
which said this Statute holds always his force, and was never defeated or
annulled in any point, and by so much as he is viz. the King bound by his Oath
to do the same, to be kept as the Law of the Realm.

But I come now to the last main Objection which the Author makes against
limited Monarchy; and by which he hopes to prove it an absolute Monarchy: I
will set down the difference between our Author, and Mr. H. upon whom he
animadverts in their own words. 'First Mr. H. holds that the King himself in a
limited Monarchy is not to be resisted or punished any more then in absolute
Monarchy, and so can do no wrong in his own person.

'Yet if he this limited Monarch transcends his bounds, if he commands against
Law, the subject is not Legally bound to obedience in such cases, whereupon our
Author asks who shall be Judge, whether the Monarch transcend his bounds? Mr.
H. conceives that in a limited legal Monarchy, there can be no stated external
Judge of the Monarch's actions, if there grow a fundamental variance betwixt
him, and the Community. And in another place confesses that there can be no
Judge Legal, and constituted within that form of Government, whereupon the
Author thinks he has got a great advantage over our Gentleman, and therefore
is resolved to put the question home, and demands of him if there be a variance
betwixt the Monarch, and any of the meanest persons of the community who shall
be judge? for instance, the King commands or gives Judgment against me: I reply
his commands are illegal, and his Judgments not atcording to Law: who must
judge? if the Monarch himself judge, then you destroy the frame of the
Government, and make it absolute: For says Mr H. to confine a Monarch to a
Law, and then to make him Judge of his own deviations from that Law, is to
obsolve him from all Law, and on the other side, if any or all the People may
Judge, then you put the Sovereignty in the whole Body, or part of it, and
destroy the Being of Monarchy, and thus this Author (says Sir R. A.) has
caught himself in a plain Dilemma: if the King be Judge, then he is no limited
Monarch, if the people Judge, then he is no Monarch at all: so farewell limited
Monarchy, nay farewell all Government if there be no Judge.

But as sure as this Author thinks he has his Adversary at an Advantage, yet I
do not see that he has given him so much as a Foyl, much less a fair Fall, for
all this terrible Dilemma. For first, it is for this, that if the people be
Judge when the Princes commands are unlawful, it will therefore destroy the
being of Monarchy; suppose a King should command all his Subjects to go to
Mass, which they being Protestants judge Idolatrous. If they obey him, they must
commit Idolatry, if they disobey him he is then no Monarch. But perhaps it will
be replied, that it is true, the Subjects may judge when the Command is
unlawful, but if they cannot yield active obedience, yet they must yield a
passive one, and submit patiently to the Penalties he pleases to lay upon them
for not going. This Answer will not serve turn, for the Authors Objection is
general, if the people judge, (he does not say resist) he is no Monarch at all:
and refusing to go to Mass is a judging the Princes Command unlawful. But Mr.
Hobs, from whom this Argument is borrowed, drives it more home, (if the Authors
friends will admit the Consequence) and affirms truly upon his own principles,
that if the Subject do judge in any case whatever, of what is lawful or
unlawful, good or evil, it quite destroys the Monarchy. For the Monarch is sole
Judge of all Actions, whether they be Lawsul or not. Now when the Monarch has
declared his Will, that all his Subjects should go to Mass, surely not to go,
is to disobey the Monarchs Command. Since his will was, they should absolutely
go to Mass, nor leave it to their discretion either to go to Mass, or undergo
the Penalty ordained for not going. Lastly, neither does the Judgment of the
people concerning their own safty, in many cases, take away the absolute power
of a Monarch. For a General of an Army has an absolute Power over the Lives of
his Soldiers but does it derogate from his absolute power, that he knows he
shall not be obeyed if he command his Men to leap down a Precipice, or to kill
each other?

'But Mr. H. proposes two or three expedients to help this inconvenience of the
want of a public Judge. First. He says a Subject is bound to yield to a
Magistrate, where he cannot de jure challeng obedience, if it be in a thing in
which he can possibly do it without subversion to the Government, and in which
his Act may not be made a leading Case, and so bring on a prescription against
public liberty. And again, he says, If the Act in which the Exorbitance, or
Transgression of the Monarch is supposed to be, be of lesser moment, and not
striking at the very Being of the Government, it ought to be borne by public
patience, rather then to endanger the Being of the State. But these Salvoes
however moderate and sober, will not please our Author at all. Anarchy 285.
'For he will have them to be but Fig Leaves to cover the nakedness of Mr. H's
limited Monarch formed upon weak supposals in cases of lesser moment. For if
the Monarch be to govern only according to Law, no transgression of his can be
of no small moment, if he break the bounds of Law; for it is a subversion of
the Government it self, and may be a leading case, and so bring on a
prescription against public Liberty; and strikes at the very being of the
Government it self; and let the case be never so small, yet if there be
illegality in the Act, it strikes at the very being of limited Monarchy, which
is to be legal, unless the Author will say, as in effect he does, that his
limited Monarch must govern according to Law, in great and public matters
only, but that in smaller, and which concern private Men, he may rule according
to his own will.

All which, although it look fine, yet examined to the bottom signifies little,
for it is not true, that every the least transgression of the bounds of Law, is
a subversion of the Government it self, since if done perhaps only to one or a
few persons, it does not follow that therefore it must be a leading case, and
so bring on a prescription against public Liberty in all cases. Neither does
the Subjects bearing with it not contribute otherwise then accidentally to this
breach of Liberty. Since he is obliged to bear it, not because it is just, but
because he either may hope to have redress by the ordinary course of Law, or
else by petitioning the Assembly of Estates, when they meet, who are partly
ordained on purpose to remonstrate the Grievances of Subjects to their Prince,
and thereupon, to have them redressed. Nor is this limited Monarch (as the
Author would infer) less obliged to govern according to Law, in smaller or
private matters, then in great and public ones. Only in many smaller matters,
Princes or their Officers may through ignorance or inadvertency sometimes
transgress the true bounds of Law, which they would not do perhaps if they were
better informed. And so likewise if the Subject bear it, it is not from the
Legality of the Act, but from this great Maxim in Law and Reason, that a
mischief to some private men, is better than an inconvenience in giving every
private person power, that thinks himself injured by the Prince or his
Officers, to be his own Judge and right himself by force; since that were
contrary to the great duty of every good Subject of endeavoring to preserve
the common peace and happiness of his Country, which ought to be preferred
before any private man's Interest. So on the other side if the oppression or
breach of Laws be general, and extend to all the People alike: if the reason of
the case alter, why may not the practicedo so too. 'But Mr. H. gives us another
remedy in this case; that if the Monarchs Act of Exorbitancy or Transgression
be mortal, and such as suffered, dissolves the Frame of the Government and
public Liberty, then the illegality is to be laid open, and redressment sought
by Petition. Which is true, for an Appeal to the Law from the violence of
subordinate Ministers, is really a Petition for Justice to the King himself,
who is by the Law supposed present in the persons of his Judges that represent
him: and this the Author himself in a better humor does confess in his
Patriarcha P. 93. The people have the Law as a familiar interpreter of the
Kings pleasure, which being published throughout the Kingdom does represent the
presence and Majesty of the King; also the Judges and Magistrates are
restrained by the common Rules of Law from using their own Liberty to the
injury of others, since they are to judge according to the Laws, and not to
follow their own Opinions. And because it might so happen that the King may be
sometimes surprised or importuned to write Orders or Letters to the Judges to
direct them to act contrary to the Law. The King himself in Parliament has
declared, See the Oath of the Justices, 18. E. 3.
what Oath these Justices shall take when they are admitted into their Office
where among other things they swear thus. And that ye deny no man common right,
by the Kings Letters nor none other man's, nor for none other cause, and in case
such Letters do come to you contrary to the Law, that ye do nothing by such
Letters but certify the King thereof, and proceed to execute the Law,
notwithstanding the same Letters, and concludes thus. And in case ye be from
henceforth found in default in any of the points aforesaid, ye shall be at the
Kings will of Body, Lands, or Goods, thereof to be done as shall please him, as
God help you, etc. And the Lord Chief Justice Anderson and his Fellow-Justices
in the Common Pleas, who upon so great a point as Cavendishes. Case was, 35 El.
having consulted with all the Judges of England, delivered their Opinions
solemnly in writing, that the Queen was obliged by her Coronation Oath, to keep
the Laws, and if they should not likewise observe them, they were forsworn.
Anderson, p. 154, 155. Which Will of the Kings is supposed to be as well
declared by the House of Peers his supreme Court of Justice, as by any other
way. See the Judgment upon Tresillian and the rest of his Brethren 21 Rich. 2.
and the Impeachment of the House of Commons against the Judges that gave their
Opinions contrary to Law, in the case of Ship Money, Vide the subsequent Act of
Parliament, 17 Car. 1. Chap. 14. declaring that upon the Tax called Shipmoney
and the Judgment Entr. 1. H. 7. 4. b. the judicial opinions of the said
Justices and Barons were, and are contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm; and the Liberty of the Subjects, etc. which if it be truly observed,
there can never be any fear of a Civil War or popular Commotion, since our Law
supposes the King can do no wrong, that is in his own person. And therefore Sir
John Markham, when Chief Justice told King Edward the 4th. That the King cannot
arrest any Man himself for suspicion of Treason or Felony as other of his
Lieges may: for if it be a wrong to the party grieved, he has no remedy.
Therefore if any Act or thing be done to the Subject contrary to the Law, the
Judges and Ministers of Justice are to be questioned and punished if the Laws
are violated, and no reflection made upon the King, who is still supposed to do
his Subjects Right. Si factam fuerit injustum (says Bracton per inde non fuerit
factum Regis. And thus much will serve for a further Answer to the Authors
Query before mentioned. Whether it be a sin for a Subject to disobey the King
if he command any thing contrary to his Laws, since all the Subjects both great
and small are supposed to know what the Rights and Privileges of the Subject
are, as well as what are the Prerogatives of the Crown, nor are these reserved
Cases so many or so difficult as the Anthor would make us believe; but that
they may be easily understood without Appealing to any other Judge then the
Conscience of every honest man. And though the King may for our common defense
in time of War make Bulwarks upon another man's Land, or command a House to be
pulled down if the next be on Fire: or the Suburbs of a City to be demolished
in time of War to make it serviceable; though men may justify their obedience
in such Cases, yet it were folly and madness from thence to argue, that the
King were as much to be obeyed if he commanded us to pull down a whole Town for
his Diversion, or to take away all men's Lands or Goods at his Pleasure. Since
if he should be so weak as to command it, it were his unhappiness that he had
no more understanding. But it would be our Crime, and we alone were punishable,
if we should obey such a Command, and it is only upon this supposition, whether
the sufficiency of the Protection of our Laws and the integrity of the Judges,
declared in the 14th of his now Majesty's Reign, by the Act concerning the
Militia, be full? that it is a Traitorous Position that Arms may be taken by
his Majesty's Authority against his Person, or against those Commissioned by
him, in persuance of Military Commissions, Because they suppose the King will
not make use of the Militia for the destruction but the preservation of the
Subjects just Rights, and because all Officers of the Army or Militia, are at
their Peril, to take notice whether their Orders are according to Law or not.
For they put it thus, though to take free Quarter or to hang a man by
Martial-Law in time of War be lawful, yet to do so in time of Peace, though in
the Kings Name, is Robbery and Murder. And of this Opinion is that ancient Book
called the Mirror of Justices, Chap. 1. Sect. 10. De Larcine.

En cest Peche (viz. Robbery) chiont tonts ceux que pernont le' autrun per l'
Authorite del Roy en le' autre Grand Seigneur sans le gree de ceux aux queux
les biens sont. Into this Crime ( viz.) Robbery, all those do fall who take the
Goods of another by the Authority of the King, or any other great Lord without
their Consent. 'Nor I dare fay, will any honest well meaning Subject be
discontented, if in case of extreme necessity, or some sudden danger the King
should somewhat exceed his Prerogative for the defense of the Kingdom further
then the Law will allow. Since in matters of private concern, a Man will not be
angry with his Agent or Factor whom he hat^ ^mpowered to look after his
Business in another Country, if the Agent, perceiving the person for whom he
is entrusted, does not understand how his concerns in that place stand, and
that the Affair will not permit him to send again for farther Orders, if he act
contrary to his first Instructions: since if he did not, his Friends or Masters
business would be lost. Much more in the case of a King, who besides the
peoples concerns, with which he is entrusted, has likewise his own Crown and
Dignity at Stake. So likewise a King will easily pardon a Subject who upon a
sudden Insurrection or Invasion, raises Forces and marches against the Enemy,
without staying for a Commission; and when a Prince has so well satisfied his
Subjects that he never intends to make use of this Prerogative but for the good
and preservation of his people, he may do almost what he pleases, and no body
will be concerned. And this made Queen Elizabeth meet with that great Affection
and Confidence that she did throughout her whole Reign; for though she
sometimes exercised as high Acts of Prerogative as some of her Predecessors,
yet she had the good luck to have scarce any of them questioned in Parliament:
because the whole Nation was satisfied, she acted for the best, and sought no
other end but the public good and safety of the Kingdom. Which, had she
permitted Spain to have swallowed up France and the Low Countries, it would
have been a hard task to persuade them.

But Mr. H. proceeds in the same Paragraph, and supposes that redressment by
Petition failing (that is, that the Judges either do not, or will not act
according to their Oaths) then (if the Exorbitancy 'or transgression be mortal
to the Government) prevention by resistance ought to be: and if it be apparent,
and appeal be made to the Consciences of Mankind, then the Fundamental Laws of
that Monarchy must judge and pronounce sentence in every man's Conscience, and
every man (so far as concerns him) must follow the Evidence of Truth in his own
Sense, to oppose or not oppose according as he can in Conscience acquit or
Condemn the Act of the Governor or Monarch.

This our Author finds fault with: 'First, concerning the laying open of
illegal Commands, he will have Mr. H's meaning to be, that each private Man in
his peculiar case, should make a public Remonstrance to the World, of the
illegal Acts of the Monarch, and then if upon his Petition he cannot be
relieved according to his Desire, he ought to make Resistance. Whereupon the
Author would know who can be Judge, whether the illegality be made sufficiently
apparent? It is a main point, since every man is prone to flatter himself in
his own cause, and to think it good, and that the wrong or injustice he suffers
is apparent, when moderate and indifferent men can discover no such thing: and
in this case the Judgment of the common people cannot be gathered or known by
any possible means; or if it could, it were like to be various and erroneous.

In which Annimadversion of our Author, he first lays that to Mr. H's Charge,
which he does no where affirm; that every particular Subject, when injured,
should make a public remonstrance to the people; but only lay it open to the
Monarch, or his Judges that represent him, by Petition. And sure there is a
great deal of difference between a Petition, and a Remonstrance. He does not
say that every single Subject failing of Redress by Petition, ought to make
resistance in his own case, for he before supposes the Exorbitant Act or
Transgression not to be Mortal, and such as suffered, dissolves the Frame of
the Government and public Liberty. And that in such lighter cases for the
public Peace, we ought to submit and make no resistance at all, but de jure
cedere; which can never fall out, as long as this Transgression or Exorbitance
extends it self only to some particular men.

2. Our Author will have no particular man to be Judge in his own Cause. I grant
it, if by Judge he means Execution too, by public resistance. Otherwise a man's
passing his judgment or declaring it, that he thinks himself injured, suppose
by a Decree in Chancery or Act of Parliament, does not disturb the Government or
public Peace. But he may if he please bring his Appeal, or a new Bill in
Parliament and have the unjust Decree or Act reversed, which he can never do,
if he did believe he ought not to make the injustice or illegality of this Act
or Decree apparent to those that are to give him redress, but if this
Exorbitant Act or Transgression be general and presses upon all alike, I deny
that the Judgment of the common people cannot be gathered or known by any
possible means: or if it could it were like to be various and erroneous. For
suppose the illegal Act were so publicly declared that for the future all
Taxes should be raised without consent of Parliament: or that all menshould be
tried for their Lives without Juries. I would fain know whether the Judgment
not only of the Commonalty, but of all the people, may not be easily known,
though not gathered by Vote? or whether it would be various and erroneous in
these cases. Fr the people though they do not argue so subtly as our Author
does, yet in their Sense of Feeling, when wronged or hurt, are seldom mistaken.

Then our Author is angry that Mr. H. will have an Appeal made to the
Consciences of all Mankind, that being made, that the Fundamental Laws must
judge and pronounce Sentence in every man's own Conscience, here he would fain
learn of Mr. H. or any other for him, what a Fundamental Law is, or else have
but one Law named to him, that any Man shall say is a Fundamental Law of the
Monarchy.

Well, to do the Authors Friends a pleasure, (since he is dead himself) I will
name one that he himself would deny to be one in this Monarchy; and that is,
that the Crown upon the death of the King should descend to the next Heir, and
so we have one Fundamental Law, and I hope there may be more. But he says Mr.
H. tells us, 'that the Common Laws are the Foundation, and the Statute Laws
superstructive. Yet our Author thinks that Mr. H. dares say, 'that there is any
one branch or part of the Common Law, but may be taken away by Act of
Parliament; for many points of the Common Law (de facto) have, and (de jure)
any point may be taken away. How can that be called a Fundamental, which has
and may be removed, and yet the Statute Laws stand firm and Stable! It is
contrary to the Nature of a Fundamental, for the Building to stand, when the
Foundation is taken away.

All which, is mere wrangling about the Metaphor of a Foundation and a
Superstructure, as if such expressions required an absolute Physical Truth as
they do in the things from which they are taken.

It is already granted, that all Laws in a limited Government, but those of
Nature, and right Reason are alterable, because the Governmen it self is so,
and in respect of which alone they may be called Fundamental, or Foundations of
the Government, but these being altered, it would cease to be the same kind of
Government it was before.

I will not affirm, but the people of this Nation may give away their present
Rights of not having any Laws made, or Taxes imposed upon them without their
consent, or of not being perpetually kept in Prison or put to death without
legal Trial.

But these being altered, it would cease to be limited and turn to an absolute
Monarchy, and all Statutes concerning any of these would be so far
Superstructives, as to signify nothing when the Foundations are taken away, and
indeed how any Statute Law made by Parliament could signify any thing when the
Parliament is gone, I know not, since all Laws after that would depend upon the
sole will of the Monarch.

His second Reason is, 'That the Common Law is generally acknowledged to be
nothing else but common Usage or Custom, which by length of time only obtains
Authority: so that it follows in time after Government, but cannot go before
it, or be the Rule of Government by any Original Radical Constitution.

Which is not true, as the Author has laid it down; for all the parts of the
Common Law do not depend upon mere Custom or Usage taken up after the
Government instituted: and therefore his consequence that follows from this is
false. For some parts of the Common Law of England, are without doubt as
ancient as the Government it self. Thus, though some parts of our Common Law may
have proceeded from some later Customs, or particular Judgments and
resolutions of the Judges in several Ages, yet without doubt, Property in Goods
and Land and Estates of Inheritance, and the manner of their descent are as
ancient (since they came over with our Saxon Ancestors) as the Government it
self, since some of the Laws. As, that Brethren by the half-Blood, should not
be Heirs to each other. That an Estate should rather Escheat then ascend to the
Father, upon the death of his, could only proceed from the Custom of the
ancient Saxons. For certainly, had we not been used to them, we should scarce
allow them to be reasonable. But it is in nothing more visible then in those
Tenures (which the modern Civilians call Feudat) which L. Ca. 3.. 23. Grotius
tells us, are not to be found but among the Germans, and those Nations derived
from them, as both our Saxons and Angles were. Tacit. de Mor. Ger. cap. 40.
So likewise that Fundamental Constitution of ordering all public Affairs in
General Councils or Assemblies of the Men of note, and those that had a share
in the Land. de minoribus rebus Principes Consultant, de majoribus omnes, ita
tamen ut ex qnoque quorum penes plebem arbitrium est, apud Principes
praetractantur. In this great Council they tried Offenders in Capital Crimes.
Id. Cap. 12.
Licet apud concilium accusare queque and discrimen capitis intendere, nor was
the power of their Kings or Prince absolute, as appears by the passages in the
same Author. Id. Cap. 7:
Nec regibus infinita aut libera potestas, etc. speaking of the manner of their
holding these public Councils after silence commanded by the Priests. Mox Rex,
Id. Cap. 11.
vel Princeps prout aetas cuique prout nobilitas, prout decus bellorum prout
facundia est audiuntur, autoritate suadendi, magis quam jubendi. And though our
first Saxon Kings might have more conferred on them then this, yet it is
altogether improbable, that Hengest and the rest of those Princes who erected
an Heptarchy in this Island, comeing hither not as Monarchs over Subjects, but
as Leaders of Volunteers, who went to seek a new Country, should be so fond of
a Government they never knew, as to give these their Gennerals an absolute
despetick power over their persons and Estates, which they never had in their
own Country; and by which Liberty, they had so long defended it against the
utmost effects of the Roman Empire; therefore says the same Author, Ne Parthi
quidem sepius admonuere, Id. Cap. 37.
quippe Regno Arsacis acrior est Germanorum Libertas. The sense of which is,
The Parthians themselves have not oftener rebuked us; for the German-Liberty is
harder to be dealt with then the Monarchy of Arsaces. Pat. p. 116, 117.
And as for the Antiquity and usefulness of these great Councils the Author
himself has confessed enough for our purpose, though he will not have our
Parliament antienter then about 'the time of the Conquest, because until those
days we cannot hear it was entirely united into one Kingdom, but it was either
divided into several Kingdoms, or Governed by several Laws, as when Julius
Caesar Landed, he found four Kings in Kent. The Saxons divided us into seven
Kingdoms: and when they were united into a Monarchy, they had the Danes for
their Companions, or Masters in the Empire, till Edward the Confessors days.
Since whose time the Kingdom of England has remained as it does.

In which passage the Author has discovered, either a great deal of Ignorance,
or inadvertency in the History and Government of his Country. For first he
Confesses that the English Saxons had a Meeting, which they called the Assembly
of the Wife, termed in Latin, Conventus Magnatum, or Praesentia Regis,
Procerumque Prelatorum Collectorum, or in general, Magnum, or Commune
concilium, etc. All which Meetings may in a general sense be termed
Parliaments: yet he will not allow, there could be any Parliaments assembled of
the general Estates of the whole Kingdom, for the reason he gives us before.
What he means by, until about the time of the Conquest, I know not; but this is
certain, that from the time of King Egbert, who is reckoned the first Monarch,
the great Council, or Wittena Gemore consisted of the General Estates of the
West-Saxon-Kindom, and if the whole people of England had not their
Representatives there, it was because they were represented by their Tributary
Princes or Kings, who Governed Subordinately to this Monarch, until the coming
of the Danes. Thus the West-angles had their particular Kings in the time of
King Ethelwolf St. Edmund the last King being Conquered by the Danes. So
likewise had the Mercians their King Beorced; their last King being driven out
by the same Invaders about the same time, and after the Kingdom was at Peace
again, and the Danes in great part subdued or quiet, King Alfred Re-conquering
the Mercian-Kingdom, gave it in Marriage to a Saxon Nobleman called Etheldred,
who had Married his Daughter Elsteda, who was long after her Husbands Death
Lady, or Queen of the Mercians; Rerum Anglick Scriptores post Bedam. Ed Fra. p.
857.
yet did these feudatory Princes always appear and make a Part in the Wittena
Gemore or great Council of the Monarch, thus we may find in Jugulphus that
Withlafe King of the Mercians made a promise of the Lands and Liberties of the
Abbey of Croyland, (which he after confirms by his Charter) in Prisentia
Dominorum meorum Egberti Regis Westo-Saxoniae and Athelwolwafij filij ejus,
coram pontificibus and proceribus totius Angliae, in Civitate Lundini (ubi
omnes Congregati sumas pro consilio capiendo contra Danicos Pyratat Littora
Angliae infestantes) which certainly was a great Council. And that these Kings
were tributary to the West Saxon Monarch, the same Author tells a little
further, that Bertulph Brother of Witlafe, succeeded his Nephew Wimund, Id. p.
860, 861.
and was Tributary to Athelwolf King of West Saxony; and by his Charter
confirms the same Lands and Liberties to the said Monastery which had been
granted by his Predecessors: and this was done and confirmed, unanimi consensu
totius praesentis concilij hic apud Kingsbury Anno incar Domini 881. etc. pro
Regni negotis congregati, and is thus subscribed, Ego Olflac Pincerna, and
Legatus Domini mei Regis Ethelwolf, and Filiorum suorum nomine illorum and
omnium Westsaxonum istum Chirographum Regis Bertulphi plurimum Confirmavi. Ego
Bertulphus Rex Mericorum palam omnibus prelatis and Proceribus Regni mei. Which
shows us, that besides the General Council of the whole Kingdoms these Mercian
Tributary Kings had a Particular Council or Parliament of their own Kingdom
without whose consent as also of their Paramount Monarch they could not part
with the Lands, and Royalties belonging to their Crown. So likewise in the same
Author, Beorced King of the Mercians, Anno Domini 868 confirms his Charter to
the same Monastery at Snotringham, coram fratribus, and amicis and omni populo
meo in obsidione Paganorum Congregatis. To which likewise his supreme Monarch
Elthred King of the West- Saxons, gives his consent, and subscribes after the
Bishops: the like form we find in the passing of all the other Charters to this
Monastery, quoted by the said Author which are all of them confirmed by the
King then Reigning, and in praesentia Archiepiscop. Episcop. Procerum (or
optimatum Regni Collectorum. And before the Kingdom came to be united under one
supreme King or Monarch, there was also one great Council or Synod of the whole
Kingdom, where the chief and most powerful King or Monarch of the Heptarchy
presided, and in which they made their general Ecclesiastical Canons, and also
Civil Laws that were binding to the whole People of England, and to which
Persons that had been grieved or wronged by their particular Kings appealed,
and were righted, and to this general Wittena Gemote, that ancient Writer Will.
Malmsbuny, speaking of the ancient Customs and Laws of England says were made
per generalem Senatum and populi Conventum and edictum: therefore we find the
first: Synod or Council of Clovesho, Anno Christ. 747.
called by Ethelbald King of the Mercians, who was then chief King or Monarch
as they called him of the English Saxons, and at which were present the said
King, with all his Princes and great Men: Malm. de gest. pontific.
as also all the Bishops of this Island: but it more plainly appears in the
second Council held at the same place, called by Beornulf King of Mercia, who
presided therein. Spelman. Council. p. 332.
You will find one of the first things they did, was to inquire whether any
person had been unjustly dealt with, or unjustly spoiled or oppressed, whereupon
Wulfred Archbishop of Canterbury complained of the violence and Avarice of
Kenwulf late King of the West- Saxons, which beingfully proved, the said
Council ordered Kenedrith the Abbess, the daughter, and Heir of the said King,
to make satisfaction to the said Archbishop: which was done accordingly, out
of the Lands of the said King, see it at large in Spelmans Councils. and Mr.
Somner (that Learned Antiquary) in his Glossary to the december Scriptores is
clearly of opinion, Spelman Council, page 393.
that this was all one with a Parliament Synodus magna Parliamentum nuncupatur.
So likewise the Canons of the Synod or Council of Catchyck Annol, were
confirmed by Offa King of the Mercians, then Chief Monarch of this Island. Tam
Rex quam Principes sui cum senatoribus terrae decreta signo Cracis firmarunt.
And further that each of the Kingdoms of the Heptarchy had its particular
Councils or Wittena Gemotes appears by that famous Council called by Ethelbert
King of Kent, about Six Years after his Reception of the Christian Religion,
which was called commine concilium tam Cleri. quam Populi: And no doubt this
custom came not in with Christianity: the Clergy only here succeeding in the
room of the Pogan Priests, who among the Germans had always a place in their
common Councils as we find in Tacitus. See the passage before Cited, p.
Spelman, Con. page 126.
So likewise the first Laws we have extant were made by Ina King of the West-
Saxons, Per commune concilium and assensum omnium Episcoporum, and Principum
Procerum, comitum, and omnium Sapientum, Seniorum, and Populorum totius Regni:
And whoever will but examine the said Collection of Sr. Henry Spelman, will
find almost all the Ecclesiastical Constitutions confirmed, if not made in the
Wittena Gemote, the Great Synod or Council. So that what this Author says of
the difference of the Laws, and Customs of the several Kingdoms during the
Heptarchy, makes nothing against us, as long as we can prove that in the main,
the Government of them all was alike in the three great Liberties of the
Subjects, viz. Trial by a Man's equals, and absolute Propriety in Lands, and
Goods which the Kings could not justly take from them; and a Right to join in
the making of all Laws, and raising Public Taxes, or Contributions for War. So
that without doubt these Wittena Gemotes, or great Councils were Ordained for
some Nobler and Higher purpose, then either to give the King advice, what Wars
to make, or what Laws to make, or barely to Remonstrate their grievances (as
this and some other Modern Authors would have it) for what King would call so
great a Multitude those Ancient Parliaments consisted of) to be his
Counselors: Or would call together the whole Body of a Nation, only to be made
acquainted with their grievances, which he might have known with greater ease
to himself, and less charge to the Subjects; by having them found by the Grand
Inquest in the County Court: And so to have been presented to him by the Earl,
or Alderman of each particular County; whereas we find these great Councils
employed in businesses of a higher Nature; such as the confirmation of the
Kings Charters, the Proposing of Laws, the Election of Archbishops, and other
great Officers: So that the Higher any Man will look back, the more large, and
uncontrollable he will find the Power of this great Assembly: Since before the
Conquest, and afterward too, we find them to have often Elected Kings, when
the Children of their last King were either Minors, or supposed unfit to
Govern. So that whoever will take the pains to consult our Ancient Saxon, and
English Historians, will find that there was never Anciently any Fundamental,
or unalterable Law of Succession: nor was it fixed for any two Discents in a
right Line from Father to Son without interruption, until Henry the Third: and
then it lasted so but Four Generations reckoning him for the first. And as for
these particular Laws, or Customs the Author mentions whether King Edgar, or
Alfred, first Collected them, as were also Corrected and Confirmed by both the
Edwards, to wit, the Elder and the Confessor; they still owed their Authority
to the King, Vi. Lambert de priscis Anglorum Legibus, p. 1^9.
and his Barons and his People as Malmesbury before asserts. As for the Danish
Laws, they never prevailed, but in those Countries which the Danes entirely
Conquered, which consisted mostly of them: as Norfolk, Suffolk, and
Cambridge-shire; but as for the rest of England it was governed by its own
Laws, and enjoyed its Ancient Customs in the Reign of King Knute and his
Successors of the Danish Race. See the Charter of K. Knute quoted by Mr. Pe^yt.
in his said Treatise page 146.
But to come to the Authors next Reason why there can be no Fundamental Laws in
this Kingdom, viz. Because the Common Law being unwritten, doubtful and
difficult, cannot but be an uncertain Rule to govern by, which is against the
Nature of a Rule, which always ought to be certain. This is almost the same
Argument as the Papists make use of against the Scriptures being a Rule of
Faith, only their Reason is that the Scriptures are obscure, because they are
Written and need an Expositor, viz. The Church, or Tradition; but with Authors
it is contrary, the Law is doubtful, because unwritten, whereas all that
understand any thing of the Nature of the Laws of England, know very well that
the Common Law, whose Authority depends not on any set Form of Words, but the
Sense and Reason of the Law is much less doubtful, and makes fewer Disputes
then the Statute Law; but though it be granted that many things in the Common
Law, are doubtful and difficult; yet in the Main and Fundamental parts of it,
but just now recited, it is plain enough: (As the Scriptures though doubtful or
obscure in some things; yet are plain and certain in all Points necessary for
Salvation; and why it is harder for an ordinary Country Fellow in a Civil
Government, to know when he is Condemned to be Hanged without trial or to have
his Goods, or Money taken from him, by a Fellow in a Red-coat without any Law,
then for him to judge in the State of Nature, when another Man lies with his
Wife, or goes about to Rob or Murder him I know not. His last Reason against
making Common Law, only to be the Foundation, when Magna Charta is excluded
from being (according to Mr. H.) a Fundamental Law, and also all 'other
Statutes, from being limitations to Monarchy, since the Fundamental Laws only
are to be judge; and these are Statute Laws or Superstructures. This is also
mere Sophistry, since no Man in Metaphors or Similitudes ever expects an
absolute Truth; but what if the great part of the Magna Charta were Fundamental
Laws before either King Stephen, or King John granted it, and that they did but
restore what some of their Predecessors had before by oppression taken from
their Subjects; since there is little or none of it, but was part of King
Edward's Laws, and consequently the Ancient Saxon Law before the Conquest; and
the like may be said of all other Constitutions in limited Monarchies; as
suppose, in Denmark, the Crown which was before Elective, is now by the
Concession of the Estates, become Successive; I believe no Men of this Authors
Opinion will deny, that this is not now a Fundamental Law in that Kindom, and
can never be altered without the Consent of the King and the Estates, and yet
this is a Law that follows after the Government was Instituted; nor can I see
any Reason, why this Rule may not hold as well on the Peoples side, as the
Kings. Why Rules of Play may not be made as well after the Gamesters are in at
Play, as when they first began; and may not be as well called Fundamental Laws
of the Game; since if they are not observed, it may be lawful for any of the
Gamesters to fling up his Cards, and play no more, though he be at play with
(the Authors Natural Monarch) his own Father.

But our Author will not leave off so, but must give us one stabing Paragraph
more against Fundamental Laws, which is thus, ' Truly the Conscience of all
Mankind is a pretty large Tribunal, for these Fundamental Laws to pronounce
Sentence in. It is very much that Laws which in their own Nature are dumb and
always need a Judge to pronounce Sentence, should now be able to speak, and
pronounce Sentence themselves: Such a Sentence surely must be upon the hearing
of one Party only; for it is impossible for a Monarch to make his Defense and
Answer, and produce his Witnesses: in every Man's Conscience in each Man's Cause;
who will but question the Legality of the Monarchs Government. Certainly the
Sentence cannot but be unjust, where but one Man's Tale is heard.

The first Sentence of this Paragraph is Answered sufficiently in the
Observation upon the last Reason; but one. As for Written Laws, every Body
knows they are adumb Letter; as they lie in Ink and Paper, but as they come to
be from thence Copied out and fixed in Men's Memories they are not dumb, neither
always needs a Judge to pronounce Sentence, but are able enough to speak
oftentimes against the Sentence of an unjust Judge, and all the Standers by can
easily tell if a Judge should go about to Try and Condemn a Man without ever
Impanelling a Jury, nor needs there any Defense for the Judge in this case; but
that a Man may safely give his Sentence in this Case without hearing the Judges
Reason; since it is plain there can be none given. But as for the Monarch, it
is supposed that he has already made his Defense by his Attorney, and produced
his Witnesses when the Subject Petitioned his Judges to right him in what he
conceived to be an Oppression. So that the Sentence cannot be unjust, where but
one Man's Tale is heard. But if the Judges in this Case (as in that of
Ship Money) cannot convince the Plantiff, but that he is oppressed contrary to
Law. It is neither his nor their Judgment that can alter the Case: But if he
can have no other remedy, he must even go home and expect better opportunities
of being righted, as when there are honester Judges; or the calling of a
Parliament, one of whose ends is to redress grievances of that kind by
representing to the King the faults and transgressions of his Ministers, who
only are punishable, and answerable for the injustice; since the King in his
own Person can do none (as I have often affirmed) as for Mr. H's conclusion,
that every man must oppose or not oppose the Monarch, acoording to his own
Conscience, when he can have no other redress, I do not approve of it. For I
will not suppose any time (in which this Nation is not oppresed by a standing
Army, or Men of different Principles in Religion and Government;) but the
Subject may find redress, if not at one time, yet at another. But the other
part of the dispute between our Author and Mr. H. whether this Power of every
Man's judging of the illegal Acts of the Monarch 'argues not a Superiority of
those who Judge, over him who is Judged, because it is not Authorative and
Civil, but Moral residing in Reasonable Creatures, and lawful for them to
execute, which is not so hard to understand as the Author makes it, if we take
this Word Moral (as it is plain Mr. H. uses it) in contradiction to Civil
Power, which is such a right of acting as every private Man has, though he
has no Civil Authority. For a Man's bare judging of the justice and injustice
of all Actions that concern him, or any other man, are inseparable from the
Nature of Man? whether they are ordered by a Prince, or private Man; and a
Princes commanding this or that to be done, or giving his judgment this way, or
that way, cannot alter these settled Rules whereby Men judge of right and wrong.
So that if this Author or his Friends will make use of Mr. Hobs's Arguments of
the necessity of the Judgment of one Man in all Points whatever, they must
likewise take what follows, that there is likewise no good, or evil, or right,
or wrong in the state of Nature, but what the Monarch judges to be so; and when
that is done, if the Authors Friends have any Religion, let them see what they
will get by it; but the Author supposes he has sufficient advantage over Mr:
H. because he has laid it down in the Page before going; 'That resistance
ought to be made, and every Man must oppose, or not oppose, according as in
Conscience he can acquit, or condemn the Acts of the Governor. For (says the
Author) if it enable a Man to resist, and oppose his Governor without Question
it is Authoritative, and Civil. As for Mr. Hobs's Assertion) I will not take
upon me to meddle in so nice a Point, though he has in all his work supposed
such resistance lawful only in limited, or mixed Monarchies, and not in
absolute ones; and likewise then only when all other ways, and means hvae
proved ineffectual; and of this opinion likewise the Author of the Excellent
Poem, called, Coopers Hill, seems to have been; which I rather take notice of,
because the Author was never looked upon, but as a great Friend to Monarchy:
and this Poem it self speaks him no Presbyterian. Both the Verses and Sense are
so good, that perhaps it may refresh the Reader tired with Reading so much dry
Arguments to run them over; speaking of the King's hunting the Stag over
Runny-Mead, where the great Charter was Sealed, he falls into this reflection.

This a more innocent, and happy Chase,
Then when of Old, but in the self same Place;
Fair Liberty pursued, and meant a Prey,
To lawless Power, here turned, and stood at Bay:
When in that remedy all hope was placed,
Which was, or should have been at least the last.
Here was that Charter Sealed wherein the Crown,
All marks of Arbitrary Power lays down:
Tyrant, and Slave, those Names of hate and fear,
The happier Style of King, and Subject bear:
Happy, when both to the same Center move,
When Kings give Liberty, and Snbjects love.
Therefore not long in force this Charter stood
Wanting that Seal, it must be sealed in Blood.
The Subjects Armed, the more their Princes gave,
The advantage only took the more to crave:
Till Kings by giving, give themselves away,
And even that Power, that should deny betray.
Who gives constrained, him, his own fear reviles;
Not thankt, but scorned; nor are they gifts, but spoils.
Thus Kings by grasping more then they could hold;
First made their subjects by oppression hold:
And Popular sway by forcing Kings to give
More then was fit for Subjects to receive,
Ran to the same extremes, and one excess,
Made both by striving to be greater, less.
The mischiefs of which extremes if rightly considered, would make all wise
Princes, and good Subjects contented with their share; and endeavor to keep
the Balance even, and not to let it incline to either side. As to Magna
Charta, I shall only add, that the Defense which the Nobility and People made
of their Ancient Rights was not condemned or declared Rebellion, either by
Magna Charta, or any other Statute; but on the contrary, the breakers thereof
were declared ipso facto, excommunicated the solemn form of which (and where
the King himself who had so often broke his Oath bore a part) see in Mat.
Paris. Anno 125. But to return to our Author (from whom I have a little
degressed) I think he is mistaken in affirming all Power which enables in some
cases a Man to resist or oppose his Governors, must be Authoritative and Civil:
Therefore I shall put the same case again which I did about the beginning of
these Observations concerning the Natural Power of Fathers: Suppose a Son
cannot otherwise preserve his own Life, or that of his Mother, or Brothers from
the rage of his mad or drunken Father; but by holding him, or binding him, if
need be; I suppose no reasonable Man will deny the lawfullness of this action;
and yet this Power over his Fathers Person is not Authoritative, or Civil, but
Moral, and which the Son does exercise not as Superior to his Father, but as a
Rational Creature obliged by the Laws of Nature, to preserve his own being, and
to endeavor the good preservation of his Parents and Relations, not against
Paternal Authority (which is always Rational, and for the good of the Family)
but Brutish, Irrational force: Which God gives every Man a right to judge of; so
likewise if a Prince prove either a Madman, or a stark Fool, the power which
their Subjects exercise in the ordering him, or confining him, and appointing
Regents, or Protectors to Govern for him, and in his Name, is not
Authoritative, or Civil, since the Prince himself who is the Fountain of all
Authority, gave them no such power, and therefore must be Natural, or Moral or
residing in them as reasonable Creatures. And of this we have had diverse
examples. Thus the French were forced to confine their Mad King Charles VI. and
appoint his Queen to be Regent during his Distraction. So likewise Joan Queen
of Castile, falling Distracted upon the Death of Her Husband King Philip I. Her
Father Ferdinand governed in Her right; and after His decease, Her Son Charles
afterward Emperor (she continuing bereft of her understanding) was admitted
King of Castile. And what has been done lately in Portugal, is so notorious,
that it needs not a particular Recital. So then Mr. Hs. expression, That this
is a Moral Judgment, residing in reasonable Creatures, and lawful for them to
execute, may not seem so absurd as to imply what our Author endeavors to draw
from thence, that Authoritative, and Civil Judgment does not reside in
reasonable Creatures, nor can be Lawfully executed: since a Reasonable Creature
may be endued with another Power of acting precedent to that of the Civil.

So I shall likewise leave it to the Judgment of the impartial Reader, whether
this conclusion fits so well with Anarchy as the Author will have it. As also
whether Mr. H. take away all Government by leaving every Man to his own
Conscience to judge when the Prince oppresses him; for else how could he sue for
relief to the Prince himself; and so all actions a Prince did, or commanded
would be just, and lawful though never so contrary to Reason, or positive Law.
And so there would be truly (as Mr. Hobs asserts) no other measure of good, and
evil, right or wrong but the Princes will.

But as I have no where maintained with Mr. H. in his Treatise, which our
Author writes against, that ours is a mixed Monarchy though limited by Law; and
therefore shall not maintain as he does the King to be one of the Three Estates
(according to the Opinions held during the late Wars. So on the other side,
that there is, and ever has been such a Government as a mixed Monarchy in some
Countries, I hope I have made out (notwithstanding what this Author says to the
contrary: and that these might more properly be called a mixed Monarchy, then
mixed Aristocracy, or mixed Democracy. Since all Governments of this kind, take
their denomination from the most Honorable and Predominant part in it, in whom
the Executive or Authoritative part resides.

And though perhaps some of these Governments may not seem so firm, so regular,
and well constituted as others, it does not therefore follow that they are mere
Anarchies, or that all mixtures, and limitations of Monarchy are vain, or
unlawful as our Author imagines.

For a further proof of which, I will not give you may own sense alone, but
likewise of that eminent Civil Lawyer Mr. Pufendorf now or very lately Gretian
Professor in the University of Vpsal, in his excellent work De Jure Naturae,
and Gentium, Dedicated to Charles the 10th, now King of Sweden, and certainly
holding a place of such profit and Credit in his Dominions, he would be too
prudent to speak any thing prejudicial to Monarchy, or contrary to the
Government of Sweden in particular. But to return to the matter in the
abovementioned Treatise, which for the benefit of those that cannot easily
procure the Latin Original. Lib. 7. Cap. 5. where speaking before of the
several kinds of mixed Governments or Commonwealths.. 14. He expresses himself
to this purpose, as near as I can Translate it. Yet however, as I will not envy
the commendation of constancy in any that will obstinately maintain the name of
a mixed Commonwealth (to those sorts of Government he had before recited. So it
seems to us more ready, and easy for the demonstrating diverse Phenomenon in
certain Commonwealths, if we rather call those irregular Commonwealths, in
which neither one alone of the three irregular Forms is found, neither an
absolute Disease, or (...) takes place, and which yet cannot be strictly
referred to distinct confederate States. Concerning which, it is generally to
be observed, that they depart in this from a regular Commonwealth, whilst in
them all things do not seem to proceed as it were from one Soul, and will,
neither to be governed by one Common Authority. Yet they diffor from the
confederate State, in that they are not compounded of distinct and perfect
Commonwealths as these are. Yet they are far from those things that they count
Diseases in a Commonwealth, because a Disease that always carries with it as
it were a shameful and unallowable pretense since it proceeds from ^he evil
administration of a good Form of Government, or from Laws and Institutions ill
contrived and put together. Whereas this irregularity does not only
intrinsically affect the very. Form it self, but also being publicly, and
lawfully established, dares show it self openly and without shame. So that a
Disease ought to be supposed as not intended by those, who first Instituted
this Commonwealth; since the irregularity arose, or was Confirmed from the will
or approbation of those of whom the Government was at first Constituted; as a
building is one thing, whose design agrees with the Rules of Architectture, but
either its materials are naught, or else thorough the carelessness of the
Dwellers, the Roof gapes, and the Walls are ready to fall; and another thing
where a Model, though differing from the common Rules of Building is dedesigned
by the Owner or Architect himself. Lastly, some of these irregularities may
have continued from the very Constitution of the Commonwealth, and some have
crept in by success of time, and by insensible degrees. So that it might happen
that a regular Form could not well be Instituted from the very Original of the
Commonwealth, or some remarkable mutation of it, either by the Founders, or
Authors of that mutation; either thorough their unskilfulness, or because the
urgency of their affairs, or temper of the People did not permit them to
consider of the means of doing it otherwise; nay oftentimes thorough either the
carelessness of those that Govern, or by some other 'occasion, a Disease invades
the Commonwealth, which when it has taken such deep Root, that it cannot be
expelled with out the destruction of the Government, there is nothing then to
be done, then that the Disease should cease to be so by a Public Sanction, and
that which hitherto was Usurpation, Faction on Contumacy, may for the future
become a Privilege or right.

So much of Irregular Governments or Monarchies. But in the next Chapter of the
same Book, the same Author speaking of the rights of the Supreme power; where
when he has first proved, what it is that makes any Power be called Supreme in
a Commonwealth, and that he who has this Power must be free from punishment,
and not obnoxious to humane Laws; and that he has confuted the Long
Parliaments distinction of a real and Personal Majesty, and that Kings properly
so called must be Superior to all the People; and having answered the
Objections to the contrary, at last he proceeds 7 to show what absolute Power
is, and that it is not found alike in all Forms of Commonwealths, and gives us
the true Original of limited Governments; his sense is so good, that I shall
not much contract what he says, but give it you as it is, 7. 8, 9, 10. Besides
it is apparent enough, that in some Commonwealths the Royal Authority is free
in the exercise of its Acts, but restrained to a certain Mode of acting, from
whence arose the distinction of Empire into limited, and absolute, where in the
first place it is to be explained, what is meant by the word absolute, which is
so odious to those who have had their Education in free Commonwealths. Indeed
the same word being ill interpreted, may incite some Princes to vex their
Subjects, and to commit a great deal of wickedness. Flatterers adding fuel to
the Fire, who are still ready to encourage the Ambition, and other Vices of
their Prince at this rate. Sir, you are absolute, therefore if it pleases you,
it is lawful: therefore you may tire out your own Subjects, and all your
Neighbors with unnecessary Wars, that you may appear a mighty Monarch, and set
forth your own Glory; therefore you may affront, and insult over whom you
please, and drain your Subjects with all sorts of Exactions, that you may have
wherewith to serve your Luxury, or Ambition; according to the Flattery of
Anaxarchus to Alexander upon the death of Clitus, that right and wrong,
Plutarch. ad Princi. indoct.
do sit by Jupiter; that whatsoever the King does, ought to be accounted right,
and just so that there are some who go about to establish the absolute right of
Kings by Arguments, that seem to have no other Measure thereof, then impunity,
and a License to vex their People. Therefore as by an absolute Liberty of
particular Men is meant, their judging of their own affairs and actions,
according to their own, and not another judgment: yet still supposing their
Obligation to the Laws of Nature, And that this Liberty belongs to all Men, who
are not as yet subject to another will: so where diverse Men have United
together into a perfect Commonwealth, it is necessary for the same liberty or
faculty of appointing, resolving all means necessary for their own safety,
should now exist in the Supreme Power, as in a common Subject: which Liberty is
accompanied with the Highest Authority, or a right of prescribing those means
to the Subjects, and of compelling them to their Duty; therefore in every
Commonwealth properly so called, there must be an absolute Power at least
habitual, though not always exercised, for it must be answerable to Superior,
and to have a right of Judging of its own affairs by its own Judgment and will.
Therefore that absolute Power implies nothing in its self unjust, or
intolerable is easy to be perceived from the ends of instituting of
Commonwealths. For indeed we never constituted them, that neglecting Natural
right, things should be done out of a wicked, and perverse Lust or Humor; but
that the security and safety of singulars may be more conveniently looked after
by the joint assistances of many. So that they might more safely and with more
leisure live after the Laws of Nature, and Virtue.

Yet when this Supreme Authority is considered as it is conferred upon one Man,
or one Council consisting of all, or few, as in its proper subject, it is not
always free, and absolute, but in some places limited by certain laws; indeed
in Democracies the difference between absolute, and limited Power seems not so
easy to be observed, for although in every Democracy there must needs continue
certain Institutions received by use, or established by written Laws, at what
time, and by whom the People should be Assembled, and Public business
proposed, and Executed, since without such things, a Commonwealth cannot be
understood, yet since that Council consists of all the Citizens, in whom the
Sovereign Authority resides; nothing can hinder, but those Constitutions may be
altered or abrogated at any time by the same People that made them.

But in Aristocracies and Monarchies, where there are some who command, and
others who obey, and so a Right arises to these from the Promises and Commands
of the other. There does plainly appear a difference between an absolute and
limited power, he is therefore absolute who exercises his Authority according
to his own discretion, and not according to the Rule of any certain, or
perpetual Constitutions; but as the present condition of affairs require, and
who does so provide for the safety of the Commonwealth, as its occasions
direct him: from whence the word absolute is so far from implying any thing
unjust or hateful in it self, or intolerable for Freemen; that it should
rather lay upon such absolute Princes necessity of greater care and
circumspection, if they will acquit themselves of their Duty, and discharge
their Consciences as they ought; then on those to whom a certain form of
dispatching public Affairs is prescribed. So Dio Chrysostom. Orati. 62.
describes an absolute Prince thus, "a good Prince covets nothing because he
supposes himself to possess all things, he abstains from pleasures, since he
may enjoy whatsoever he pleases. He is juster than others, as he who is to be
an example of Justice to others. He takes pleasure in business, because he
labors of his own accord. He loves the Laws, because he does not fear them;
and of all these he rightly persuades himself: for who has greater need of
Prudence, then he who deliberates of such great Affairs? Who of more exact
Justice, then he who is above the Laws? Who of a more severe modesty, than he
to whom all things are Lawful? Who of greater Fortitude, than he who keeps all
things in safety?

Yet because the Judgment of any one man in discerning that which truly
conduces to the public safety may be easily deceived, neither is there in all
Men that strength of mind, that they may know how in so great a Liberty to
govern their Passions and Lusts (as Herodian Li. 1. Cap. 4. well observes) that
it is difficult in the highest Liberty for a Man to restrain himself, and as it
were to bridle his own desires. Therefore it seemed most convenient to diverse
people, not to commit so great a power to one man's sole discretion, and he no
more free from Errors than others, but rather more subject to Vices; and
therefore would rather prescribe the Prince a certain Form or Method of
dispatching of public Affairs, after it was at first found out what sort of
constitutions, or forms of dispatching public Affairs did best suit with the
Genius of the people, and the Nature of the Commonwealth to be constituted.
Neither is there any injury done to the Prince, who was at first raised to that
Dignity by the free consent of the people upon those conditions. For if it
seemed grievous to take the supreme Authority, because he could not manage it
as he pleased, he might have refused it if he would; so the Conscience of the
Oath by which they are obliged upon their taking this Authority ought to
restrain them and their Successors from going about to make themselves absolute
by secret Machinations and Designs: Much less to subvert the Laws of the
Kingdom by force. Plin. Paneg.
Since an Oath is not more Religiously to be observed by any than he whom it
most chiefly concerns not to be perjured. For that is too weak which some
maintain, that since Kings are ordained by God, who injoyns them a true
discharge of their Duty, which cannot be performed without the exercise of the
most absolute power: and therefore God is to be supposed to have conferred such
a proportion of power on all Kings, as that they ought not to suffer the least
part thereof to be diminished or circumscribed, and that the People can neither
rightly require or oblige their King to it; no more than there can honestly be
made such a bargain between a Husband and a Wife that he should connive at her
stolen pleasures. But as we have already sufficiently proved, that as all Civil
Government is from God, yet is so left in Man's disposal (at least to those that
God did not give any particular Laws to) what sort of Government they would set
up (as Phil. Melancthon in his Epitomy of Moral Philosophy, honestly teaches,
That the forms of Kingdoms are different, and in some places there are some
degrees of Liberty more than in others: For God approves all Forms of
Government that are agreeable to Right, Nature, and Reason; and as I think
there is no where any Divine precept extant, that a free People being about to
choose it self a King, should choose Cajus rather than Titius, no more is there
any certain form Divinely established, under which, and no other Authority, is
to be conferred on Princes. Neither are these Men any way helped by that place
of 1 Samuel 8. where some will have only the bare unjust practice of Kings, that
the true right of all Kings is to be there described. But Grotius, Lib 1. c. 4.
3. Taking a middle way lays down, that there the bare actions of a King is
described, yet what has the effect of a right, to wit an Obligation of non
resistance: So that however a King may act against his Duty when he commits
such things; yet that his Subject sought no more to resist, than if he had
acted thus by the highest Right; and therefore it is added that the People
pressed by those vexations should cry to God, because there remained no humane
remedies. So that this was called the Right of the King in that sense as the
Roman Praetor was said, jus reddere, to judge right, even then when he decreed
unjustly; however I conceive the true sense of this place may be thus
understood, there had been hitherto a Democracy among the Hebrews, but that
which often resembled that sort of Kingdom which Aristotle calls Heroical. The
Judges incited by a divine instinct did for the most part rescue the oppressed
People from their Enemies, or else in Peace Judged Causes: but in other matters
were rather endued with a power of persuading, than commanding, but yet their
Equipage and State being small, was not born or increased by any Public Taxes;
yet the People weary of this Government, would have a King after the manner of
other Nations: That is, who should appear in great State, and Splendor, and
should maintain a constant Guard, or at least should still exercise his
Subjects in Arms, that they might still be able to meet their Enemies in the
Field, see Sam. XIII. 2. XIV. 48, 52. Now Samuel, that the People might
consider of it soberly before hand, lays open to them the Prerogatives of such
a King: and the inconveniences of that Government. You would have a King
remarkable by a great deal of Splendor; but such a one must be attended with a
numerous Train, and so will take your Sons, and appoint them for himself, and
to be his Horsemen, and to run before his Chariots. You would have a King. who
should maintain an Army; but it will be necessary that he appoint him Captains
over Hundreds, and Captains over Fifties; and this must be of your Sons, who
were used before to look after your own business only; the greatness of his
affairs, and the state of his Office, will not permit this King to till his own
Land; Therefore of your Sons will he set some to Ear his Ground, and Reap his
Harvest, and to make his Instruments of War; and since besides he must need a
great deal of Attendance, and that it will not become the Dignity of his Wives,
or Daughters, to look after the Houshold-affairs. Therefore he will take your
Daughters to be Confectioners, to be Cooks, and to be Bakers; he will likewise
stand in need of many Servants to dispatch the businesses of War and Peace, and
who all must have Salaries: and therefore he will take your Fields, and your
Vineyards and your Olive-Yards, and give them to your Servants: and to this
purpose he will take the Tenth of your Seed, and of your Vineyards, and give to
his Officers, and to his Servants, and he will likewise when he has need, take
your Menservants, and your Maidservants, and your young Men, and your Asses,
and put them to his work. In short he says no more than this; If you will have
a King, he must be maintained like a King, and a certain Revenue appointed for
this end; of which burden if you are afterward a weary, you shall not be able
to Depose him again, since he obtained the Kingdom by your choice and consent,
and so cannot be taken from him. So that it is plain, that this place does not
at all serve to Patronize evil Princes; so neither that there is here any
limited Power conferred by God after the manner of a constant and unalterable
Precept, and of which no constitutions can diminish any part; since here only
the necessary Charges and Burdens as well of an absolute, as of a limited
Royalty are described; therefore it is wholly in the will of a free People,
whether they will have an absolute Power, or will deliver it with certain Laws,
so that those Laws contain nothing that is wicked, or which may destroy the
ends of Government; for although Men at the beginning did freely enter into a
civil Society, yet since they were before obliged to the observation of the Law
of Nature, they ought to Constitute such Rules of Power, and civil Obedience
which might be agreeable to that Law, and to the lawful ends of all
Commonwealths.

But as it may rightly be understood, by what sort of Promise, a Kingly
Government may cease to be absolute (for every promise has not that force) it
is to be understood that a King upon his taking the Kingdom, may oblige himself
either by a General, or special Promise, which for the most part is confirmed
by the Religion of an Oath. A General Promise may be made either tacitly or
expressly. A tacit Promise of Governing well is understood in the very
acceptance of the Kingdom, although there were nothing expressly Promised; yet
most commonly this promise ought to be made expressly not without an Oath, and
the solemnity of certain rights; neither is it unusual that in this promise the
Office of a King should be described by a Periphrasis, or enumeration of the
principal Parts; as suppose it be, that he will take care of the Public
safety; that he will defend the good, and punish the bad, that he will
Administer indifferent Justice, that he will oppress no Body, or the like. Such
Promises do not all detract from absoluteness of his Power. since the King is
indeed obliged by those general Promises, to govern well; but what Method, or
what means he shall make use of for this end is left to his will, and
discretion; but a special promise, and in which both the Method, and means to
be used in the Administering the Government are particularly expressed, seem to
have a twofold Power; for one only obliges the Conscience of the King; but the
other makes the Obedience of the Subjects depend upon its performance, as upon
an express condition. A Promise of the first sort is thus, If the King should
swear, for example, that he will not bestow any Offices of trust, on such a
sort of Men, that he will not grant any Privileges to any which shall redound
to the prejudice of others, that he will make no new Laws, or impose new Taxes
or Customs, or will not use Foreign Soldiers or the like. Yet if there be no
certain Council, or Assembly Coustituted, which the King should be obliged to
consult, whether the occasions of the Commonwealth require he should depart
from those Engagements (for there is still in all of them, that tacit
exception still understood (unless the Safety of the Commonwealth the Supreme
Law in all such Engagements require otherwise) and which Council by its own
right, and not precariously can take cognizance of those affairs, and without
whose consent the Subjects cannot be obliged to observe the Kings commands in
such matters; here the Administration of the supreme Authority being restrained
to certain Laws, if the King shall act otherwise (unless in cases of great
necessity,) he is without doubt guilty of the breach of his Oath; yet there
does not therefore belong any power to the Subject to deny Obedience to the
Kings commands, or of making those actions void. For if the King do say, That
the safety of the People, or some remarkable advantage to the Commonwealth
requires him to break his Promise, as that presumption always ought to go along
with the Kings actions, the Subjects in this case have not any thing to reply:
because they have no faculty of taking Cognizance of those actions, whether the
necessity of the Commonwealth required them or not; from which this is
apparent, that they do not take a sufficient caution, if they will allow their
King but a limited Power, and yet has not Constituted some great Council,
without whose consent those actions excepted cannot be exercised, or unless
there lie upon the King a necessity of calling the Estates, whenever he
deliberates upon the exercise of those Legislative Powers, for that is better,
than if it should be necessary for the King to consult some Council, consisting
only of some few of his Subjects: since it may easily happen that the private
advantages of those few may differ from the public good, and likewise, they
for their own private Interest, may not agree in those things which are truly
beneficial for their Prince.

But the Authority of a King is more closly restrained, if it be expressly
agreed between the King and People upon the conferring the supreme power upon
Him, or his Ancestors that he should Administer it according to certain
Fundamental Laws; and concerning those matters which he has not absolute Power
to dispose of, that he leave them to a great Council of the People, or
Nobility, neither may decree any thing in those matters without their consent;
and if they should be done otherwise, that the Subjects would not be obliged to
observe his commands in such things; neither, yet is the Supreme Power rendered
defective by such Fundamental Constitutions. For all the acts of Supreme Power
may be exercised in such a Kingdom, as well as in an absolute one, unless that
in the one, the King uses his own Judgment alone, as decisive, but in the other
there is as it were a concomitant Cognizance remaining in the great Council,
upon which power of the Supreme Authority it does not radically; but as it were
conditionally depend, and sine qua non; neither are there in such a
Commonwealth two distinct wills, forall things which the Commonwealth wills,
it wills them by the Kings will alone; although it might happen form that
limitation, that certain conditions not being observed, the King cannot legally
will some things, and so wills them in vain; but neither does the King cease to
have the supreme Power in such a Kingdom; or that this Council is therefore
above the King. For these are no true consequences, that because this Person
cannot do all things according to his own humor, therefore he has not supreme
Power. I am not obliged to obey this Man in all things, therefore I am his
Superior, or Equal: and these are likewise very different; I am bound to
perform what this Man pleases; because I have obliged my self to it by compact;
and I am obliged to follow this Man's will, because he can enjoin me thus by his
supreme Authority. But supreme, and absolute are not one, and the same thing,
for that denotes the absense of a Superior, or an Equal in the same order or
degree; but this a faculty of exerciseing any right by a Man's own Judgment and
Will; but what if there be added a Commissary clause; that if he shall do
otherwise he shall forfeit his Kingdom; as the Arogonians of Old after the King
had sworn to their Privileges, did promise him Obedience in this manner: Vid
Hotomani Frarcogallia. C. 12.
We, who are of as great Power as thou, do Create thee our King and Lord on
this condition that thou observe our Laws and Privileges, if otherwise, not.

Here it is certain, that an absolute King cannot be He to whom the Kingdom is
thus committed under a Commissary Clause, or Condition: but that this King may
have for all this a regal Power though limited, I see no reason to the
contrary; for although we grant a Temporary Authority cannot be acknowledged
for Supreme, because it depends upon a potestative condition, and which can
never be in the Princes power. Yet a King of this sort abovementioned is not
therefore subject to the power of the People, with whom the cognizance is
whether he keep his Oath, or not, for besides that such a Commissary Clause is
wont to comprehend only such plain things, which are evident to any Man's
senses; and so are not liable to dispute. So that this power of taking
cognizance does not at all suppose any Jurisdiction by which the Actions of the
King as a Subject may be judged, but is nothing else, than a bare Declaration,
whereby any Man takes notice that his manifest right is violated by another.
See Grotius, Lib. 1. Cap. 3. 16. And Baecler, upon him: who are both of the
same Opinion. Grotius indeed in the same place speaks more obscurely, when he
says, That the Obligation arising from the promises of Kings, does either fall
upon the exercise of the act, or also directly upon the very power of it, if he
act contrary to promises of the former sort; the act may be called unjust, and
yet be valid; if against those of the latter, it is also void, as if he should
have said, Sometimes a King promises not to use part of his Supreme Authority,
but after acertain manner; and sometimes he plainly renounces some part
thereof, concerning which there are two things to be observed; first that also
some acts may be void, which are performed contrary to an Obligation of the
former sorts; as for example, if a King swear not to impose any Taxes without
the consent of the Estates. I suppose that such Taxes which the King shall Levy
by his own will alone; to bevoid. Secondly, That in the latter form the parts
of the supreme power, are divided.

But that the Nature of limited Kingdoms may more thoroughly be understood; it
is to be observed, that the affairs which occur in Governning a Commonwealth
are of two kinds; for of some of them it may be agreed beforehand, because
whenever they happen they are still but of the same Nature: but of others, a
certain Judgment cannot be made but at the time present, whether they are
beneficial to the Public or not; for that those circumstances which accompany
them, cannot be forseen. Yet concerning both, that People may provide, that he
to whom they have committed this limited Kingdom should not depart from the
Common good in the former, whilst it prescribes perpetual Laws or Conditions
which the King should be obliged to observe in the latter, whilst he is obliged
to consult the assembly of his People or Nobility. Thus the People being
satisfied of the truth of their Religion, and what sort of Ecclesiastical
Government, or Ceremonies do best suit their Genius; so it is in Sweden, may
condition with the King upon his Inauguration, that he shall not change any
thing in Religious matters by his sole Authority. So every Body being sensible,
how often Justice would be injured, if Sentence should always be given by the
sole Judgment of the Prince, and ex aequo and hono, without any written or
known Laws, and that Passion, VI. Tacit An. L. 13. 4. 2.
Interest, or unskilfulness would have too great a sway for avoiding this
inconvenience, the people may oblige their King, that either he shall compose a
Body of just Laws, or observe those that are already extant and also that
Judgment be given according to those Laws, in certain Courts or Colleges of
Justice, and that none but the most weighty Causes should come before the King
by way of Appeal. This is likewise the Law of Sweden.
So likewise, since it is well known how easily Riches obtained by the Labor
of others, may be squandered away by Luxury or Ambition: therefore the Subjects
Goods should not lie at their Princes mercy to sustain their Lusts. Some
Nations have wisely assigned a certain Revenue to their Prince, such as they
supposed necessary for the constant Charges of the Commonwealth; but if greater
expenses were necessary, they would have those referred to the Assembly of
Estates. And since also some Kings are more desirous than they ought to be of
Military Glory, and running themselves into unnecessary Wars, may put
themselves and their Kingdoms in hazard, therefore some of them have been so
cautious, that in the conferring the regal Dignity, they have imposed this
necessity upon their Kings, that if they would make offensive Wars upon their
Neighbors, they should first advise with their great Council; and so likewise
it might be ordained concerning other matters, which the People judged
necessary for the Commonwealth, lest that if an absolute power of ordering
those things, were left to the Prince, the common good of the People would
perhaps be less considered.

And since the people would not leave to this limited King an absolute power in
those Acts which are thus excepted, but that an Assembly, either of the whole
people, or of those that represent them divided into their several Orders; it
is further to be observed, that the power of this Council, or Assembly, is not
alike every where. For in some places the King himself though every where
absolute, may have appointed a Council, or Senate, without whose approbation he
will not have his decrees to be valid. Which Senate without doubt will only
have the Authority of Counselors, and though they may question the Kings
Grants or Decrees, and reject those which they judge inconvenient, for the
Commonwealth, yet they do not this by any inherent Right, but by a power
granted them from the King himself. Who would this way prevent his decreeing
any thing through have, imprudence, or the persuasion of Flatterers that might
prove hurtful to his State: to which may be referred what Plutarch mentions in
his Apothegms. 'That the Egyptian Kings observe a Law, Note the Antiquity of
of this excellent Law.
whereby they oblige their Judges by Oath, that if the King require an unjust
Sentence from them, they should refuse him. And in the same place it is noted,
that Antigonus 3. writ to his Cities, that if by his Letter he should command
anything contrary to his Laws, they should not obey it, but should think he
failed thorough ignorance or misinformation; and oftentimes importunate
Requests are cluded this way, whilst the Prince seems for quietness sake
content to grant what he knows will be made void by this Senate or Court of
Parliament, As it has been often in France.
yet when the King is resolved that his Will shall hold good, and looks upon
the contrary Reasons of this Parliament as not weighty enough to convince him,
it cannot then any longer contradict the Kings Will; for it is not presumed
that the King by constituting such a Court would irrevocably abdicate his Right
of absolute power. So that this Senate or Parliament has indeed but a
Derivative power from the King to be limited as he himself shall please,
although perhaps he will not exert this power but upon weighty considerations,
nor does this Court make the power of the King less than absolute; since it
only gives him occasion to review his own Acts, and as it were Appeals from
himself, when surprised with Passions Prejudices, or misinformation to himself
in a more indifferent and considerate Temper. The like may be said of the
Assembly of Estates, if they meet only for this purpose that they should be the
Kings greatest Council, by which the Requests and complaints of his People,
which often times are concealed in his private Council, may come to the Kings
ears; who is then left free to Enact what he thinks expedient, Vid. Gro. Li. 1.
c. 3.. 10. But a Kingdom is truly limited, when the Subjects at first
conferred it on the King, on this condition, that he should assemble the
Estates concerning some Acts, without whose consent this Decree should not be
valid, yet it ought to be in the Kings power to call, and dissolve this
Assembly, and to propose the business to be dispatched therein unless we should
go about to set up an irregular Commonwealth, and leave the King no more than
an empty Title, but if these States being so convocated, do of their own accord
Propose those things which they conceive conducing to the good and safety of
the Kingdom, yet the Decrees or Acts constituted concerning them, take their
force from the Kings passing them. Yet such an assembly of Estates do differ
from Counselors properly taken in this, that although both of them can only
move the King by reason only, yet the King may very well reject the Reasons of
these latter, but not of the former, neither ought the King to think himself
contemned, if these Estates do not consent to some things of his proposing. For
as he promised at first to have always before his Eyes the good of the
Commonwealth, of which a great many choice men are supposed to Judge more
certainly than one. A King may most commonly blame his own imprudence,
Passions, or ill Fortune, if the States happen to differ from him, from whence
it likewise appears, that their fear is vain, who think that by this means, it
is at the disposal of the Estates, whether the Commonwealth shall be safe or
not. For it can scarcely be supposed, that the King should be so negligent, as
to omit laying open to his Estates the necessities of the Kingdom, or that the
Estates being fully satisfied of them, will ever go about to betray their own
safety. But this is certain, since those who have conferred the limited power
cannot be presumed either to intend to destroy or dissolve the Commonwealth;
or by their confederacy to order things so, that the end of all Commonwealths,
cannot be obtained in it, therefore there ought to be that favorable
interpretation made of those Conventions that they really desire the common
safety, and would by no means do any thing contrary thereunto; so likewise in
making this compact, that whatsoever they have so agreed to, they are still to
be supposed to have that intention, that nothing should be done by reason of
those conditions or parts which should prejudice the common safety, and public
utility, or whereby the Convulsion or Dissolution of the Commonwealth might
follow. But if such a chance should happen, it would be most convenient, that
if the affair will allow of delay, it should be proposed in the Assembly of
Estates, but where this cannot be done, it may be the Kings Duty dexterously to
correct those complaints that may break out to the destruction of the
Commonwealth, which also is of the the same force in respect of public Laws,
Pint. in the Life of Agesilaus:
which the safety of the people and the supreme Law commands sometimes to be
silent. As Agesilaus commanded the Laws of Licurgus to sleep for one day, that
those might return without ignominy that had fled at the Battle of Levetra.

However, Mr. Hobs will allow no distinction between limited power and
absolute, but will have all supreme power to be absolute, when it is to be
observed, that in all those assertions which are too rudely laid down by him,
there is a restriction to be added from the and of all Commonwealths, as in
what he lays down in his de Cive cap. 5.. 6. that he to whom in a Commonwealth
there belongs the right of punishing, can by right compel all to all things he
pleases, or as he expresses this limitation in the same place, which are
necessary for the common peace and safety, and Cap. 6.. 13. when by the right
of the supreme Governor he says there is connected so great an obedience of
all the Subjects as is requisite for the Government of the Commonwealth, so
when in the place aforegoing he says, who ever has so subjected his own will
'to that of the Prince, that he may do whatever he pleases, without punishment,
as also make Laws, Judge differences, punish whom he pleases, and use the
strength and power of all men according to his own will, perform all these
things by the highest right, he has then granted him the greatest power which
can be granted. But it is now to be considered, by what intention, or on what
grounds men were moved to institute Commonwealths, from whence it is clear,
that no body is understood to have conferred more power by his Will upon the
Monarch, then a reasonable man can judge necessary to that end: and that
although the ordering what may conduce to this end in this or that occasion,
does not remain in those that have transferred their power, but in him on whom
that power is transferred, therefore the supreme Ruler can compel the Subjects
to all those things which are really condusing to the good of the
Commonwealth, but he ought not to go about to compel them to those things that
are contrary to the safety of the Commonwealth, or against the Laws of Nature.
And if he endeavors any such thing, without doubt he transgresses the bounds
of his power. Let us also consider the Arguments by which the same Author in
his De Cive. Cap. 6,. 17. endeavors to prove that all limitation of Sovereign
power is absolutely vain, he says that assembly which prescribed the Laws to
the future King, must have had absolute power, either habitually, or vertually.
If the Assembly remains constantly, or adjourns their Meeting from Time to
Time, to a certain day and place, their power will be perpetual, and so the
King will not have the Supreme power, but will be only a bare Magistrate. Which
we grant to be true, if that Assembly can meet by its own Right and Decree of
any Affairs of the Commonwealth, and that the King be liable to give them an
Account of his Actions. But if it absolutely dissolve it self; unless the
Commonwealth be likewise dissolved, there must in like manner a power be left
somewhere, of punishing those that transgress the Laws, which without absolute
power cannot be performed. Which is false as also the Argument by which he
would prove it: for he who has granted him by Right, so much power, that he
can compel any of the Subjects by punishments, has so great power that greater
cannot be conferred by them. But for all this, whoever will but consider the
end of all Commonwealths, and that those Subjects by the submission of their
Wills and powers, did not immediately become senceless Machines: so that since
they could grant the use of their united Forces to another upon condition, and
are able to judge whether this condition be perform^d or not, so they can
likewise withdraw their Forces again upon the breach of the condition, as
likewise this is apparently false, that there is no better provision against
the abuse of Authority, when it is granted limited, then when it is left
absolute; for it is not who, that he who has power enough to defend all Men.
(which all that are not Fools will easily grant their Prince) as also power
enough to destroy them. The Commands of a General which are sufficient to make
the Soldiers stout, to venture their Lives, against an Enemy, yet would be
found of no force, if he should command them to draw their Swords against each
other. So that prudent and worthy Princes though absolute, will comply with the
Genins of their Subjects, and ^t-times will be sparing to urge them too far
though for their own advantage, when they cannot be compelled to their Duty
without some hazard to the Commonwealth. But those Subjects are not less
discreet, who when they are satisfied, what is not expedient for their
Commonwealth, have provided by Fundamental Laws, that they should not be
compelled to it by their Princes power. So far speaks the judicious Mr.
Pusendorf upon this Subject, which though somewhat prolix, I have thought fit
to translate verbation, because I would not be thought by going about to
contract it, to put my own sense upon his words, and besides I know no man that
has writ more clearly of this Subject, in avoiding on one side an absolute
despotick Monarchy, without falling into that Solacism in Politics the
division of the supreme power which he supposes truly inconsistant with
Monarchy. So that if the Reader is not satisfied with what I have here writ
upon this Subject: I am sorry his understanding and mine are not framed alike,
nor shall be angry with him, if he like an absolute Monarchy better then that
we live under. Provided, he will never Act any thing to produce public
disturbances: or to introduce it, either by force or fraud in this Kingdom. Yet
shall wish him no greater Prerogative, then that of enjoying his own opinion,
without imposing it upon others, who are not yet weary of their Estates and
Liberties, which since the People of this Nation are not yet weary of. The
World is wide enough, and there are Countries, where this which they admire as
the primitive Government of the World, and that which they perhaps Reverence as
the Primitive Religion is practiced in its full splendour: and indeed are most
suitable to each other. All the hurt I wish those Gentlemen, that they were all
settled in any of them, even which they like best. Whilst all plain hearted
Englishmen, notwithstanding such subtle discourses, as thofe of our Author,
are resolved to return the same Answer to them as the Temporal Lords did to the
Bishops long since upon another occasion, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari, of
which I hope there is as little fear, as there is or ever will be just occasion
for it. And so I shall quit my hands of this ungrateful task, without troubling
my self with his Discourse of Witches. Since his other writings sufficiently
assure us that whatever he was in other Learning he was no Witch in Politics,
though he had Read Aristotle, might perhaps be better read in the Fathers and
Schoolmen. or Civil-Law, than in the Laws of Nature, or those of his own
Country.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface Page 2. l. 14. dele not l. 18. hy r. by p. 5. r. despise observe p. 8.
l. 32. compore r. compare the p. 15. l. 30. of Fathers r. of a Father l. 31.
more true r. more certain l. 36. to r. thereto l. 37. dele without the help and
assistance of others p. 24. l. 24. should make r. should have l. 26. in r. or
in p. 29. l. 16. dele fourth p. 32. l. 33. d. not p. 37. l. 33. for excellent
Pufendorf r. Mr. Pufendorf a late judicious Writer. p. 40. l. 17 d. often p.
42. l 20. d. of p. 43. l. 17. ought quit r. ought to puit p. 44. l. 10. for a
privilege r. a liberty l. 21. and if r. for if l. ead. have such r. have only
such l. 31. fatherly r. or fatherly p. 37. 57. l. 28. puzzle r. distract p. 67.
l. 14. require r. acquire l. 32. as I r. and p. 70. l. 13. d. perhaps p. 72. l.
25. d. goods p. 74. l. 5. or at their own dispose include within a Parenthesis
p. 77. l. 8. upon r. upon them p. 83. l. 8. on r. than l. 31. r. without any
stop after legate l. 32. owe his r. owe its p. 86. l. 32. the r. those l. 35.
change r. charge p. 87. l. 29. it is r. they are p. 88. l. 20. his r. this p.
89. l. 6. consting r. consisting p. 90. l. 26. r. representative and d. body p.
92. l. 34. many r. so many p. 93. l. 7. but of r. but part of l. 13. d. from p.
95. l. 16. for an r. but an l. 24. d. hatred p. 99. l. 7. both of d. both p.
102. l. 3. at man's r. a man's p. 107. l. 20. Laws d. s ead. l. 1. d. Custom p.
112. l. 32. r. misuse him p. 113. l. 25. most r. many p. 117. l. 30. all r. at
all p. 120 l. 20. a r. and l. 22. d. nor dishes p. 121. l. 12. and r. which p.
122. l. 18. d. the p. 123. l. 23. they deserve r. he deserves p. 127. l. 13.
yet is r. yet it is l. 22. Body r. Badg p. 132. contract it r. contract his
words p. 134. l. ult. first 97. r. first Classis of 98. [Chap. IV.] p. 97. l.
26. r. definition p. 98. l. ult. 1000 parts r. 100th part p. 100. l. 10. was ^.
as l. 11. being still r. is still p. 101. l. 15. r. Cain p. 105. l. 21. d.
should I. ead. know r. knew 107. l. 33. d. into l. 35. which having r. and
having p. 109 l. 32. erecting of r. laying p. 110. l. 7. a true r. tacit l.
15. things in r. things under l. 17. the thest r. the Thief l. 29. concern r.
convey p. 111. l. 7. d. were l. 13. d. when l. 23. necessities r. necessaries
p. 115. l. 23. does r. did p. 118. l. penult. Casak r. Casaq; p. 123. l. 20. it
r. Usufructuary p. 124. l. 13. Crown must be of England r. Crown of England
must be p. 126. l. penult. d. our l. ult. d. if p. 127. l. 1. d. it treats l.
2. Irenes r. some men's p. 129. l. 3. d. and l. 4. d and l. 33. Medipersians r.
Medop. p. 133. l. 2. that it r. that is p. 131. l. 8. discoursed r. discoursing
l. 9. d. not p. 133. l. 33. from them. r. from him p. 135 l. 18. and makes d.
and r. make p. 136. l. 27. d. give and p. 138. l. penult. a breach r. branch p.
14^. l. 2^. d. by p. 141. l. 23. this accepted r. this K. Henry accepted p.
143. l. 7. r. Senate l. 8. this r. his p. 144. l. 19. Judges r. Indies p. 145.
l. 13. worship r. wardship l. 15. mettre due sense r. mettre hers du sense p.
147. l. 32. before r. that before l. 33. the nobiles r. barons or nobiles p.
148. l. 34. born r. Booren p. 149. l. 14. after Grammar r. nice^ies l. 25. d.
he l. 15. be called r. may be as well called l. ead. as they are r. as any p.
150. l. 28. Law to r. Law ought p. 160. l. 10. d. which said Statute, viz. l.
11. repealing r. reciting l. 13. d. is, and r. ( viz. the King within a
Parenthesis l. 14. bound r. is bound l. 18. it an absolute Monarchy r. all
Monarchy absolute p. 209. l. 5. d. the Parenthesis, (says Sir. R. A.) l. 11.
this Author r. our Author. l. 14. d. it is and r. as l. 15. be Judge r. may Judge
l. 17. suppose a r. suppose then a p. 210. l. 6. not r. nor 211. l. 22. d. not
p. 213. l. 25. Anderson r. Andersons Reports p. 214. l. 15. factam r. factum p.
215. l. 7. d. whether l. d. be full l. 14. of military r. such military l. 20.
d. they put it thus l. 27. tonts r. touts l. 28. le autrun r. les biens
d'autruy l. ead. en r. oud'p p. 218. l. 14. Execution r. Executioner p. 219. l.
21. dares say r. dares not say p. 221. his r. his so p. 222. r. despatick 223.
r. Gemoto l. 25. d. their last King and r. who p. 224. l. 4. r. Athelwolsi l.
6. r. sumus l. 12. d. his Nephew Wimund l. 10. tells r. tells us l. penult. r.
Ethelred p. 225. l. 15. and to r. and by l. 18. says were r. says they were l.
32. or unjustly d. unjustly p. 226. l. 13. Cracis r. Crucis. p. 228. l. 5. and
were r. or were l. 31. Authors r. our Author p. 232. l. 5. d. which l. p^ult.
Mr. Hobs r. Mr. H. p. 23. l. 4. means had r. have proved l. 12. Arguments d. s.
p. 234. Anno 125. r. Anno 1252. l. penult. son does r. son may p. 236. l. 21,
22. d. a and r. mixed Monorchies, then mixed Aristocracies or Democracies l. 25.
paat r. power p. 237. l. 8. after original r. I shall here tronslate l. 12. d.
as near as I can translate it l. 33. d. that l. 34. d pretense and r. somewhat
p. 240. l. 18. d. that r. for l. 27. to superior r. to no superior l. ult. for
singulars r. particular persons p. 24^. l. 12. of all r. in all l. ead.
persuades r. commands l. 13. or r. of 243. l. 29. yet is r. yet it is l.
penult. if r. of p. 244. l. 6. and no other include with a parenth. l. 8. only
the r. only from the l. 16. subjects sought r. subjects ought p. 245. l. 31.
your r. his 246. l. 7. and so r. and so it 247. l. 9. not all r. not at all l.
ead. from the absol, r. from the p. 248. as that r. as if that, and include
from as to Actions, within a Parenthesis p. 249. l. 20. form r. from p. 250. l.
4. Commissary r. Commissory l. 6. r. Arragonians and d. of old l. 23.
cognizance is r. cognizance remains 251. l. 2. or also r. or else l. 11. sorts
r. for. 253. l. 10. after orders add should be consulted (...) 256. l. 21.
Lavetra r. Leuetra l. 27. and r. end 257. l. 7. perform r. performing p. 259.
l. 30. d. yet weary of. Lesser errors in Orthography the Readers discretion may
correct.

ADDENDA.
THe quotation in the Margin, p. 50. vid. Mezeray Abrege Chronologique belongs
to p. 59. l. 22.

To p. 117. l. 5. That even in the Christian Religion, Men are Masters of their
own lives: when Gods Glory or the avoiding of imminent sin requires it, see the
examples of the primitive Martyrs Eusebius Eecl. Hist. Lib. 8. Cap. 9. 12. To
Chap. 4. p. 123. l. 24. And that the French look upon their Kings to have but
an usufructuary right in the Crown of France, appears from the Declaration of
the Assembly des Notables called K. Francis I. 1527. to give their advice
concerning the Redemption of his Children, and his return to Spain, the
delivery of Burgundy, whereupon the three Estates answered a part. That his
person belonged to the Realm, and not to himself, that Burgundy was a Member of
the Crown of which he was but the ususructuary and so could neither dispose of
the one nor the other. Mezeray Abrege Chron. Francis I. Anno 1527.

P. 151. l. 29. after Law, add the same Author (the Book is quoted there, but
the Quotation omited) Que quidem fuerint approbata concensu utentius and
Sacramento Regam confirmata non possunt mutari neo destruitine communi consen u
little omnium quorum consilio and consensu fuerint promulgata.


