Tyrconnel 's Proceedings in Ireland, AND Motion in Council, as to the Burning
of Dublin Together with a Speech then made against it.
Sent to a Person of Quality in London.
Dublin, the 27th of January, 1688. My Lord,
WEre your Lordship here, you would not so much admire that you have not Money
remitted you: Tyrconnel has in several Bodies of old and new raised Men 30000,
24000 of which have neither Pay nor any Subsistence but what they take from the
Country, who are also Robbed of their Corn and Cattle, twenty, thirty, forty at
a time, insomuch that some Farmers are fled with their Rent in their Pockets:
Some have left all the Robbers left them, and are gone for England; where we
hear many good Families of them want Bread; many more would go, but cannot make
Money of any thing: the best EnglishCow is offered for Ten Shillings, and all
other Stock proportionable; nay, some have offered black Cattle at Elve Pound a
Score, and cannot get it. For three Weeks past there has not been bought or
sold the value of Twenty Pound, besides what is absolutely necessary for
support of Life, in this City, where Money is so scarce that one Neighbor will
not trust another for Two pence. Tyrconnel has declared, he cannot expect
Money for the King's Revenue, but will take the value in Kind of the growth of
the Country; and how it will be livied, that way your Lordship may imagine.
Four Thousand persons have deserted Dublin, and more than Eight Thousand other
parts, and gone out of the Kingdom; those that remain secure, only preparing
for flight; and unless some speedy stop; by Protection f^nd England, the
Country will be waste, and reduced to a worse condition; and those Protestants
who have Estates here, be in the same case as if they had none. The Tories
march boldly through the Country, a hundred and two hundred in a Company, and
drive away black Cattle, and Sheep at noon day. And the Irish say already, they
wonder at the Impudence of any English, to pretend a Title to any thing in
Ireland. And those of them that are rich, have given great Sums for support of
a War, which the Priests and Friars call a Holy War, and preach Damnation to
all who Assist not in Purse or Person. The Lord Mayor of Dublin has given 6000
l.the late Lord Mayor, Sir T. Hackett 2000; Mr. Kenedy, the Merchant in Bridge
street, 1500; the Mayor of Drogheda 2000; the City of Galloway, in Money and
Goods, 30000 l. and all the other Papist Counties, Cities, and Towns are
following their example. So that they expect in three Months a Bank of Five
Hundred Thousand Pounds. To which may be added, the Encouragement given this
Week from the French King, by the Marquess Du Ponte, who has brought Arms and
Ammunition for 15000 Men, and assured more Men and Money, and this day went
hence for Waterford, where he Embarques back for France. The Irish fear nothing
but an English Army of 20000 Horse and Foot, and the Protestants, that they
will not come time enough to deliver them.

Tyrconnel has not only publicly threatened, in case of Invasion from England,
to Burn Dublin, but to Motion it this Week in Council, in order thereto; to
which one of the Council replied, in the Speech following; and notwithstanding
their Boasting, it is believed they dare not do it for the reasons herein
mentioned.

A Speech, or Disswasive from the Burning of Dublin, pronounced at a Juncto of
Council, The Five and Twentieth of January, 1688.
MY LORD,
THE warmth and flames of this Debate, kindled by the Subject Matter thereof,
has proceeded so far, as to incense us so much among ourselves into Passion;
and I hope that those flames will never reach to the Destruction of this Noble
City, and the Inhabitants thereof: The Question is, Whether the Circumstances
wherein we are, it be advisable to Burn this City? The matter in debate, is of
great weight, and, as I conceive, of as equal concernment to the Roman
Catholics, as to the English Protestants interested and Residing therein; for
if we shall consider the Freehold, Goods, and Chattels belonging to the one or
the other, you shall not find any great difference in the Value: Why,
therefore, should we destroy those whom we effect, and are bound to preserve,
together whith those whom we think fit to punish; for we know that in the
flames of a general Conflagration, the Interest of one and the other cannot be
distinguished. In the next place it is to be considered, how far the whole
Country, and Foreigners, may be concerned in so vast a Distraction; Consider
how much the Country will be impoverished by destroying their great Commerce
with the City; and whether Lands in the Country will continue in the half Value
they now bear, should they be deprived of venting their Corn, Cattle, and other
their Commodities in this City: Consider furthermore, that according to the
Rules hithertofore observed in the prosecution of War, nothing can prove more
dangerous, than for the over mastered Party, or at least fear to be such; What
can be reason to burn so famous, so great, so opulent a City, as we are now
possessed of? If we be, or shall soon be upon the access of English Forces, or
burning of this City, will prove an Example to them, at whose mercy we shall
lie, to prosecute the whole Country with Fire and Sword; and then it will be
known, that our Party, though not so much concerned in the Freehold of Ireland,
are greater Masters of Corn both in Field and Haggard; which they, upon so
great provocation, would set on fire, whereas now they have no design to
destroy the Country, or the Inhabitants thereof, they intending no more than to
deliver the English Protestants from the the terror of a new raised Army of
the Irish, and the settling of them in safety; so that unless we should begin
Acts of Hostility, such as the burning of Dublin would be, the whole body of
the Country and City, Inhabitants thereof, and even the common Soldiers,
laying down their Arms, may follow their former Callings without being further
questioned, leaving the Landed Officers of the new raised Irish Forces, whereby
the English have so much been terrified, together with the Unqualified Judges,
and Civil Officers, to the punishment of the Law, or to the Mercy of those who
do or shall bear sway in England; Furthermore, we cannot forget that the
burning of Houses is Treason by the Law of Ireland, How great a Treason
therefore would it be to burn this famous City? If a War were so severely
prosecuted against us, as by Force to drive all the Inhabitants out of this
Kingdom, leaving no hope ever for us to return again, it might then seem,
perhaps, reasonable to destroy the Country and City; but no Hostile Act being
intended, to the Disquiet of the Nation, the whole scope of the Power of
England being no more than to give vigor to the Laws of the Kingdom and the
Exercise thereof: Why should we burn Dublin engaging our selves and the whole
Nation in a War, and thereby bring Misery to our selves and the whole Nation,
under pretense of doing that which we are no way able to effect? Let us
therefore by a wise submission, while our Adversaries are on the other side of
the Water (and I know the Officers and Soldiers of the old Army will consent)
passifie them, by ondering a general laying down of Arms, which I am confident,
will, not only deliver the whole Irish Nation from Destruction, th^^ also
assure them of greater prospect and felicity then ever they yet enjoyed, so far
as may agree with the Laws of the Land. And why should we expect in so
prostrate a Condition more advantage than the Law will afford us. I am sure I
have hither to said nothing but what intended for the service of the Irish
Nation, for whom I am very much concerned as a Native thereof; and I am
persuaded, that all of you in a right Judgment, cannot but approve of what I
have said; If so, it is sufficient, and I shall add no more then this my last
Advertisement. The Attempt of Burning the City will be very difficult: the
Opposition you will meet in doing it, will be very great and bloody; and being
once Attempted, whether Effected or not, will prove the most ruinous
Destraction that ever befell this Nation, which I wish may by your Prudence be
prevented.


