Two Letters touching the Trinity and Incarnation. The First urging the Belief
of the Athanasian Creed. The Second, an Answer thereto.
The First LETTER.
Loving Cousin;
IT IS no small Trouble to me to hear you are fallen into the horrid Heresy of
the Socinians and Arians, viz. to deny the Holy Trinity and Incarnation of our
Savior: For you commend a printed Sheet, that is dispersed under the Title of
Brief Notes on the Creed of St. Athanasius, and are not afraid of the Damnation
which is there pronounced against all such as do not firmly believe the
Doctrines contained therein, which have been always and are at this Day held to
be the Great Fundamentals of Christianity. And I take them to be so clearly
revealed in Holy Scripture, that no Man well acquainted with Scripture, (as you
are) can disbelieve them, without some Wantonness and Pride of Understanding, a
great Conceit and Confidence of their own Knowledge, and such unpardonable
Immodesty, as admits of no Excuse: And though such Persons may be otherwise
pious and useful Men, yet there is no Reason why they should not be damned as
well as devout and virtuous Jews and Heathens.

I always took you for a modest Man, and one that had a great Reverence for
what is revealed in Holy Scripture. But if you now resolve never to allow that
to be the Sense of the Revelation, however plain and evident the Words are,
which is not agreeable to your Reason, but will put another Sense upon them,
though never so forced and violent, as in this Controversy you do; I can no
longer account you modest, but that you now betray the Pride and Conceitedness,
which before lay hid, and that if you persist in the Denial of the supreme
Divinity of the Son of God and of the Holy Ghost, you are to be rejected of all
good Christians as an Heretic, one that is subverted, and sins, being
condemned of himself. For that it is not consistent with any Man, but him that
has long indulged in himself that Arrogance and Singularity which stops his
Ears to sober Truth, and shuts out of his Heart the Fear and Awe of God, or at
least never sets himself seriously before the Divine Tribunal in the
Consideration of these Matters (as I am persuaded befalls some heady and hot
Controvertists) to shut his Eyes against the Meridian Light of these necessary
Doctrines, the Foundation of Christian Religion as it is Christian. For the
Mystery of the Trinity runs through it, and gives it all the Strokes of Life
and Greatness, as it is a positive Religion different from natural. I beseech
you therefore, Cousin, retire your self into your own Heart, and set our Lord
Jesus upon his Throne before your Eyes, and consider what you will answer to
him, whom you have denied to be your God, and say he is but a made Lord, and
that as a Mediator he is not God-Man, but Man only; and concerning the Holy
Ghost, in whose Name you are baptized as well as in the Father and the Son, you
yet deny him to be another Divine and Almighty Person. Consider, I pray, that
the Doctrine of the Trinity is not a speculative Point, but that the whole
Frame of Christianity is built upon it, and that it is necessary to support
both our Christian Worship, and our Christian Hope and Comfort. Consider also
that all Heresies are Works of the Flesh, which notwithstanding many great
Bishops, and some great Councils have been guilty of, even in this Point
denying of three equal Persons in God: And we know, that for many Ages the
Church of Rome has maintained the gross Heresies of Transubstantiation, and
Idolatrous Worship of the Host, with many other Superstitions; all which show
that our corrupted Wills and Passions are as inclinable to Heresy and
Superstition as to other Vices and Immoralities. Faith is a Christian Virtue,
and a Man shall be punished for the Faults of his Understanding as well as any
others. We must be as careful then to bring our Reason to whatever is divinely
inspired, as our Will to whatever is divinely commanded. I beseech you
therefore again and again, examine your Conscience seriously, and the Holy
Scripture sincerely. Do not impose upon your self to your own Destruction, by
uncouth, nice, unintelligible and trifling Distinctions, for God will not be
mocked. Sincerity is necessary to every good Christian, and they that want it
shall have their Portion with Hypocrites and Sinners. As you hearken to this
altogether necessary Advice, you shall have me,

Your Condoling, or Congratulating Kinsman.

The ANSWER.
Dear Cousin;
AS I was meditating on the little or no care Christians take of their own
Salvation, that unhappy Carelessness afforded me the true Reason of their being
so little concerned for the Salvation of their Neighbors: I am glad to hear
you are not of that Number, and I don't question but you will be pleased that I
am none of them neither, and that following your Example, I desire your
Salvation with as much Earnestness as you do mine. Most of those whom the
Church has set up for the Conduct of Souls, are much more earnest to get
Preferments, and defend the Party wherein they are engaged, by subtle Disputes
and violent Persecutions, than sincerely to examine the Doctrines which they
teach, and feed their Flocks with those pure and solid Truths, which free from
Sin and Error: Nor do they think that thereby they become accountable before
God's Tribunal for all the Wanderings of their Disciples. And lastly, that both
the blind Guide, and the Blind whom he guides, shall fall into the Ditch. Do
but separate from their Study whatever is profane, and belongs not to the
Character of a Pastor, and the Treasure of their Minds will soon be exhausted;
therefore imitate them not in such a Disorder. For my part, though I am a
Layman, I think I am bound earnestly to exhort my Brethren, and you
particularly, to restore the Principle of our Reformation, which is almost
degenerated into Popery; and to make use of our own Light, that we may be able
to keep the Way set before us in the Scripture: This is the Protestants Right,
we are in Possession thereof, and we must not suffer our selves to be deprived
of it.

I beseech you, dear Cousin, in the Name of God, to consider, that when we were
first delivered from the Roman Tyranny, we inveighed against the absurd
Doctrines, that were imposed upon our Faith, we cried down the Word of Men, and
recommended only the Word of God, the Bible, the Bible, the Bible only, says
Chillingworth. But we no sooner got out of our former Slavery, by the help of
so clear a Light; but we are fallen into a new one by a most unequal Conduct.
The Question is no more concerning the pure Word of God; it is, say they, too
equivocal and uncertain, and it is no hard Matter for Heretics to make it
agree with their particular Opinions. What then? we hear of nothing but
Fathers, Tradition, Councils, Creeds, and new-coined Words, on purpose to keep
Christians within the Bounds of the Faith of their Ancestors; Metaphysical
Terms, whereof Men have no fixed Notion, and yet they stop the Mouths of
Heretics, by making the Church speak more clearly and reasonably than the Holy
Ghost did. But this is not all; some of the same Men who inveighed so much
against the Inquisition and Popish Violences, set up among themselves a Holy
Inquisition, and will hear of no Toleration, but oppress the Liberty of the
Christians, who dare speak out their Mind, so far are they from venturing on
Writings and a public Profession. One would think that by our many Disputes
with the Roman Church, concerning Infallibility, we have acquired the Privilege
thereof to our selves.

Give me leave therefore, dear Cousin, since you call me to God's Tribunal, to
summon you to the same. Pray tell me, Ought we not to fear that God should
require from us the Truth of the Holy Scripture, with which we have been
entrusted; that Light which we have put under a Bushel, and his gracious
Talent, which we have buried? If he asks, from whence we took those prosane
Novelties of a Science falsely so called, I mean that most strange and barbarous
Language in his Church, O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, three Persons and
one God, have Mercy upon us; What shall we answer him? What if he shall oblige
us to give an Account of our Faith of that monstrous Creed of Athanasius, with
which we honor our great Holy Days, and which you mention as the most
illustrious Monument of the Faith of our Fathers. Where is the Scribe, where is
the Philosopher of this World, that can answer him to one of those many
nonsensical Articles? How came ye, will he say, to find in my Word one Essence
and three Persons, rather than one Person and three Essences? By what
Partiality have you discovered a Figure in these Words, This is my Body, and
have found none in these, The Word was God? Why did you distinguish two Natures
in the Christ, whom I sent you, whilst you refused to admit of two sorts of
Being in the Sacramental Body, which he gave you? You were afraid of those
Words, To eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Son of God; and you had no
Repugnancy for the literal Sense of these, A Virgin brought forth God; The Jews
crucified God? He can ask a thousand such Questions, to which we shall be able
to give no reasonable Answer, by reason of the Inequality of the Reverence we
pretend to pay to his Word, and of our Unsteadiness in the Use we make of our
Reason and Senses.

In Effect, I would fain have our Teachers to tell us by what Principle of
Philosophy, by what Rule of Language, that Conclusion is irght and necessary,
viz. the Father is a Divine Person, the Son is a Divine Person, the Holy Ghost
is a Divine Person; Therefore there are three Divine Persons: and this should
not likewise be so; The Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is God;
Therefore there are three Gods? Does not common Reason tell us, that those two
Conclusions are like this? Gabriel, Raphael, and Michael, are three Angelical
Persons; therefore they are three Angels? The same might be said of Peter,
James and John, who are both three humane Persons, and three Men. This
Principle of natural Reason ought to prevail, unless we are taught by the
Scripture, that three Divine Persons are not the same with three Gods, or that
a God is three Persons, and three Persons a God. But where does it tell us so?
What Texts can they alledg that are clearer to prove that Mystery, than those
alleged by the Papists are, to prove their supposed Mystery of one Christ and
many Bodies, and of many Bodies and one Christ? How is it that with respect to
the Sacrament, we are helped by our Senses to put a reasonable Sense upon the
Scripture; but with respect to the Trinity, Reason forsakes us so far, as to
ascribe to Scripture an absurd Sense, and contrary to its Simplicity? Is the
Light of a sensible Man more certain than that of an understanding and
reasonable Man? Have we a greater Certainty, that a Piece of Bread is not a
humane Body, than that two and one make three? Is the Mystery of Christ's
Sacramental Body more suitable to our Apprehension, than the Mystery of his
real and natural Body? How come we to know that there is something that is
incomprehensible in that Man, whom we see born and dead, and that there is no
such thing in the Bread which we take and eat? A God is joined to that, say ye,
and why not to this? But we see still some Bread, will ye reply. It is true,
your Senses do not deceive you: But have not the Apostles too seen with their
Eyes, and touched with their Hands, the Man, who is called the Word of Life?
and their Senses have not deceived them. This is true, who can, doubt of it?
How shall we come off? Shall we fly to another Nature hypostatically united to
this, which is the Object of our Senses? But then the Heretics, who err about
the Sacrament, may have Recourse to the same Shift, to avoid the Testimony of
the Senses. Some will say that the Senses can judge only of the Species which
remain in the Sacrament; Some, that there is an invisible Object in the Bread,
which is the glorious Body of Christ; Some that there is an hypostatical Union
of that Bread with the eternal Word, which raises the Mystery so much above our
Reason, that it loses thereby the Right and Liberty of judging thereof, and
lies under the Necessity of submitting to the Authority of the Revelation,
which is clear upon this Point; for it says, This is my Body. Now if our Reason
is rash in the Judgment it bears concerning the Incarnation, notwithstanding
the Evidence of the literal Sense of the Scripture, which is on her side, what
Rashness will it not be to interpose her Judgment in the Mysteries of
Consubstantiation and Transubstantiation, against the express Revelation of
God's Word, This is my Body?

I will only ask you one Question upon this Matter, and I desire you to answer
me in the Fear of God, and the Sincerity of your Heart. Why do you think you
may with Dr. Wallis say, that the Terms of Person, Father, Son, Begotten, etc.
are metaphorical, whilst you cannot endure that those you call Heretics should
use the same Right, and according to Reason and Scripture, pretend likewise
that the Title of God ascribed to Christ, is also a metaphorical Expression?
Can any thing be more unjust? Furthermore, why do you take the Liberty to
explain the Words of the Eucharist thus, This Bread is the Representation and
the Figure of my Body? And why do you deny me at the same time the same
Liberty, when I explain the Words in the Beginning of St. John's Gospel by
these, And the Word was the Image of God? Your Injustice is so much the
greater, because I may ground my Interpretation upon other Expressions of the
Scripture, wherein Christ is formally called the Image of God, and because you
have no express Texts of the same Scripture wherein the Sacramental Bread is
called the Figure of Christ's Body. Now neither in my Proposition nor in yours,
the Image cannot be the Original. As the Bread has but a Conformity of
Qualities with Christ's Body, not the same Qualities, and the same Substance:
Thus Christ, as he is the Image of God, cannot have the same Qualities nor the
same Nature with God: He only has the Impression of the Divine Substance,
which God has communicated to him, by honoring him with his Unction, bearing
Testimony to him, and crowning him with Glory as a Reward of his Sufferings:
Because he humbled himself to the Death of the Cross, therefore the Father has
highly exalted him, and has given him a Name which is above every Name. Now if
Christ has been dignified with that high Name, by reason of his Obedience and
Virtue, it follows from thence, that he had it not by the Privilege of his
eternal Generation: For if so, the pompous Description of Christ's Elevation
set down in the Gospel would be but a Show and mere Pageantry.

Therefore, dear Cousin, if you find in those clear Texts of the Scripture the
true Reason of Christ's being called God; believe me, do not fetch any other
from the extravagant Notions of the Athanasian Creed, wherein neither you nor I
can apprehend any thing, except we apprehend nothing. Notwithstanding you are
so bold as to pronounce against me a Sentence of Damnation upon the Words of
that doting Writer, (who was not Athanasius) and even to damn all those who
will give no Credit to his Ravings, let them be never so pious and charitable.
O strange Prejudice of Men! As for me i will make bold likewise to tell you, that
how false and ill grounded soever the Assurance of Salvation may be, which that
Author promises to those that believe his Visions, it is yet more false, that
those good Christians who refuse to believe them, shall be damned. For there is
nothing more certain and clear in the Gospel than this, viz. That all honest
and pious Men shall be saved, and that all those who shall be saved, will be
saved without believing the curious Mysteries of the pretended Athanasius. Do
but peruse all the Evangelical Promises, and look if you can find any one that
promises Salvation to those who believe the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity
in Unity; I can show you a thousand which make Salvation sure to Piety, or to a
Faith inconsistent with the Faith of Athanasius. What Guide shall we then
follow, this Creed which says, That whosoever will be saved, ought to believe
three Divine Persons, and one Divine Essence, or Christ, who assures us, that
eternal Life consists in acknowledging his Father the only true God, and
himself Christ Jesus to be he whom the Father has sent, that is to say, the
Messiah? What Creed shall we pitch upon to be the Badg of our Christianity,
either the new ones, which speak of God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost, as three equal Persons, or the ancient Creed of the universal
Church, commonly called the Apostles Creed, which only speaks of God the
Father, Jesus Christ his Son, and the Holy Ghost, without giving the Title of
God to these two last? and which expressly ascribing to the Father the
Attributes of the Godhead, of Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth; ascribes
only to the Son that which is only consistent with a Man, and cannot be
ascribed to the supreme God without Blasphemy, viz. That he was conceived,
born, died, was buried, and raised?

Now as it is not the Language of the Apostles Creed, to say, God the Father,
God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; so it is neither the Style of the
Scripture, which never gives the Title of God to Christ, when it joins him with
the Father, in those Places wherein it sets before us the Objects of our
Knowledge and Worship, and makes, as it were, a kind of Form or Confession of
Faith. The Reason of it is this, Christ is God with Respect to the Empire which
he has received from God over the new Creatures, which he has taken out of
the Chaos of Sin, and governs by his Father's Power: But with Respect to God
his Father, he is only the Minister of his Will, his Messenger, and is at most
called the Lord, which is a Term of Inferiority in the New Testament, to denote
him whom the Father has made his Lieutenant, who has received his Empire from
another, and is to deliver it to him, that entrusted him with it; God, say the
Holy Apostles, having made him Lord and Christ. According to this Rule, which
the Scripture exactly follows, it does not only deny the Title of God to Christ
in the Abridgments of Faith which it affords; but it is wont to ascribe it only
to the Father exclusively of the Son, saying expressly, that the Father is the
only true God, and the Son the only Lord, as often as it puts together those
two Objects of our Faith. And in this remarkable Opposition it is that we are
to look for the true Sense of the Scripture about this Mystery; not in those
other Places wherein it does not affect the same Exactness. Here, dear Cousin,
I entreat you again, if you are a true Lover of Truth, seriously to consider
those Texts of the Gospel upon which my Remark is grounded. This is Life
eternal, says Christ to his Father, to know Thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. But to us, says St. Paul, There is but one God, the
Father, of whom are all things; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things; and we by him. One God, says the same Apostle, and one Mediator between
God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. Where is the Trinitarian, who on such an
occasion would not say, One God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost? yet
there is no mention made of the Holy Ghost; and as for the Son he bears only
the Title of sent, Lord and Mediator, that of God being not at all bestowed
upon him in those Places? Who is the Trinitarian that would not say on the last
cited Place, One God, and one Mediator between God and Men, Christ God-man? But
God-man is too barbarous an Expression, and the Holy Ghost is too wise to make
such a Conjunction. Lastly, who is the Trinitarian, who would call the Father,
the only God, the only true God, to distinguish him from the Son, by opposing
God to Man, the only God to the only Lord and Mediator, in a Word, the Father
to the Son, and one Person to another? Do they not pretend that the Father
cannot be called the only true God, but by Opposition to the false Gods of the
Heathens? But the Holy Apostle does not only oppose him to the Idols of the
Pagans, as the true one to the false ones, but to the only Lord, whom
Christians worship; inasmuch as God by Excellence, God by himself, is opposed
to the inferior and subordinate Gods, whom he has made such out of his Grace
and Liberality, I said, ye are Gods: But to us, says the Holy Apostle, to us
Christians, there is but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ: Two
Objects of our Faith really distinguished; the one by the Name of one only God,
the other by the Title of one only Lord. From whence it follows, as I have
already said, that Christ indeed is God, or rather a God, if considered as the
Head of all the new Creatures, which God has subjected to his Empire; but when
joined to the Father, this Title vanishes away, and he bears only that of his
Minister and Ambassador; so true it is, that before the true and supreme God,
any other God besides him must fall and disappear.

You accuse me of wresting the Scripture, yet you see how I have brought you to
the Necessity of putting a hard Sense upon it, if you will maintain your
Hypothesis. The Texts that I alledg to you are clear and formal, and you cannot
avoid the Strougth of them, but either by a Philosophy altogether
incomprehensible, or by some gross and contradictory Shifts, or by a pitiful
Wrangling, or even by Impiety and Blasphemies. The Number of such Shifts is
endless, and I shall be contented to bring an Instance about every one of
those, which I have just now intimated. When we alledg that Crowd of Texts,
which say, that God is one, you fly to that famous Distinction of one Essence
and three Persons, and three Persons and one Essence. If at the same time we
alledg those primitive Facts of the Gospel, wherein we see a most exact
History, not of a God, but of a Man like unto us, who was born, died, and was
raised; you answer with another Distinction of two Natures and one Person, and
one Person and two Natures. This is your incomprehensible Philosophy, which
will have one to be three times one, three times himself: and pretends that by
Virtue of I know not what hypostatical Union, a Man is the supreme God, and the
supreme God a Man; so that it may be said, The most high God was born, the most
high God died. O! Who shall raise him from the dead? Again when we show that
the Question concerning Christ's Divinity was decided by himself before the
Jews, who accused him that being a Man, he made himself equal to God; when one
shows you, I say, that Christ vindicates himself from Blasphemy, by protesting
that he said he was the Son of God, only in such a Sense as is approved by the
Law, founding his Right, not upon an eternal Generation, but upon a Heavenly
Commission and Unction, just as the other Gods, whose Example he alleges, If
those are called Gods, to whom the Word of God came, etc. say ye that I
blaspheme, because I said, I am the Son of God? When one sets before you so
clear a Decision, and at the same time so favorable to those you call
Heretics, how do you make shift? You say that Christ spoke only according to
the Need of the Jews, that there was no Necessity for him to give them further
Instructions. Yet at the same time that you return this curious Answer, which
supposes that it was enough for the Jews, that Christ should teach them, that
he was a God by Office, you make an Objection taken out of the same Discourse
of Christ, wherein you pretend that he told the Jews he was God by Nature, when
he says, that he and the Father were one, which Words you insist upon to prove
the Unity of Nature. This I call your gross and contradictory shifts. Again,
when one cites the famous Text of St. John's Gospel, wherein Christ makes
eternal Life to consist in knowing the Father the only true God, etc. What do
you answer to so strong an Objection? You put upon those Words a most forced
and unnatural Sense, and say that they ought to be translated thus, This is
Life eternal, to know that thou Father and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent,
are the only true God. This I call your rash and impertinent Wranglings. In
effect you are so bold as to make use of this in your Disputes, to make shift
as well as you can. But none of your Orthodox Translations durst take the same
Liberty, neither the Latin, nor the English, nor the French, nor the German,
nor the Dutch, etc. And I am sure that if you would undertake a new
Translation, you have still Modesty enough not to fly to so shameful an
Extremity. Lastly, (for I should never have done, were I willing to insist upon
every thing) when one shows you in the 13th Chapter of St. Mark, that Christ is
not the most high God, since he was ignorant of the Day of Judgment, (for God
knows all things) of that Day, says Christ, no Man knows it, not the Son, but
the Father only. In answer to this unanswerable Objection, you put into
Christ's Mouth a Jesuitical Equivocation, pretending his meaning was, that he
knew it not as a Man, though he knew it well as God. This I call your Impiety
and Blasphemy. Methinks, dear Cousin, you should blush to impute to Christ a
mental Reservation, which you so much detest in the Priests of the Church of
Rome. Read Dr. Stillingfleet in his Sermon upon Matthew. 10.16. page 31, 32. The
common Answer, says he, (speaking of those Priests Equivocations) is, That in
Confession the Priest does not know as Man, but as God, and therefore when he
is asked any thing as a Man, he may deny what he knows as God. But the Doctor
shows the Folly and Absurdity of this Answer, Because, says he, this does not
salve the Contradiction; for to say, he does not know, is as much as to say, he
does not any way know it, which is false, if he does know it in any Capacity,
because he knows it as a Priest, and as such he is not God, but Man. Give me
leave therefore to look upon the Words you put into the Mouth of Christ, who is
Truth it self, as an Impiety and a Folly. He does not know it, signifies that
he does not any way know it, which is false, if he knows it in any Capacity.
Furthermore, it is false, that he does not know it as Man, since he knows it as
Mediator, and as such he is not only God, but God and Man, say you. This is a
Pattern of your unnatural Explications. I pass by a great many others, to be
short.

For the same Reason, I will only undertake to overthrow the two Foundations of
your Mysteries; which being done, nothing remains to build your Faith upon. The
one is the eternal Generation, and the other the Incarnation or the Union of
the two Natures. To begin with the eternal Generation; it is no difficult thing
to demonstrate to you, that it has no ground in the Scripture. For forasmuch
as Christ, as you say, is God only upon the Account of his being begotten of
God, or being the Son of God, we have nothing to do but to consult the same
Scripture, to see upon what grounds the Title of Son of God bestowed upon
Christ is founded therein. And if among those Reasons alleged by it, that of
an eternal Generation is not to be found, it will necessarily follow, that such
a Generation is the Invention of your Teachers. Let us pass by, if you will,
that famous Place, wherein the Angel grounds the Title of Son of God upon the
miraculous Conception of our Savior in the Womb of a Virgin by the Power of
the Holy Ghost: The Holy Ghost, says he to the Virgin, shall come upon thee,
and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore that holy thing
that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Again, let us omit
that remarkable Passage, wherein Christ derives his Title of Son of God from
his Unction and Heavenly Commission, Say ye that I blaspheme whom the Father
has sanctified and sent into the World, because I said, I am the Son of God?
It seems to me impossible to find two Causes or two Reasons of Christ's being
the Son of God, more clear and express than these two; because he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of a Virgin, and because the Father has
sanctified him, and sent him into the World. However I will not insist upon
them, to stay the longer upon those, in which the Word to beget is expressly set
down. I know but three Texts belonging to this Subject: The first is in Acts
13.33. where it is said, that God has begotten his Son by raising him from the
dead; God, says the Apostle, has fulfilled the Promise unto us, in that he
has raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art
my Son, this Day have I begotten thee. The second, Heb. 5.5. where it is
expressly set down, that God has begotten his Son, by making him his
High Priest: Christ, says the Apostle, glorified not himself to be made an
High Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to Day have I begotten
thee. The third is in the same Epistle, chap. 1.5. where the same Apostle tells
us, that God has begotten his Son by exalting him above the Angels: For unto
which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this Day have I
begotten thee? In all these Texts there is no other Generation mentioned, but
what is grounded upon the high Glory, which God has conferred upon his
Messiah, by raising him from the dead, and making him Lord and Christ. And this
Generation is so far from being eternal, that it is expressly said, it was
performed to day, viz. the Day of his Resurrection and Ascension. Your Teachers
have been often challenged to produce one single Text of Scripture, wherein the
eternal Generation is expressly contained, and is the true Ground of Christ's
being called the Son of God. If there is any, you will do me a Kindness to let
me know it. Till this be done, I ought to acknowledge no other Generation, but
what the Scripture teaches, in those clear and express Texts which I have
cited. Hereupon I will acquaint you with an Observation, for which I am
beholden to a learned Man, viz. That there is a vast Difference between the
manner of the Father's speaking of Christ's Divinity, and that of the Apostles.
The first setch'd his Original from I know not what Generation, which was made
in the Beginning of the World: it is almost the only Generation spoken of by
them, and their Platonic Style always runs that way. On the contrary, the last
show the Source of it in his miraculous Birth, especially in his Resurrection
and Exaltation. Hence it is that though Christ never called himself God, whilst
he had but a Glimpse of his future Glory; yet the Apostles made no Scruple to
honor him with that glorious Title, when they saw him crowned with his highest
Glory and Honor. Now that Difference in treating of the same Doctrine, which
is to be seen between the sacred Writers and your Teachers, is a material one,
and ought to convince you, that they had not both the same Principles, as your
Church pretends. This general Observation concerning the Fathers, is sufficient
to make me refuse their Testimony, and look upon them as no good Interpreters
of the Scripture, and unfaithful Guardians of Tradition.

I come now to the Incarnation or the Union of two Natures. You must confess,
dear Cousin, that if we can from any Place learn the Distinction of two Natures
in Christ, it is undoubtedly from Romans 1.3. where he is called the Son of David
according to the Flesh, and the Son of God according to the Spirit of Holiness,
by the Resurrection from the Dead. Here is the Son of David and the Son of God,
the Flesh and the Spirit, or the Word. Yet this Text is so far from proving two
Natures in Christ, such as you understand, that it is the strongest Argument
that can be brought against you, to confute that foolish and absurd
Distinction, and the clearest Commentary we have, to explain the other
Passages, which speak of Christ as a Man and a God. To be convinced of the
Truth of this Assertion, you need only compare together the 23d, 28th and 29th
Verses of the 4th to the Galatians: The Apostle says, that Ismael was born
according to the Flesh, or that he was the Son of Abraham according to the
Flesh, that is, according to the ordinary Course of Nature; but that Isaac was
born according to the Spirit, or by a miraculous Birth, that is, he was not so
much the Son of Abraham, as the Son and Heir of the Divine Promise. This is
granted by all. Now according to St. Paul's Style, it is plain that Christ is
the Son of David according to the Flesh, that is, according to his natural
Birth, because he was born of a Woman, and Son of God according to the Spirit,
viz. according to his supernatural Birth, because he was born of a Virgin by
the Operation of the Holy Spirit, and because he was raised from the dead,
according to the Spirit of Holiness, as the Apostle speaks: In which Sense he
is not so much the Son and Heir of David, as the Son and Heir of God, or the
Son of that great Promise, which God had made to the Patriarchs. According to
the Spirit, can therefore signify only by the Divine Power, by his miraculous
Birth and Resurrection: Which plainly shows that the Distinction of two
Natures, in the Sense you take them, is a mere Fancy; because the eternal
Generation is not at all mentioned by the Apostle in his Opposition between the
Son of David and the Son of God, the Flesh and the Spirit, the Humanity and the
Divinity of Christ; and because, speaking of those two Natures, taken in a
right Sense, he says, that Christ did partake of this last, when he was
constituted the Son of God, not by an eternal Generation, but a Divine
Sanctification, and the Virtue of his Resurrection.

From what has been said, it does plainly appear, dear Cousin, that those are
truly Heretics, who forsake the Simplicity and Purity of the Scripture, to
coin Mysteries unknown to that Divine Revelation: Unknown, I say, as it is
evident from the new Words that have been coined to express them: Which so
plainly argues their Novelty, that any one that is but sincere, must needs be
no less prejudiced against the strange Words of Consubstantiality and
Incarnation, than against the monstrous Term of Transubstantiation. They have
both the same Original, Growth and Scope, and consequently, with respect to us,
they must have the same Destiny, and be looked upon by all good Christians, as
the Effects of humane Passions, and the dismal Causes of our Divisions. In this
you do condemn your selves. For if you pretend to teach the same Doctrines,
which are taught in the Scripture, why do not you use the same Words? Your new
Terms do betray your Cause, and plainly show, that according to the Character
of an Heretic set down by St. Paul, you do act not only against your own
Conscience, but against the Design of the Holy Ghost: Seeing you can never
speak differently from him, but you must perceive at the same time, that you
think differently, and by changing his Words, alter his Notions too. It is an
easy thing to change a Doctrine by the Help of a new Word, especially when to
this new Word another is added, and the Explication thereof extended as far as
possible, as Councils commonly do, who under Pretense of clearing Truth to its
highest degree of Evidence, do so far depart from its Simplicity, that they
quite lose the sight of it: so that it may be said, that after so many new
Pieces have been borrowed and sewed to that first Garment, it has lost its
Form and Color, and is no more the same Cloth. But lest you should say, that
it is still the same Doctrine, expressed several ways, I shall prove the
contrary in few Words. Observe therefore, (dear Cousin) that when the Scripture
or the Creed of the Apostles, (which is for the most part made up of scriptural
Terms) sets down any Capital Doctrine, it makes use of so plain and
intelligible Terms, either proper or metaphorical, that they may be understood
by all Men. None can be deceived by them, if he is sincere: For Example, when
the Apostles Creed says, that there is an Almighty God, Maker of Heaven and
Earth; that that most high God has a Son, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
was born, died, was raised from the Dead, etc. any one presently apprehends
with the whole Catholic Church, what is an Almighty God, Creator of all
things; and what is a Son of God, who is his only Son, because none but he has
a Virgin for his Mother, and God for his Father; what it is to be born, to die,
and to be raised from the dead, and such other Terms, whereby the Doctrines of
our Religion are expressed. There is no Dispute about them, because all
Christians have the same Notions of them: so that the Heretics who rejected
the Doctrines contained in them, were forced to reject those Scriptures,
wherein they were mentioned. But pray how dare you pretend that the Terms which
you have contrived, were contrived to signify the same things, seeing they are
not commonly used by Men, being all taken out of Philosophy? Besides, their
Signification is liable to so many Changes and Alterations, that sometimes they
signify one thing, and sometimes another. This is so true, that the very Men of
that Age in which they were coined, could not agree about their natural
Meaning, one Doctor taking the Word Hypostasis for that we call a Person, and
another for that which we call a Substance; one Council rejecting the Word
Consubstantial as favoring Heresy, and the other looking upon it as a Word fit
to confute it. What may be the Reason, that when the Holy Ghost speaks, his
Words are so popular and so clear, that reasonable Men cannot mistake the
meaning of them? How comes it to pass, that there is no Dispute among Men
concerning these Words, Son of God, who was conceived of the Holy Ghost, was
born, died, etc? But when Men speak, and introduce a Son consubstantial with
the Father, begotten, not made, etc. some do not understand them at all, let
them be never so reasonable; some, though very teachable, cannot endure such a
Language; and some disagree about their meaning, though every one of them
considers it with a good Intention, and in the Fear of God. You need but
consult your Divines hereupon; some by three Persons understand three
Relations; some, three Capacities; some, three Minds; some, three Somewhats;
and some, three individual Natures, as Peter, James, and John. The Reason of
that Difference is obvious and plain: The Holy Ghost sets before us the Divine
Revelation full of Wisdom, and accommodated to our Knowledge, and he fixes
popular Notions to his Terms: But Men join to their Words remote, abstruse and
metaphysical Ideas, and they put such an unnatural Sense upon the Word of God,
that even when they use it, it is only to defend their foolish and extravagant
Fancies.

Do not tell me that it was wisely done by the Church, to coin those new Words,
that the Sense of the Scripture might be fixed thereby, and the Liberty of
Heretics stopped. So pitiful an Excuse does not justify your Rashness, it only
justifies the Innocence of the pretended Heretics. For what could hinder those
Heretics, whom you accuse of wresting the Scripture, to use the same Subtilty,
in order to the eluding of those new Terms, which you will have them to
subscribe to? They could easily do it, by putting upon them such a Sense as
would not be prejudicial to their Opinions. However this very thing, viz. their
refusing to submit to those new Impositions, is an undeniable Argument of their
Sincerity: and if they cannot be brought, though in order to the saving of
their Lives and Estates, to put an unnatural Sense upon Men's Words, which they
despise; much less will they wrest the Sense of God's Word, to which they pay
the greatest Reverence. From whence it follows, dear Cousin, that you your self
are a Heretic: I am sorry to tell you so, but you force me to it. I have yet
something more to say to you, give me leave to speak it out; for I do impart my
Thoughts to you not in Anger, but with a Desire of making you more attentive to
those things, in which your Salvation is so much concerned. I mean that you run
the Danger of being one of those Antichrists spoken of by St. John, when he
says, that whosoever does not confess that Christ, who came in the Flesh, (for
thus it must be rendered) the same is Antichrist. For first, since Christ
signifies Anointed, an Antichrist is one that is an Enemy to the Lord Christ's
Anointing. Now do not you destroy that Divine Unction, pretending that Christ
is the Son of God by an eternal Generation, which makes him incapable of
Unction or Exaltation, and overthrows that Fundamental Truth, viz. that God
made him Lord and Christ? Secondly, since to come in the Flesh, signifies to
come not like a conquering Prince, but like a Man of Sorrows, do not you
destroy his Flesh and Sufferings, pretending on one hand, that he is the most
high God, who can neither be born, nor die; and on the other affirming, that
Christ has not the proper Personality of a Man, but the borrowed Personality
of the eternal Word? so that according to your Notions, the Holy Virgin did not
bring forth a Man, but an humane Nature; the Jews have not crucified a Man, but
an Humanity. An humane Nature is but an Ens rationis, and a mere Fancy: an
Humanity can neither be born, nor die, nor be raised; which overthrows the
first Articles of the Christian Faith, and may convince you of mere
Antichristianism. For my part, dear Cousin, I can boast, Thanks be to God, of a
contrary Character, viz. that he that confesses that Jesus, who came in the
Flesh, is Christ, is born of God. For I do not believe him to be the most high
God, who can neither be born, nor die; but I believe he is a Man like unto us
in all things, Sin excepted, who died for our Sins, and was raised for our
Justification. I confess at the same time, that Jesus is Christ the Lord, to
the Glory of God the Father, who has highly exalted him, and given him Power,
Might, Honor and Glory. I am amazed to see that instead of building your Faith
upon the Rock of that solid Confession, you will by all means found it upon
such Doctrines as have no Influence upon Practice. What Advantage is it to your
Religion to reckon three Almighty and three Incomprehensible Ones, as Objects
of Confidence and Worship? Is Infinity capable of more or less? Is one the
richer for having ten thousand, than one only infinite? But to believe the only
all good, wise, just and Almighty God was pleased to manifest himself to us by
his Messiah, who is the Prophet that declares his Will to us, the King who
engages himself to fulfill his Promises, and the faithful and merciful
High Priest, who can be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities: This, I
say, is the Notion of a most wise Religion, which contains a great many
Doctrines, wherewith the Mind is enlightened, and the Heart moved, a firm
Support to our Faith, a solid Foundation to our Hopes, and a thousand
Encouragements to Holiness of Life. I exhort you, dear Cousin, to a serious
Consideration of so simple, but so rich a Religion. Do it with an honest and
sincere Heart, and I hope by God's Grace, that so great a Light will scatter
the Mist that surrounds you, and help you to overcome the Prejudices of a
Party. For it is to be presumed that they are on your side; and one that owes
his Religion to his Birth and Education, ought always to mistrust them. You are
already gone a great way, adopting St. Augustin's Maxim, viz. That whatever
Expression of the Scripture seems to command a Crime, must needs be figurative.
Go on and be sure, that any Expression of the Scripture, which seems to require
the Belief of an Absurdity and a Contradiction, must needs be figurative. The
Reason is the same, for if the Scripture cannot require of you any thing that
is contrary to the natural Notions you have of Piety; for Example, to eat
humane Flesh; it can neither impose upon your Belief any thing that is contrary
to your natural Ideas of Truth; as for Example, That a Man who dies is the
living and immortal God. I leave it to your Consideration, recommending you to
God, and the Word of his Grace. I am,

Dear Cousin, Yours, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
Dear Cousin;
AFter a second Reading of your Letter, I have observed some Fragments of the
Writings of your Teachers, which you took the Pains to transcribe, and upon
which you seem to rely much as upon good Authorities. I shall tell you, that
several of your Teachers have over-strained the Matter, and that a modest Man
ought not to depend upon their Expressions. Some others have been so inconstant
in their Judgment concerning Heretics, that they have blown hot and cold with
the same Mouth, according to the several Circumstances they have been in.
However we need only, in opposition to them, to consider the Testimony of some
more wise and moderate Divines, whose Names are no less eminent and respected
in the Church of God. These are so far from damning devout Christians that are
in Error, that they will not damn devout and virtuous Jews and Heathens. Do but
read the Christian Life, Vol. 3. p. 2. wherein Dr. Scot tells you, that to live
according to mere natural Reason, is all that God expects from those to whom
Christianity has never been proposed: and as for those to whom it has been
sufficiently proposed, he lays upon them no other Obligations, but those
wherewith Christ has strengthened natural Religion. Since Christianity, says
he, has improved the Duties of natural Religion upon new Principles, and
enforced them with new Obligations; to render our Piety and Virtue strictly and
properly Christian, it is necessary that we should receive those new
Principles, and act according to those new Obligations. But lest you should
dispute about those Principles and Obligations, which the Gospel adds to
natural Religion; I shall abridg this Dispute by a fine Place taken out of the
Design of Christianity: The pious Author of that excellent Book says, ( p.
236.) that if one would be sure that one keeps the Foundation of Christianity,
and is in no damnable Error, he must examine himself thus: Am I sincerely
willing to obey my Creator and Redeemer in all things commanded by them? Do I
entertain and harbor no Lust in my Breast? Do I heartily endeavor to have a
right Understanding of the Holy Scriptures, and chiefly of the Gospel, and to
know what Doctrines are delivered there, in order to the bettering of my Soul
by them, and the Direction of my Life and Actions according to them? If we can
answer those Questions in the Affirmative, (who can doubt but all pious
Heretics may do it) whatsoever Mistakes we may labor under, they can be none
of them such as will undo our Souls, because we shall have Cause to conclude
from thence, that the Design of Christianity is in some measure effected in us:
And whatsoever Tenets may be accompanied and consist with the true Love of God,
and a sollicitous Care to keep a Conscience void of Offense toward him and
Men, we may be certain that they belong not to the Catalogue of fundamental
Errors. This obedient Temper is the most infallible Mark of an Orthodox Man; he
that is endowed with it, though he may err, cannot be an Heretic. If I was as
bold as you, dear Cousin, I would apply to you a fine Passage of our worthy
Archbishop of Canterbury, in his Sermon upon Luke 10.42. wherein he blames the
Rashness of those, who like you dare censure Error and Heresy in others, whilst
they themselves do not think of curing those Lusts, Vices and Passions, which
so visibly reign in them. But I shall only cite that general Reflection of his
concerning those pretended Orthodox. Deluded People, says he, that do not
consider that the greatest Heresy in the World is a wicked Life; because it is
so directly and so fundamentally opposite to the whole Design of the Christian
Faith and Religion, and that God will sooner forgive a Man an hundred Defects
of his Understanding, than one Fault of his Will.

And to show you in one Word, that when you attribute Immodesty, Wantonness and
Pride to Heretics, you act against the Spirit of your Church; the Testimony of
one of your Teachers only will suffice, since he speaks for the whole Clergy: I
mean the Author of the Vindication of the conformed Clergy from the unjust
Aspersions of Heresy: (That Heresy was no less than Pelagianism and
Socinianism.) See how he vindicates your Teachers. The Reason, says he, why
they are accused of Heresy, is their Moderation in Points of Controversy. They
do not confute their Opponent with a rude and infignificant Noise, nor think
they shall ever convince him by hard Words and ill Names, which are the only
Arguments that some Men are able to manage; but they consider and are willing
to make Allowances for the common Infirmities of humane Understandings, and the
strong Prejudices of Education: and therefore they treat all Men gently, and
are not rudely clamorous in their Discourses, but hope the best, and think as
charitably as they can of those that are of a different Persuasion. See the
Moderation of your Church, imitate so charitable and Christian a Judgment, and
cease to damn, like Jews and Heathens, proud and conceited Men, those good Men,
who work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, lest with what Judgment
ye judge, ye may be judged. The same Author will tell you, that the Term of
Heretic is a Name that is given nowadays liberally, and at a good rate, and
that, It is nothing but the Passion of the Opponents, that has made that Name
so very common as it is; for it is grown no more now than an ordinary Term of
Reproach, for every angry Man, that would fain be dealing with controversial
Divinity, that it serves for one of the principal Topics for the great
Professors of artificial Scolding, etc. Read but p. 70. As to that great
Conceit and Confidence of their own Knowledge, of which you think Heretics are
so full, that they resolve never to allow that to be the Sense of the
Revelation, however plain and evident the Words are, which is not agreeable to
their Reason, but will put another Sense upon them, though never so sorced and
violent: As to this, I will tell you; First, that they have borrowed that
Method from the very Principle of the Reformation. When, dear Cousin, those
Words of Christ are objected to you, This is my Body; My Flesh is Meat indeed:
My Blood is Drink indeed: Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, etc.
When, I say, those Places of the Scripture are objected to you, who follow the
Spirit of the Reformation, Are you not resolved never to allow that to be the
Sense of the Revelation, however plain and evident these Words are, which is
not agreeable to your Senses and Reason; and will you not put another Sense
upon them, though never so forced and violent, as in effect you do, when you
say that by the Body of Christ is meant the Figure of his Body; by eating his
Flesh, to believe in him, etc? But I have already touched that Article in my
Letter, and therefore I shall insist no longer upon it. Secondly, Who puts upon
the Scripture a more unnatural Sense than you do in this Controversy? Who has
a greater Pride of Understanding, and is more conceited of his Reasonings?
Heretics so called, make Religion to consist in the Profession of a simple
Faith, which they express in the very Terms of Scripture, holding fast the Form
of sound Words, so afraid they are to indulge their Reason too much, and to
wrest the Language and Intention of the Holy Ghost. But you on the contrary,
who rely altogether upon humane Expressions, taken out of the Pagan Philosophy,
metaphysical Arguments and Abstractions, or remote Consequences; you, I say,
must needs violate the sacred Reverence due to God's Word, put a forced Sense
upon the Words of the Holy Ghost, and show at the same time a proud Confidence,
by making the Scripture speak any thing that agrees with your Notions. There is
not one Word or Proposition in that Scripture, but will signify quite contrary
things, according to your Distinctions and Consequences. You distinguish
between the Son of Man, and the Son of God, yet you confound those two Terms,
when you think fit, and make the Son of Man to be the Son of God, and the Son
of God to be the Son of Man: If we say that it was the Son of Man that came
down from Heaven: you reply, that the Son of Man signifies there the Son of
God. If we object that the Son of God knew not the Day of Judgment; you answer,
that by the Son of God in that Place is meant the Son of Man: If one asks you,
What Is the Name of the first Person of the Trinity? you answer, the Father, and
insist earnestly upon that Distinction of Persons, to avoid the Force of this
Objection, viz. That if Christ were the most high God, he would be the Father
of himself. But if we object, that the Father only knows the Day of Judgment,
and that he only is the true God and Creator of all things; then the Word
Father signifies no more what it signified before, I mean the first Person of
the Trinity, but the whole Trinity, and the very Son whom he has begotten: so
great is your Skill in doing and undoing the Work of the Holy Ghost, by
contradicting Heretics in Season and out of Season. Let this suffice as to
what concerns Words. The same may be said of the Propositions of the Scripture,
either affirmative or negative. By the enchanting Virtue of your Distinctions,
the Affirmative becomes Negative, and the Negative Affirmative, when there is
any need of it, and two contradictory Propositions are equally true and divine,
if at any time it can serve your turn. It may be said, that Christ has wrought
Miracles, and has wrought no Miracles; that he knew not the Day of Judgment,
and knew it; that he was born, and not born. In a word, one may overthrow the
whole Gospel and Creed, all those Contradictions are Orthodox, if one does but
keep in his Mind the blessed Distinction of two Natures, which directs the
Intention, and hinders a Man from telling a Lie.

By such Tricks as these you pretend to Orthodoxy, and boast of a Principle
that promotes Holiness and Piety; and, as you say, has a great Influence upon
all the Parts of Religion. But, dear Cousin, don't you know that the learned
Dr. Hammond, who made a large practical Catechism, could find no Place in his
Book for the great Spring of the Trinity? No question but he looked upon it as
a thing altogether useless and incapable of moving the Heart of Man. Make no
doubt of it, it is a dry and empty Opinion, a Bone without Marrow or Meat,
which can afford a Christian Soul no sort of good Nourishment in order to
Piety. I confess there is a Trinity that has Influence upon the Life of all
true Christians, viz. that in which you and I have been baptized, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. But I must confess at the same time, that it is
very different from yours, if understood according to Scripture. We have the
Doctrine of the Father revealed by his Son, his Interpreter and Messiah, and
confirmed by the Gifts and Miracles of the Holy Spirit. This Doctrine has so
necessary an Influence upon the Practice of Christians, that without a right
Knowledge of that Revelation we could neither obey God's Commands, nor hope for
his Rewards. And I confess, that with respect to this primitive and capital
Truth, any Man to whom that great Object is proposed, shall be no less
accountable for the Faults of his Understanding than the Vices of his Will.
There is a plain Reason for it, viz. that this Object does not consist in
Philosophical Speculations, which the Simple cannot attain to, and the
Ignorance whereof must needs be excusable; but in plain and sensible Facts, for
the believing of which, nothing else is required but the same Honesty and
Sincerity necessary to practice the Precepts. For Example, We believe a Father,
Creator of all things; a Son born, dead, raised, etc. and a Holy Ghost setting
the Seal of his Miracles to that Revelation. Here is a Faith grounded upon
undeniable Facts, which does not require from us a seraphick Understanding, but
some Honesty to receive the Testimony of those who relate them with as much
Evidence as is necessary to satisfy an honest and reasonable Mind. The Want of
Faith or Understanding in this Respect, is the Want of Probity and Uprightness;
and therefore the Fault is inexcusable. But if instead of so simple and
sensible a Faith, you introduce your Athanasian Faith of three Eternal,
Almighty, and Incomprehensible Ones, you make Unbelief of all things the most
pardonable, nay, and the most reasonable too, because such a Faith is above the
Reach of our Senses, Reason, and Revelation. So that we must read in the
Gospel, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these things from Babes, and have revealed them unto the Wise and Prudent. I
can assure you that not only many eminent Bishops and great Councils have
rejected the Belief of such a Mystery, as you confess it, but that no good
Christian knew it, except perhaps in his Catechism, or a Book of Controversy.
How many Monuments of Antiquity have we lost, of which we could boast with
great Reason? Who can tell but most Fathers had been on our side, if the Malice
of their Enemies, the Superstition of Monks, and the Flames of the Emperors had
not destroyed their Books? As for those that remain, nothing but this can be
concluded from them, viz. that the Party that prevailed (History tells us by
what means) took Possession of Tradition and Orthodoxy. However we have still
in the Apostles Creed the Primitive Truths, which unite all Christians, the
saving Truths wherewith God's Providence fed the Faith of Christians during the
Quarrels of their Teachers, and the only Truths, for whose sake true Martyrs
have shed their Blood. I shall add, that the same Providence has preserved in
all Sects and Ages a Body of Christian Morality, which makes the great and
whole Design of the Gospel. Let us conclude here, and seriously think, dear
Cousin, that you and I shall be judged by Christ in the last Day only according
to this Rule, independently on those Opinions, which now adays make the
Subject of our Disputes. I rest,

Yours, etc.

FINIS.

