Imprimatur.

Guil. Lancaster, R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.

Mar. 14. 1691/2.
A BRIEF DISQUISITION OF THE Law of Nature, According to the Principles and
Method laid down in the Reverend Dr. Cumberland's (now Lord Bishop of
Peterborough s) Latin Treatise on that Subject. AS ALSO His Confutations of Mr.
Hobbs's Principles put into another Method. WITH THE Right Reverend Author's
Approbation.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms
in Warwick Lane. 1692.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, RICHARD, Lord Bishop of PETERBOROUGH.
My LORD,
HAving, many Years agon, when your Learned and Judicious Treatise of the Laws
of Nature was first published, carefully perused it to my great satisfaction, I
also thought it necessary to make an Epitome, or Abridgment of it, as well for
my own better Remembrance, as that I believed it might be also useful, as an
Introduction to Ethics, for some near Relations of mine, for whom I then
designed it. These Papers, after they had lain by me several Years, I happened
to show to some Friends of mine, (and in particular to the Honorable Mr.
Boil;) who so well approved of the Undertaking, that they encouraged me to
make it public, as that which might give great satisfaction to those of the
Nobility and Gentry of our own Nation, (as well as others of a lower rank) who
either do not understand Latin, or else had rather read Epitomes of greater
Works, than take the Pains to peruse the Originals. Which Task, though not very
grateful to me, yet I was prevailed with to undertake, and to look over those
Papers again, and add several considerable Passages out of the Treatise itself;
and this not for Fame's sake, or the honor of being thought an Author, since I
was satisfied, that nothing of that nature could be due to one, who does not
pretend to more, than to Translate or Abridge another Man's Labors: Yet I am
willing, in pursuance of your Lordship's Principle, to sacrifice all these
little private Considerations to the Public Good, as being sensible, that in
the Trade of Learning (as in other Trades) diverse, who cannot be Inventors, or
chief Merchants, may yet do the Public good service by venting other Men's
Notions in a new dress; especially since I have also observed, that things of
this kind, if well done, (and with due acknowledgment to the Authors from
whence they are borrowed) as they have proved beneficial to those whose
Education, or constant Employments in their own Professions, will not give them
leave to peruse many Volumes, written perhaps in a Language they are no great
Masters of; so also, they have not failed of some Commendation from all Candid
Readers. Thus Monsieur Rohault's Abridgment of Des Cartes's Philosophy, and
Monsieur Bernier's of Gassendus's, (to mention no more) have been received with
general Applause, not only by all Ingenious Men of the French, but also of our
own Nation, who understand that Language.

And the Learned and Inquisitive Dr. Burnet has thought an Undertaking of this
kind so useful for our Nobility and Gentry, as to give us his own elegant
Translations, or rather Abridgments in English, of his two ingenious Treatises
of the Theory of the Earth. And I doubt not, but your Lordship would have done
somewhat in this kind, with this admirable Work of yours, had not the constant
Employments of your Sacred Function, as well as your other severe and useful
Studies, hindered you from it.

But, perhaps, it may be thought by some, that this Task has been very well
performed already by Dr. Parker, late Bishop of Oxford, in his Treatise,
entitled* A Demonstration of the Laws of Nature, and therefore needs not be
done over again. But to this I shall only say, that as he has borrowed all
that is new in that Work from your Lordship's Book, so it is with so slight an
acknowledgment of that Obligation, that since he owns himself beholding to you
for no more than the first Hint, or main Notion, no wonder if he has fallen
very short of the Original from whence he borrowed it, both in the clearness,
as well as choice of the Arguments or Demonstrations, and in the particular
setting forth of those Rewards and Punishments derived (by God's appointment)
from the Nature of Men, and the Frame of Things; which can only be done
according to that exact Method your Lordship has there laid down. Though, I
confess, there is one thing that is particular in that Authors Undertaking, (
viz.) That excellent Account he there gives us of the great Differences and
Uncertainties among the most famous of the Heathen Philosophers, concerning
Man's Sovereign Good, or Happiness, chiefly for want of the certain belief of a
future state, and that clear conviction we now have, that Men's chiefest Good or
Happiness consists in God's Love and Favor toward them: As also his
observation, That, notwithstanding all that can be said of the Natural Rewards
of Virtue, and Punishments of Vice, nothing but the reasonable hope and
expectation of Happiness in a Life to come, can in all Cases bear us up under
all the Miseries, Sorrows and Calamities of this. And herein I must own I agree
with him; and therefore hope your Lordship will pardon me, if I have in the
ensuing Discourse insisted somewhat more particularly upon these future Rewards
and Punishments, which I doubt not may very well be proved from Reason, and the
necessity of supposing them, in order to the asserting and vindicating God's
Justice and Providence: Though I grant, that the Gospel, or Divine Revelation,
has given us more firm grounds for this our Belief, than we had before by the
mere light of Nature.

But supposing this Work of Bishop Parker never so well performed; as I do not
deny, but it has all the advantages of a Popular and Gentile Style, and that
neat Turn he gives to all his Writings; and therefore I have not scrupled to
transcribe, out of his Discourse, one or two Passages, where I thought either
his way of urging your Lordship's Arguments, or the close summing them up, was
not to be mended by any other Pen: Yet since (as I have already observed) the
whole is not done from your Lordship's Work, and is also too concise, and full
of Digressions, and besides wants your solid Confutations of Mr. H.'s
Principles, it seems necessary, that another Treatise more exact in the kind,
should be published as more agreeable to your Lordship's Original: Whether this
which I now present you with, be such, I must submit to your Lordship's and the
Reader's judgment.

But since I have undertaken this difficult Province with your Lordships
approbation, it is fit, that I give you, as well as the Reader, some account of
the Method I have followed in this Treatise, and wherein it differs from yours.

First then, to begin with the Preface, The substance of it is wholly yours,
except the Introduction concerning the usefulness of the Knowledge of the true
Grounds of the Law of Nature, in order to a right understanding of Moral
Philosophy, nay Christianity itself.

But for a Conclusion to the Preface, I have also made some Additions, wherein.
I have shown your Principle of Endeavoring the Common Good, is not a new
Invention, but that which several Great Men had before delivered, as the only
firm Rule, by which to try not only all our Moral Actions, but all Civil Laws,
whether they are right and just; that is, agreeable to right Reason, or not.
And I have also concluded it with a set of Principles, very necessary to be
understood, for the proving the Truth of all Natural Religion, and the Law of
Nature, though the two last alone are the Subject of your Lordship's Book, as
well as of my Abridgment of it.

But to speak more particularly of the Discourse itself, since I here design no
more than an Epitome, I hope your Lordship will not take it ill, if I have
omitted most of your rare Instances and Parallels drawn from the Mathematics,
many of which are above the capacity of common Readers, (though therein your
Lordship has shown your self a Great Master) and have confined my self only to
such plain and easy Proofs and natural Observations as Men of all capacities
may understand. So also if in the Chapter of Humane Nature, I have left out
diverse curious Anatomical Observations, wherein the Structure of Men's Bodies
differs from that of Beasts, if I thought they were at all questionable or
doubtful, or such as did not directly tend to the proving, that Men's Bodies are
fitted and ordained by God for the Prosecution of the Common Good of others of
their own Kind, above all other Creatures.

I have also made bold to contract the Chapters in your Work, into a lesser
number, having disposed the substance of them into other places, or else quite
omitted some, as not so necessary to our purpose: As for example, I have placed
most of the Matter of the third Chapter, De bono naturali, partly in the
explanation of the word Good, in our Description of the Law of Nature, in the
third Chapter, reserving what remained of it to the second part for the
Confutation of that Principle of Mr. H. That no Action is Good or Evil in the
State of Nature. So likewise for the fourth Chapter, De Dictaminibus Practicis,
I have set down the Substance of it (omitting the Mathematical Illustrations)
in our second Chapter of Humane Nature. So also the sixth Chapter, entitled,
De iis quae in Lege Naturali continentur. And the seventh and eighth, De
Origin Dominii, and Virtutum Moralium. I have partly disposed the substance of
them into the first Chapter of the Nature of Things, but chiefly into your
fourth Chapter, reducing all the Laws of Nature, and Moral Virtues therein
contained, into this one Principle, of Endeavoring the Common Good of Rational
Beings. But as for your last Chapter, viz. that part of it which contains the
Consectaria, or Consequences deducible from the foregoing Chapters, in relation
to the Law of Moses, and all Civil Laws; I have made bold to omit, since it is
plain enough, that all the Precepts of the Decalogue do tend either (in the
first Table) to the Honor and Glory of God, in his commanding himself to be
the sole Object of our Worship, and that without any Images of himself; or else
(in the second Table) to our Duties toward others, wherein the highest Virtue
and Innocence are prescribed. And so likewise, that all the Laws of the Supreme
Civil Powers have no Authority, but as they pursue this Great Rule, or Law of
Nature, of procuring the Common Good of Rational Beings; that is, the Honor
and Worship of God, and the Peace and Happiness of their Subjects, and of
Mankind in general: And whereas your Lordship has here also solidly and
briefly confuted many Gross Errors in Mr. H.'s Morals, as well as Politics,
some of those Confutations I have made use of in the second Part, viz. those
that relate to that Author's Moral Principles, which, if they are false, his
Politic ones will fall of themselves.

To conclude, I must beg your Lordships Pardon, if I have made bold to alter
your Method, as to your Confutation of Mr. H.'s Principles. For whereas you
have thought fit to do it in the Body of your Work, and as they occurred under
the several Heads you treat of; since I perceived the placing your Answers
after that manner, did disturb the Connection and Perspicuity of the Discourse,
I thought it better to cast those Answers into a distinct part, digested under
so many Heads, or Propositions, in the order in which they stand in Mr. H.'s
Books, de Cive, and Leviathan, where the Reader, if he pleases, may compare
what I have quoted out of him.

And I hope your Lordship will not take it amiss in me, if (to render the Work
more pleasant and grateful to common Readers, and that it may not look like a
bare Translation) I have added several Notions and Observations, some of my own
knowledge, and others out of History, and the Relations of Modern Travelers,
concerning the Customs of those Nations commonly counted Barbarous, who yet by
their amicable living together, without either Civil Magistrates, or written
Laws, serve sufficiently to confute Mr. H.'s extravagant Opinion, That all Men
by Nature are in a State of War.

I have likewise presumed to add those Aphorisms of Good and Evil contained in
Bishop Wilkins's Treatise of Natural Religion, and Dr. Moor's Enchiridion
Ethicum, that the Reader may see them all at once, though I confess they are most
of them to be found (though dispersedly) in your Lordship's Work. I have also
inserted some things, in answer to the Objections at the end of the first Part,
out of that noble contemplative Philosopher, Mr. Lock's Essay of Humane
Understanding; since he proceeds upon the same Principles with your Lordship,
and has diverse very new and useful Notions concerning the Manner of Attaining
the Knowledge of all Truths, as well Natural, as Divine, and the Certainty we
have of them.

But, I fear, I have trespassed too much upon your Lordship's Patience, by so
long an Epistle, and therefore shall conclude with my Prayers for your
Lordship's Happiness and Health, since I am confident you cannot but prove more
useful for the common good of our Church and State, in this high and public
Station to which Their Majesty's have thought fit to call you, than you could
have been in a more private Condition: And I hope your Lordship will look upon
this Dedication as a small Tribute of Gratitude, which all the World must owe
you for your Learned and not Common Undertakings, of which Obligation none
ought to be (or indeed is) more sensible than,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most faithful and humble Servant, JAMES TYRRELL.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER, By way of INTRODUCTION.
I Suppose you are not ignorant, that the Study of Moral Philosophy, or the
Laws of Nature, was preferred (by Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, and Tully, the
wisest of the Heathen Philosophers) above all other knowledge, whether Natural
or Civil, and that deservedly, as well in respect of its usefulness, as
certainty, since it was to that alone (as most agreeable to the Natural
Faculties of Mankind) that Men, before they were assisted by Divine Revelation,
owed the Discovery of their Natural Duties, to God, themselves, and all others:
as Cicero has shown us at large in those three excellent Treatises, De
Officiis, De Finibus, and De Legibus. And though I grant we Christians have now
clearer and higher Discoveries of all Moral Duties, by the Light of the Gospel,
yet is the Knowledge of Natural Religion, or the Laws of Nature, still of great
use to us, as well for the confirmation as illustration of all those Duties,
since by their Knowledge, and the true Principles on which they are founded, we
may be convinced, that God requires nothing from us in all the practical Duties
of revealed Religion, but our reasonable Service; that is, what is really our
own interest, and concerns our good and happiness to observe, as the best and
most perfect Rule of Life, whether God had ever farther enforced them or not by
any revealed Law. And though I do not deny, that our Savior Jesus Christ has
highly advanced and improved these Natural Laws, by more excellent and refined
Precepts of Humility, Charity, and Self-denial, than were discovered before by
the wisest of the Heathen Philosophers, especially as to the greater assurance
we have of that grand Motive to Religion and Virtue, the immortality of the
Soul, or a Life either eternally happy or miserable, when this is ended: Yet
certainly it was this Law of Nature, or Reason alone, by which Mankind was not
only to live, but also to be judged, before the Law given to Moses, and it must
be for not living up to this Natural Light, that the Heathens shall be
condemned, who never yet heard of Christ, or of a revealed Religion, and so
cannot (as St. Paul expressly declares to the Romans) believe on him of whom
they have not heard, Romans 10.14. And therefore the same Apostle, in the first
Chapter of the same Epistle, appeals to the knowledge of God, from the things
that are seen, that is, the Creation of the World, as the foundation of all
Natural Religion, and their falling [notwithstanding this knowledge,] into that
gross Idolatry they professed, as the only reason, why God gave them up to
their own hearts lusts, because that when they knew God, they glorified him not
as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened, v 21. And so likewise in the second Chapter, the
Apostle farther tells them, that when the Gentiles, who have not the Law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law
unto themselves, showing the work of the Law written in their hearts; that is,
the Law of Nature or Reason, as the main substance or effect of the Mosaical
Law. And that it is by this Law alone, that they shall be judged, mark what
immediately follows, Their consciences bearing witness, and their own thoughts
(or reasonings, as it is rather to be rendered) in the mean while accusing or
excusing each other. And indeed the Apostle supposes the Knowledge of God as a
Rewarder of Good Works, as the foundation of all Natural, as well as revealed
Religion, and the first Principle of saving Faith, as appears in his Epistle to
the Hebrews, Chap. 11. v. 6. But without faith it is impossible to please him,
for he that comes unto God must first believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of all them that diligently seek him. But I need speak no more of
Natural Religion, and how necessary it is to the true Knowledge of the
Revealed, since the Reverend and learned Dr. Wilkins, Late Bishop of Chester,
has so well performed that Noble Undertaking, in that excellent Posthumous
Treatise, published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, now Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, to which nothing needs to be added by so mean a Pen as mine.

But since the Laws of Nature, as derived from God the Legislator, are the
foundation of all Moral Philosophy and true Politics, as being those which are
appealed to in all Controversies between Civil Sovereigns, and also are the
main Rules of those mutual Duties between Sovereigns and their Subjects: It is
worth while to enquire how these Laws may be discovered to proceed from God as
a Legislator. Now whereas this can only be done by one of these two ways,
(viz.) Either from the certain and manifest Effects and Consequences that
proceed from their observation; Or, 2dly, From the Causes from which they are
derived. The former of these has been already largely treated of by others,
especially by the most learned Hugo Grotius, in his admirable Work, De Jure
Belli and Pacis. And by his Brother William, in that small Posthumous Treatise,
De Principiis Juris Naturalis. And by the Judicious Monsieur Puffendorf, in his
learned Treatise, De Jure Naturae and Gentium: As also by our own Countryman,
Dr. Sharrock. Who have all undertaken to prove their certainty from their
general belief and reception by the wisest and most civilized Nations in all
Ages. To which we may also add the learned Mr. Seldom, in that most elaborate
Work, De Jure Gentium juxta placita Hebraeorum. And as I do acknowledge, that
those Great Men have all deserved very well in their way, so I think none
deserves greater commendation, than that excellent Work of Grotius the Elder,
which as it was the first in its kind, so it is worthy of enduring as long as
Virtue and Justice shall be in esteem among Mankind. And though the Objections
which are wont to be brought against this Method of proving the Laws of Nature,
are not of so great moment, as to render it altogether fallacious or useless,
as some would have it to be; yet I freely acknowledge they can chiefly serve to
convince Men of sincere and honest minds, and who are naturally disposed to
Virtue and right Reason: So that I conceive it were more useful, as well as
certain, to seek for a firmer and clearer Demonstration thereof, from a strict
search and inquisition into the Nature of things, and also of our own selves,
by which I doubt not but we may attain not only to a true Knowledge of the Laws
of Nature, but also of that true Principle on which they are founded, and from
whence they are all derived.

But it will not consist with the narrow bounds of a Preface, to propose and
answer all the Objections that may be made against their Method of proving the
Law of Nature, from the Consent of Nations, neither perhaps can it be done at
all to the universal satisfaction even of indifferent persons; since it may be
still urged by those that do not admit them, that although some Dictates of Right
Reason may be indeed approved of by our Understandings, and are commonly
received and practiced by most Nations for their general usefulness and
convenience: Yet it must be acknowledged, that there is still required the
Knowledge of God as a Legislator, by whose Authority alone they can obtain the
force of Laws. The Proof of which (though the most material part of the Question)
has been hitherto omitted, or but slightly touched, by former Writers on this
Subject.

But besides the Objections of some of the Ancients, Mr. Seldom and Mr. Hobbs
have also argued against this Method, though upon diverse Principles, and from
different Designs, the latter intending, that no body should receive these
Dictates of Reason, as obligatory to outward Actions, before a Supreme Civil
Power be instituted, who shall ordain them to be observed as Laws. And though he
sometimes vouchsafes them that Title, yet in his De Cive, cap. 14. he tells us,
That in the state of Nature they are but improperly called so, and that though
the Laws of Nature may be found largely described in the Writings of
Philosophers, yet are they not for this cause to be called Laws, any more than
the Writings or Opinions of Lawyers are Laws, till confirmed and made so by the
Supreme Powers.

But, on the other side, Mr. Seldom more fairly finds fault with the want of
Authority in these Dictates of Reason, (considered only as such) that he may
from hence show us a necessity of recurring to the Legislative Power of God,
and that he may thereby make out, that those Dictates of Reason do only acquire
the force of Laws, because all our knowledge of them is to be derived from God
alone, who when he makes these Rules known to us, does then (and not before)
promulgate them to us as Laws. And so far I think he is in the right, and has
well enough corrected our common Moralists, who are wont to consider these
Dictates of Reason as Laws, without any sufficient proof, that they have all
the Conditions required to make them so, viz. That they are established and
declared to us by God as a Legislator, who has annexed to them sufficient
Rewards and Punishments. But I think it is evident, that if these Rational
Dictates can by any means be proved to proceed from the Will of God, the Author
of Nature, as Rules for all our Moral Actions, they will not need any Humane
Authority, much less the Consent or Tradition of any one or many Nations to
make them known to be so: Therefore, though I grant this learned Author has
taken a great deal of pains to prove from diverse general Traditions of the
Jewish Rabbis, that God gave certain Commands to Adam, and after to Noah,
contained in these seven Precepts, called by his Name; and that those various
Quotations this learned Author has there produced, do clearly prove, that the
Jews believe, that all Nations whatever, although they do not receive the Laws of
Moses, yet are obliged to observe the same Moral Laws, which they conceive to
be all contained under the Precepts above mentioned; and though this Work is
indeed most learnedly and judiciously performed, and may prove of great use in
Christian Theology, yet I must confess it still seems to me, that he has not
sufficiently answered his own Objection concerning Men's Ignorance, or want of
Discovery of the Lawgiver; for although it should be granted, that those
Traditions they call the Precepts of Noah, should be never so generally or
firmly believed by the whole Jewish Nation, yet are they not therefore made
known to the rest of Mankind, and one of them, viz. That of not eating any Part
or Member of a living Creature, is justly derided and received with scorn by
all other Nations. So that it seems evident to me, that the unwritten
Traditions of the learned Men of any one Nation, cannot be looked upon as a
sufficient promulgation made by God as a Lawgiver, of those Laws or Precepts
therein contained; and that all Nations, who perhaps have never heard of Adam
or Noah, should be condemned for not living according to them, especially when
we consider, that it is but in these latter Ages of the World, that the Jewish
Rabbis began to commit these Traditions to Writing; and that it is most
probable the ancient Jews knew nothing of them, since neither Josephus, nor
Philo Judaeus, take any notice of these Precepts in their Writings.

Therefore that the Divine Authority of those Dictates of Right Reason, or
Rules of Life, called the Laws of Nature, may more evidently be demonstrated to
all considering Men, it seemed to me the best and fittest Method to inquire
first into their Natural Causes, as well internal as external, remote as near,
since by this Series of Causes and Effects, we may at last be more easily
brought to the knowledge of the Will of God, their first Cause, from whose
intrinsic Perfections and extrinsick Sanctions, by fit Rewards and due
Punishments, we have endeavored to show, that as well their Authority as
Promulgation is derived.

I know indeed, that the greatest part of former Writers have been content, to
suppose, that these Dictates of Reason, and all Acts conformable thereunto, are
taught us by Nature, or at most do only affirm in general, that they proceed
from God, without showing us which way, or the manner how. Therefore it seemed
highly necessary to us, that we ought to inquire more exactly how the force of
Objects from without, and of our own Notions or Idea's from within us, do both
concur toward the imprinting, and fixing these Principles in our Minds, as
Laws derived from the Will of God himself; which Work if it be well performed,
we hope may prove of great use, not only to our own Nation, but to all Mankind;
because from hence it may appear, both by what means Men's Understandings, may
attain to a true, and natural Knowledge of the Divine Will, or Laws of God; So
that if they practice them not, they may be left without excuse: And this
Principle will likewise serve for a general Rule, by which the Municipal Laws
of every Commonwealth may be tried, whether they are Just, and Right, or not;
that is agreeable with the Laws of Nature, and so may be corrected, and amended
by the supreme Powers, whenever they have deviated from this great End of the
common Good. And from hence may also be demonstrated, that there is somewhat in
the Nature of God, as also in our own, and all other Men's Natures, which
administers present Comfort and Satisfaction to our Minds, from good Actions,
as also firm Hopes, or Presages of a future Happiness, as a Reward for them
when this Life is ended; whereas on the other side the greatest Misery, and
most dismal Fears, do proceed from wicked, or evil Actions, from whence the
Conscience seems furnished, as it were with Whips, and Scorpions to correct and
punish all Vice, and Improbity: So that it may from hence appear, that Men are
not deluded in their moral Notions, either by Clergymen, or Politicians.

I grant, the Platonists undertake to dispatch all these Difficulties a much
easier way, only by supposing certain innate Idea's of moral Good, and Evil,
impressed by God upon the Souls of Men. But I must indeed confess my self not yet
so happy, as to be able thus easily to attain to so great a Perfection, as the
Knowledge of the Laws of Nature by this natural Instinct, or Impression: And it
does not seem to me either safe, or convenient to lay the whole Stress of
Natural Religion, and Morality upon an Hypothesis, which has been exploded by
all Philosophers, except themselves, and which can never alone serve to
convince those of Epicurean Principles, for whom we chiefly design this Work:
But whosoever will take the Pains to peruse, what has been written, against
these innate Idea's by the inquisitive, and sagacious Dr. Ioh. Lock.
Author of the late Essay of humane Understanding, will find them very hard, if
not impossible to be proved to have ever been innate in the Souls of Men,
before they came into the World: Therefore as I shall not take upon me,
absolutely to deny the Being, or Impossibility of such Idea's, so I shall not
make use of any Arguments drawn from thence in this Discourse, Though I
heartily wish that any Reasons, or Motives, which may serve to promote true
Virtue, and Piety may prevail as far as they deserve, with all sincere and
honest Men.

And the same Reasons, which deterred me from supposing any natural Laws innate
in our Minds, have also made me not presently suppose, as many do (without any
due proof) That such Idea's have existed in the Divine Intellect from all
Eternity. And therefore I looked upon it as more proper, and necessary to begin
from those things, which are most known, and familiar to us by our Senses, and
from thence to prove that certain Propositions of immutable Truth prescribing
our Care of the Happiness, or common Good of all rational Agents considered
together, are necessarily imprinted upon our Minds from the Nature of things,
and which the first Cause perpetually determines so to act upon them: And that
in the Terms of these Propositions, are intrinsecally included an evident
Declaration of their Truth, and certainty, as proceeding from God the first
Cause in the very intrinsic Constitution of things: From whence it will be
also manifest, that such practical Propositions are truly and properly Laws, as
being declared, and established by due Rewards, and Punishments annexed to them
by him, as the supreme Legislator.

But after it shall appear, that the Knowledge of these Laws, and a Practice
conformable to them are the highest Perfection, or most happy State of our
Rational Natures: It will likewise follow, that a Perfection Analogous to this
Knowledge, and a Practice conformable to these Laws, must necessarily be in the
first Cause; from whence proceeds, not only our own Natural Perfections, but
also the most wise Ordination of all Effects without us, for the common
Conservation, and Perfection of the whole Natural System, or Universe, which
our Eyes daily behold: For that is looked upon by me among the things most
certainly proved, That it must be first known, what Justice is, and what those
Laws enjoin, in whose Observation all Justice consists, before we can
distinctly know, that Justice is to be attributed to God, and that his Justice
is to be considered by us as a Pattern, or Example for us to imitate. Since we
do not know God by an immediate Intuition of his Essence, or Perfections, but
only from the outward Effects of his Providence, first known by our Senses, and
Experience: Neither is it safe to affix Attributes to him, which we cannot
sufficiently understand, or make out from things without us.

Having now shown you in general, the difference between our Method, and that
which others have hitherto followed, it is fit we here declare, in as few words
as we can, the chief Heads of those things which we have delivered in this
Treatise. Supposing therefore those natural Principles concerning the Laws of
Motion, and Rest sufficiently demonstrated by Naturalists (especially such as
depend upon Mathematical Principles) since we have only here undertaken to
demonstrate the true Grounds of Moral Philosophy, and to deduce them from some
supposed Knowledge of Nature, and as they refer to our Moral Practice; I have
here therefore supposed all the Effects of corporeal Motions, which are natural
and necessary, and performed without any Intervention of humane Liberty, to be
derived from the Will of the first Cause. And, 2dly. (which Mr. H. himself
likewise in his Leviathan admits) that from the Consideration, and Inquisition
into these Causes, and from the Powers, and Operations of natural Bodies, may
be discovered the Existence of one Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent Being, which
we call God.

So that every Motion impressed upon the Organs of our Senses, whereby the Mind
is carried on to apprehend things without us, and to give a right Judgment upon
them, is a natural Effect; which by the Mediation of other inferior Causes,
owes its Original to the first Cause. From whence it follows, that God by these
natural Motions of Causes, and Effects delineates the Idea's, or Images of all
natural and moral Actions on our Minds; And that the same God, after he has
thus made us draw various Notions, from the same Objects, does then excite us
to compare them with each other, and then join them together, and so determines
us to form true Propositions of the things, thus singly received and
understood. So that sometimes a thing is exposed whole, and all at once to our
View, and sometimes it is more naturally considered successively; or according
to its several parts; And the Mind thereby perceives that the Notion of awhole,
signifies the same, with that of all the several Idea's of the particular parts
put together, and so is thence carried on to make a Proposition of the Identity
of the whole, with all its parts. And can truly affirm, that the same Causes,
which preserve the whole, must also conserve all its constituent parts; and
then from a diligent Contemplation of all these Propositions, (which may justly
challenge the Title of the more general Laws of Nature;) we may observe, that
they are all reduceable to one Proposition; from whose fit, and just
Explication, all the Limits, or Exceptions, under which the particular
Propositions are proposed, may be sought for, and discovered, as from the
Evidence of that one Proposition, which may be reduced into this, or the like
Sense, (viz.) The endeavor as far as we are able of the common good of the
whole System of Rational Beings conduces, as far as lies in our Power to the
good of all its several Parts or Members, in which our own Felicity is also
contained as part thereof; Whereas the Acts opposite to this Endeavor, do
bring along with them Effects quite opposite thereunto, and will certainly
procure our own Ruin, or Misery at last. Therefore the whole Sum of this
Proposition, may be reduced to these three Things. 1. That which concerns the
Matter of it, to wit, the Knowledge of its Terms drawn from the Nature of
Things. 2. Its form, (viz.) the Connection of those Terms contained in this
practical Proposition, and particularly such, which because of the Rewards, and
Punishments annexed to them, may make it deserve to be called a Divine, Natural
Law, as proceeding from God the Author of Nature. Or, 3. The Deduction of all
other natural Laws from this, as their Foundation, and Original, from that
Respect, or Proportion they bear to the common Good, or happiest State of the
whole aggregate Body of Rational Beings.

But as to the Explication of the Terms of this Proposition: I hope the Reader
will not be scandalized, that we attribute Reason to God, and have reckoned him
as the Head of Rational Beings, since we do not thereby mean, that Sort of
Reason which consists in deducing Conclusions from prior Propositions, but
rather that absolute Omniscience, and perfect Wisdom, which we understand to be
in God, which Cicero himself could not better describe, than by the Name of
Adulta Ratio; or, the most perfect Reason. And if we Mortals can know, or
apprehend any aright, thing of him, it is as we do partake of some part, though
in an infinitely lower Degree of that only true Knowledge, and Understanding.
So that if we can once rightly judge, that the common Good of Rational Beings,
is the greatest of all others; it is no doubt true, and no otherwise true, than
as it is so apprehended by the Divine Intellect; As when it is demonstrated to
us, that the three Angles of a Triangle, are equal to two right ones, no doubt,
but the Deity it self, had before the same Idea of it. So likewise if we have
affirmed, that we can contribute any thing to the good, and happiness of
rational Beings, by our Benevolence toward them, and so may seem to suppose,
that there is a certain good common to us, and the Deity* and which we may some
way serve to promote: We desire to be understood not as if we imagined, that by
our testifying our Love, and Honor toward God, in any internal, or external
Acts of Worship; we could add, or contribute any thing to his infinite
Happiness, and Perfections; but only as judging it more grateful, and
agreeable to his Nature, if by our Deeds we express our Gratitude and Obedience
to him, by imitating him in our Care of the common good of Mankind, than if we
deny his Being, or blaspheme his Attributes, and violate, or contemn his Laws:
So likewise, if in our Thoughts, Words and Actions, we express our Worship, and
Love toward him, we doubt not but it is more pleasing, and agreeable to his
Divine Nature, than if by the contrary Actions we should signify our neglect,
or hatred of him. For if we abstractively compare any two rational Natures
together, we must acknowledge a greater Similitude, when one of them agrees,
and co-operates with the other, than if we should suppose a Disagreement or
Discord between them, or that the End or Design intended by the one should be
crossed, or opposed by the other. Neither do I see what can hinder, but that
the same may be affirmed, if one of these rational Natures be supposed to be
God, and the other only Man. Therefore, as it is known by our common Sense,
that it is more grateful to any Man to be beloved, and honored, than to be
hated, and contemned. So it may be found by a manifest Analogy of reason, that
it is more grateful to God, the Head of rational Beings to be beloved, and
honored by the Service and Worship of us Men, than to be hated, and contemned.
For as the Desire of being beloved argues no Imperfection in us; so likewise
in God, it is so far from giving the least Suspicion thereof, that on the
contrary, it rather argues his Goodness, since our Natures are perfected, to
the highest Degree they are capable of, by our Love to him, and Obedience to
his Commands. So that, when we speak of any Good, common to us with the Divine
Nature, it is only to be understood Analogically; for those things which we
perceive to conserve, or perfect our own Nature we call grateful to us, that
is, as they render the Mind pleased, and full of Joy, Pleasure, and
Satisfaction: And though we confess we cannot contribute any thing to the
infinite Perfection of the Deity, Yet since this Joy, or Complacency proceeding
from our Love, and Service toward him may be conceived without any
Imperfection, they I think may be safely attributed to his Divine Nature, and
looked upon as a sort of good endeavored by us for him, since God esteems our
Love, and Service as the only Tribute we can pay him, and therefore he has
inseparably annexed the highest Rewards to this Love of himself (as shall be
proved in this following Discourse) which certainly he would never have done,
unless it had been his Will, that we should thus love, and worship him. So that
though I grant, that the Divine Good or Happiness is not at all advanced by our
Worship of him; yet will not this at all derogate from our definition of
endeavoring the Common good of Rational Beings, which may be made out by these
following Considerations.

1. That all Rational Beings, or Agents are, and must be considered together,
as naturally, and necessarily constituting one intellectual System, or Society;
because they agree together, to prosecute one chief End, Viz. The good of the
Universe, or World, especially of that intellectual System; by the fittest
Means applicable to that End since, whilst they are truly rational, they cannot
differ in judging what is that best End; nor avoid choosing the same necessary
Means, leading thereunto.

2. That although God, the Head of this intellectual System, be indeed
incapable of any Addition to his infinite Happiness, and Perfection, yet the
whole System (in as much as it includes all finite rational Beings) is capable
of Improvement in these its finite parts, which Improvement God cannot only
desire, but ever did, and will promote both by his own Power, as also by that
of all subordinate voluntary Agents, whereby God's Essential Goodness becomes
manifest to us: And the good of the whole System may reasonably be judged as
grateful, or pleasing to God the head thereof, although it can add nothing to
himself: thus in Embryons all the other Members daily grow, and improve, after
the Head or Brain is supposed to have attained its full bigness.

These voluntary, or free Actions of the subordinate Agents, when they concur
with God's wisdom and goodness, are naturally and evidently known to be more
pleasing (as being rewarded by him) than malevolent Actions opposite to this
chief end, which fight both against God and Men; nor does the consideration of
God's rewarding such good Actions, imply any addition to his Divine
Perfections. So that our Benevolence toward God, and consequently, our worship
of him, is but our free acknowledgment, that he naturally, and essentially is
(what he ever was and will be) the same infinite, good, and wise Disposer, and
Governor of the whole System of rational Beings; and this our benevolence by
giving him Glory, Love, Reverence, and Obedience fulfils all the Duties of
humanity toward those of our own kind, which answers both the Tables of the
moral, or natural Law; and in this consent of our minds with the divine
Intellect, consists that complete harmony of the Universe of intellectual
Beings.

The great influence of these Principles upon all the parts of natural
Religion, may be more fully expressed and made out; by these following
considerations.

1. The voluntary acknowledgment and consent of our minds to the Perfections of
the divine Nature and Actions, include the agreement, and concurrence of our
chief Faculties, viz. The understanding, and will, therewith; and moreover,
naturally excite all our Affections to comply with them, and so strongly
dispose us in our future Life, and Actions, to compose our selves to the
imitation thereof, to the utmost of our Abilities; particularly these
Principles naturally produce in us. First, Praises, and Thanksgivings to God,
private and public, for goods already done to our selves, or others, wherein
the Essence of Prayer is contained.

2. Hence also arise Hope, Affiance, or Trust in God, which I willingly
acknowledge is fullest of assurance, when founded not only on observations, or
past experience of Providence; but has also revealed promises annexed,
relating to future Good. 3. To conclude, when our Acknowledgment, and high
esteem of the divine Attributes move us to the imitation thereof, we must needs
thereby arise to those high degrees of Charity, or the endeavor of the
greatest public good which we observe in God to prosecute, and such Charity
imports not only exact Justice to all, but that overflowing bounty, tenderness
and sympathy with others, beyond which humane Nature cannot arrive; because
these not only harmoniously consent with the like Perfections in God, but also
cooperate with him, to the improvement of the finite parts of the rational
System, whereof he is the infinite, yet Sympathizing head, who declares he
takes all that is done to the Members of this intellectual Society, as done to
himself.

Nevertheless, I profess my self to understand this Sympathy, or compassion in
God in such a Sense only, as it is understood in Holy Writ, for that infinite
concern for the good of his best Creatures, which is contained in his infinite
goodness, and is a real perfection of his Nature, not implying any mistake of
others for himself, nor any capacity of being lessened or hurt by the power of
any man's malice, but yet fully answers, (nay infinitely exceeds) that
solicitous care, and concern for the good of others, which Charity and
Compassion work in the best of men.

In short, if the Reader will take the pains to peruse the Three first Chapters
of this Discourse, he will find, that we have, in explaining the terms of this
Proposition, not only given a bare interpretation of Words, but also have
proposed the true Notions, and Natures of those things, from whence they are
taken; as far as is necessary for our purpose, and may observe that by one, and
the same labor we have directly, and immediately explained the Power, and
necessity of those humane Actions, which are required to the common Happiness
of all men, and also to the private good, and necessity of particular Persons.
Although it seemed most convenient to use such general words, which may in some
Sense be attributed to the Divine Majesty, and to have done it with that
Design, that by the help of this Analogy thus supposed, not only our obligation
to Piety and Virtue, but also the Nature of Divine Justice, and Dominion may be
from hence better understood.

But as for what concerns the form of this Proposition it is evident, that it
is wholly practical, as that which determines concerning the certain effects of
humane Actions. But it is also to be noted, that although the words, conduces, or
renders, in either of these Propositions, are put in the present Tense; Yet it
is not limited to any time present, but abstracts from it: And because its
truth does chiefly depend upon the Identity of the whole, with the parts; it is
as plainly true of all future time, and is as often used by us in this
Discourse with respect to future, as well as present Actions. And therefore
this Proposition is more fit for our purpose, because built upon no particular
Hypothesis; for it does not suppose men born in a Civil State, nor yet out of
it, neither see any Kindred or Relation to be among men, as derived from the
same common Parents, as we are taught by the Holy Scriptures; since the
obligation of the Laws of Nature is to be demonstrated to those who do not yet
acknowledge them: Neither on the other side does it suppose, (as Mr. H. does in
his de Cive) a great many men already grown, and sprung up out of the Earth
like Mushrooms; But our Proposition, and all those things which we have deduced
from it, might have been understood, and acknowledged by the first Parents of
mankind, if they had only considered themselves together with God, and their
Posterity which was to come into the world. Neither may it less easily be
understood and admitted by those Nations, which have not yet heard of Adam and
Eve.

Neither may it be amiss to observe, concerning the Sense of this Proposition,
that in the same words in which the Cause of the greatest, and best effect is
laid down, there is also delivered in short the means to the chiefest end,
because the effect of a rational Agent, after it is conceived in its mind, and
that it has determined to bestow its endeavors in producing it, is called the
End, and the Acts, or Causes by which it endeavors to effect it, are called
the means; and from this observation, may be shown a true method of reducing
all those things which Moral Philosophers have spoken about the means to the
best end, into natural Theorems concerning the Power of humane Actions, in
producing such Effects; and in this form, they may more easily be examined
whether they are true, or not, and may be more evidently demonstrated so to be;
and also we may hence learn by the like Reason, how easily all true knowledge
of the force of those natural Causes, which we may any way apply to our use,
does suggest fit Mediums for the attaining of the end intended, and so may be
applied to Practice according to occasion: Lastly, from thence it appears, that
either of these Propositions, which we have now laid down, do so far approach
to the nature of a Law, as they respect an end truly worthy of it, viz. The
common good of all rational Beings; or else (if you please to word it
otherwise) the Honor, or Worship of God, conjoined with the common Good, and
Happiness of mankind.

And though it does not yet appear, that this Proposition is a Law, because the
Lawgiver is not yet mentioned, nevertheless I doubt not but you will find in
the Body of this Discourse, that it has all things necessary to render it so,
viz. God, considered as a Legislator, and his Will or Commands sufficiently
declared to us, as a Law from the very constitution of our Natures, as also of
other things without us; and likewise established by sufficient Rewards, and
Punishments both in this life, and the next; neither do we suppose it can be
more evidently proved, that God is the Author of all things, than that he is
also the Author of this Proposition, concerning the common good of rational
Beings, or concerning his own Honor, and Worship conjoined with the common
Good of mankind: And though I confess we have been more exact, and have dwelt
longer upon the Rewards, that we may expect from the observation of this Law,
than upon the Punishments, which are appointed for the breach of it; and though I
know the Civilians have rather placed the Sanction of Civil Laws in
Punishments, than Rewards; yet I hope we have not offended, though we a little
deviate from their Sense, and make it part of the Sanction of this Law, that it
is established by Rewards, as well as Punishments; since it seems more
agreeable to the Nature of things, whose footsteps are strictly to be
followed, to consider the positive Idea's of Causes, and Effects in our minds,
and which do not receive either Negations, or Privations by our outward Senses;
and our Affections ought rather to be moved by the Love, or Hopes, of a
present, or future Good; than by the Fear, or hatred of the contrary Evil: For
as no man is said to Love, Life, Health, and those grateful motions of the
Nerves, or Spirits which are called corporeal Pleasures, because he may avoid
Death, Sickness, or Pain; but rather from their own intrinsic Goodness, or
Agreeableness with our humane Natures; so likewise no rational Man desires the
Perfections of the mind, to wit, the more ample and distinct knowledge of the
most noble Objects, the most happy State of rational Beings, can only give him;
and all this, not only that he* may avoid the mischiefs of Ignorance, Envy, and
Malevolence; but because of that great Happiness, which he finds by experience
to spring from such virtuous Actions, and Habits, and which render it most
ungrateful to us, to be deprived of them; and so the Causes also of such
Privations are judged highly grievous, and troublesome: From whence it also
appears, that even Civil Laws themselves, when they are established by
Punishments, (e. g.) by the fear of Death, or loss of Goods, (if we consider
the thing truly) do indeed force men to yield obedience to them from the love
of Life, or Riches; which they find can only be preserved by their observation.
So that the avoiding of Death, and Poverty is but in other words, love of Life,
and Riches; as he who by two Negatives would say he would not want Life, means
no more, but that he desires to enjoy it: To which we may likewise add, that
Civil Laws themselves ought to be considered from the end which the Lawmakers
regard in making them, as also which all good Subjects design in observing
them; to wit, the public Good of the Commonwealth (part of which is
communicated to all of them in particular, and so brings with it a natural
Reward of their obedience,) rather than from the Punishments they threaten, by
whose fear some only are deterred from violating them; and those of the worst,
and most wicked sort of Men.

But though we have shown, that the Sum of all the Precepts or Laws of Nature, as
also of the Sanctions annexed to them, are briefly contained in this
Proposition; yet its Subject, is still but an endeavor to the utmost of our
Power, of the common Good of the whole System of rational Beings, this
limitation of the utmost of our Power implies, that we do not think our selves
capable of adding any thing to the Divine Perfections which we willingly
acknowledge to be beyond our Power. So that here is at once expressed both our
Love toward God, and Good will to mankind, who are the constituent parts of
this System. But the Predicate of this Proposition is, that which conduces to
the good of all its singular Parts, or Members, and in which our own Happiness,
is contained as one part thereof. Since all those good things, which we can do
for others, are but the Effects of this endeavor: so that the Sum of all those
Goods (of which also our own Felicity consists) can never be mist of either in
this Life, or a better, as the Reward of our obedience thereunto. So to the
contrary Actions, Misery in this Life, or in that to come, are the Punishments
naturally due. But the Connection of the Predicate with the Subject, is both the
Foundation of the truth of this Proposition; and also a Demonstration of the
natural Connection, between this obedience, and the Rewards, as also between the
Transgression, and the Punishments.

From whence the Readers will easily observe, the true Reason for which this
practical Proposition, and all others which may be drawn from thence, do oblige
all rational Creatures to know, and understand it; whilst other Propositions
(suppose Geometrical ones) though found out by right Reason, and so are Truths
proceeding from God himself, yet do not oblige men to any Act, or Practice
pursuant to them; but may be safely neglected by most Men, to whom the Science
of Geometry may not be necessary; whereas the Effects of the endeavor of the
common Good, do intimately concern the Happiness of all mankind, (upon whose
joint or concurrent Wills, and Endeavors, every single man's Happiness does
after some sort depend) so that this Endeavor, can by no means be neglected
without endangering the losing all those hopes of Happiness, which God has
made known to us, from our own Nature and the Nature of things; and so has
sufficiently declared the Connection of Rewards and Punishments, with all our
Moral Actions, from whose Authority, as well this general Proposition, as all
others, which are contained in it, must be understood to become Laws.

So that from the terms of this Proposition, it is apparent, that the adequate,
and immediate effect of our thus acting, and concerning which this Law is
established; is whatever is grateful to God, and beneficial to Men, that is,
the natural Good of all the parts of the whole System of rational Beings; Nay
further, is the greatest of all Goods, which we can imagine, or perform for
them; since it is greater than the like good of any particular part, or Member
of the same System. And farther, it is thereby sufficiently declared, that the
Felicity of particular Persons, is derived from this happy State of the whole
System; as the Nutrition of any one Member of an Animal is produced by a due
Distribution of the whole Mass of Blood diffused through all the parts of the
Body. From whence it appears, that this Effect must needs be the best, since it
shows us, that not the private Felicity of any single Man is the principal end
of God the Legislator, or ought to be so of any one, who will truly obey his
Will; and by a Parity of reason it also appears, that those humane Actions,
which from their own natural force, and Efficacy are apt to promote the common
Good, are certainly better, than those which do only serve the private Good of
any one Man, and that by the same proportion, as a common Good is greater than
a private: So likewise those Actions, which take the nearest way to attain this
effect as an End, are called Right, because of their natural Similitude with a
right or straight line, which is always the shortest between the two Terms. But
the same Actions, when compared with a Natural, or positive Law, as a rule of
Life, or Manners, and are found conformable to it, are called morally good, and
also right; that is, agreeable to the Rule, but the Rule it self is called
right, or straight, as it shows the nearest way to the End. But I shall referr
you for the clearer Explication of these things, to what we have farther said
concerning them in the Discourse its self, especially in the Second part,
wherein we prove against Mr. H's Principle, that there is a true Natural, and
Moral Good antecedent to Civil Laws.

But however, it may not be amiss to give you in short the method which we take
to prove, that this Law of endeavoring the common Good, is really and indeed,
and not Metaphorically a Law. 1. This general Supposition being premised, That
all particular Persons who can either promote or oppose this common Good are
parts of that whole Body of mankind, which is either preserved, or prejudiced
by their endeavors. We shall not now descend to the particular Proofs as they
are drawn from the Causes of such Actions of which we have partly treated in
the Chapter of humane Nature, and partly from their natural Effects and
Consequences, of which we have largely discoursed, in the Chapter of the
Obligation of the Law of Nature; as also in the Second part in our Observation
on Mr. H's Principles; all which may nevertheless be reduced to these plain
Propositions. 1. As I have observed it is manifest, that our Felicity, or
highest Reward is essentially connected by God the Legislator, with the most
full, and constant exercise of our natural Powers employed about the noblest
Objects, and greatest Effects they can be capable of as proportioned to them;
from whence it may be gathered, that all men endued with these Faculties are
naturally obliged under the penalty of losing, or missing of this their
Happiness, to exercise those Powers about the worthiest Objects, (viz.) God,
and Mankind. Nor can it be long doubted, whether our Faculties may be more
happily exercised in maintaining Friendship, or Enmity with them; for I, think
it is certain, there can be no Neutral State in which God and Men, can neither
be beloved, nor hated; or in which we can stand so far Neuters, as neither to
do things grateful, nor ungrateful to them. But if it be granted, that there
is a manifest Necessity (if we will be truly happy) of preserving Amity both
with God and Men, here is thereby presently declared the Sanction of this
general Law of Nature, which we are now enquiring into, for this alone
establishes all Natural Religion, and also all those things, which are
necessary to the Happiness and preservation of Mankind, which are, besides
Piety toward God, 1. A peaceable Commerce and Agreement of diverse Nations,
which are treated of by the Law of Nations, which is but a Branch or
subordinate Member of this great Law of Nature. 2. The Constitution, and
Conservation of a Civil Society, or Commonwealth, which is the Scope of all
Civil Laws. And, 3. The Continuance of Domestic Relations, and private
Friendships, concerning which the general Rules of Ethics, as also the more
particular ones of Oeconomies do prescribe. And therefore, we have put together
many things in the Chapter of humane Nature, by which all particular Persons of
sound Minds are some way rendered capable of so large a Society, and are either
more nearly, or remotely disposed to it. And we do here entreat the Reader,
that he will not consider those things, each of them singly, or apart, but all
together; since from all of them conjoined, he may raise a sufficient Argument
to prove the Existence, and evince the Sanction of this most general Law of
Nature, and that Men will necessarily fail of their Happiness, which chiefly
consists in the Adequate, or proper Exercise of their rational Faculties,
unless they will exercise them in cultivating this Amity, or Love both with
God, and Men; to which Ends they are before all other Animals particularly
adapted.

But from the Effects of such Actions conducing to the Common good of Rational
Beings, we have also further shown in the Chapter of the Obligation of the Laws
of Nature, that this Sanction by sufficient Rewards, and Punishments, is most
commonly connected with such Actions. And it is manifest, that in the first
place God, as the best and wisest of Rational Beings is to be loved, and
honored by such Actions or Endeavors, as that the Goods, and Fortunes of all
innocent Persons of what Nation soever, are thereby secured as far as lies in
our Power, and all things profitable for particular Persons, procured according
to the Proportion they bear to the good of the whole Body of Mankind; so that
this Law will not permit any thing to be done, which the Care of the whole does
not allow: Nor can any thing be supposed more worthy a rational Creature, and
from whence greater Effects can proceed, than a Will always propeuse toward
the good of this whole Body governed by the Conduct of a Right Understanding.

Therefore, since it can certainly be foreknown, that such Effects will follow
from this Endeavor, no Man can be ignorant that all the Ioys, and present
Comforts of true Piety, are therein contained, together with the hopes of a
blessed Immortality, besides those many Conveniences of Peace, and commerce
with those of other Nations, and all those Emoluments both of Civil, and
Domestic Government, and private Friendships which are connected with this
Endeavor, as the common Rewards thereof, and which cannot by any Means within
our Power be otherwise obtained. So that, he who neglects the Care of the
Common good, does also reject the true Causes of his own Felicity, and embraces
those of his Misery, as a Punishment due to his Folly. In short, since it is
manifest from the Nature of things, that the highest Happiness which we can
procure for our selves, proceeds from our Care both of Piety to God, and Love
and Peace with Men. And that the Endeavor of these can only be found in his
Soul, who truly studieth the common Good of all Rational Beings, it is also
evident, that the greatest Rewards, that any one can acquire, are necessarily
connected with this Endeavor, and that the Loss, or Deprivation of this
Felicity, does necessarily adhere as a Punishment to the opposite Actions. The
former of these, which declares the true Causes of all that Felicity, which
particular Persons can thereby obtain, we have proved from Natural Effects
found by Experience. The latter, (viz.) that Piety to God, and Charity or
Benevolence toward all Men, are contained in the Endeavor of the common Good;
and we have also proved in the fourth Chapter, that all Virtues, both private
and public, are contained in this Endeavor.

But because the Connection of Rewards and Punishments, which follow those Acts
which are for the common Good, or opposite to it, is something obscured by
those Evils which often befall good Men, and those good Things which too
frequently happen to Evil ones, it is enough to our Purpose to show, that
notwithstanding all these the Connection between them is so sufficiently
constant, and manifest in the Nature of things, that from thence may be
certainly gathered the Sanction of the Law of Nature, commanding the former,
and prohibiting the latter Actions. And we may suppose those Punishments to
suffice for its Sanction, which, (all things rightly weighed) much exceed the
Gain that may arise from any Act done contrary to this Law. But in comparing of
the Effects which do follow good Actions on one hand, and Evil ones on the
other those good, or evil Things ought not to be reckoned in to the Account,
which either cannot be acquired, or avoided by any humane Prudence, or
Industry; such as are those which proceeding from the Natural Necessity of
External Causes, may happen to any one by mere Chance, which are wont to fall
out alike, both to good and bad. Therefore we shall only take those into our
Account, which may be foreseen and prevented by humane Foresight, as some way
depending upon our own Wills or Acts.

But I must also acknowledge, that these Effects do not all depend upon our own
particular Powers, but many of them do also proceed from the good Will and
Endeavors of other Rationals; yet since it may be known from their Natures, as
they are, is agreeable to our own, that the common Good is the best, and
greatest End which they can propose to themselves, and that their Natural
Reason requires that they should act for an End, and rather for this than any
other less good, or less perfect: And that it is moreover known by Experience,
that such Effects of Universal Benevolence, may be for the most part obtained
from others, by our own benevolent Actions; it is just that those Effects
should be numbered or esteemed among those Consequences, which do for the most
part so fall out, because every Man is esteemed able to do whatever he can
perform, or obtain by the Assistance of others. So that the whole Reward which
is connected to good Actions, by the natural Constitution of Things, is
somewhat like those Tributes of which the public Revenues consist, which do
not only arise out of constant Rents, but also out of diverse contingent
Payments, such as Custom, or Excise upon Commodities, whose value, although it
be very great, yet is not always certain, though they are often farmed out, at
a certain Rate. Therefore in the reckoning up of these Rewards, not only those
parts thereof ought to come into Account, which immutably adhere to good
Actions, such as are that Happiness, which consists in the Knowledge and Love
of God, and good Men, the absolute Government of our Passions, the sweet
Harmony, and Agreement betwixt the true Principles of our Actions, and all the
parts of our Lives, the Favor of the Deity, and the Hopes of a blessed
Immortality proceeding from all these: But there ought also to be taken into
the Account, all those Goods, which do, (though contingently) adhere to them,
and which may either happen to us from the good Will of others, or flow from
that Concord, and Society, which is either maintained between diverse Nations,
or those of the same Commonwealth; and which we do as far as we are able,
procure for our selves by such benevolent Actions. And by the like Reason, we
may also understand of what particulars all that Misery, or those Punishments
may consist, which is connected with those Acts, that are hurtful to the
common Good.

So that all of us may learn from the Necessity of the Condition in which we
are born, and live, to esteem contingent Goods; and to be drawn to act by the
Hopes of them; for the Air it self, which is so necessary for our subsistence,
and Preservation does not always benefit our Blood, or Spirits, but is
sometimes infected with deadly Steams, and Vapors: Nor can our Meat, Drink or
Exercise always preserve our Lives, but do often generate Diseases. And
Agriculture it self does not always pay the Husband-man's Toil with the
expected Gain, but sometimes he even loses by it. And sure we are not less
naturally drawn to the Endeavor of the common Good, than we are to such
natural Actions from the Hope of a Good, that may but probably proceed from
them. But how justly we may hope for a considerable Return from all others,
jointly considered, for all our Labors bestowed upon the common Good; we shall
be able to make the best Account of, when we consider what our own Experience,
and the History of all Nations for the time past, may teach us to have befallen
those who have either regarded, or despised this great End.

But because the whole Endeavor of this common Good, contains no more but the
Worship of the Deity, the Care of Fidelity, Peace, and Commerce betwixt
Nations, and the instituting, and maintaining Government both Civil and
Domestic, as also particular Friendships, as the parts thereof taken together,
it is manifest, that the Endeavor thereof expressed by a mutual Love and
Assistance must in some Degree be found among all Nations, as necessary to
their own Happiness and Preservation: Nay, it seems farther manifest to me,
that those who attain but to the Age of Manhood do owe all those past Years,
much more to the Endeavor of others bestowed upon the common Good, than to
their own Care, which in their tender Age was almost none at all. For we then
do altogether depend upon, and owe our Preservation to that Obedience, which
others yield as well to Oeconomical Precepts, as to all Laws both Civil and
Religious, which do wholly proceed from this Care of the common Good. Whereas
it is certain, that if afterward we expose our Lives to danger, Yea, if we
lose them for the public Good, we should lose far less for its sake, than we
did before receive from it; for we do then only lose the uncertain Hopes of
future Enjoyments, whereas it is certain that scarce so much as the Hope of
them can remain to particular Persons where the common Good is destroyed, for
we have thence received the real Possession of all those Contentments of Life,
with which we are blessed: And therefore we are bound in Gratitude, as well as by
Interest, to return those again whenever they are lawfully required of us;
though I grant (for the Honor of the Gospel) that the firmest Encouragements,
and greatest Reward we Men can have for exposing, nay, losing our Lives for the
Benefit, or Service of the Commonwealth, is that Happiness we may justly expect
in another Life after this.

These things seem evident to us, as resembling that Method whereby we are
naturally taught, that the Health, and Strength of our whole Body is preserved
by the good Estate of its particular Members, in its receiving Food, and
Breath: Although sometimes Diseases may breed within the Body, or diverse
outward Accidents (as Wounds, Bruises, and the like) do happen to it from
without, which may hinder the particular Members from receiving that
Nourishment, which is necessary for them: And we are taught after the same
Manner by the Acts, immediately promoting the common good, that the Happiness
of particular Men, (which are the Members of this natural System) may no less
certainly be expected, nor are less naturally derived from thence, than the
Strength of our Hands does proceed from the due State of the whole Mass of
Blood, and nervous Juice: Though we confess that many things may happen, which
may cause this general Care of the whole Body of Mankind, not always to meet
with the good Effect we desire; so that particular Persons may certainly,
infallibly enjoy all the Felicity they can hope for, or expect: Yet this is no
Argument against it, any more than that the taking in of Air, and Aliments,
(however necessary for the whole Body) should prevent all those Accidents, and
Distempers it is subject to, since it may happen as well by the violent, and
unjust Actions of our fellow Subjects, (like the diseased Constitution of some
inward part) or by the Invasion of a foreign Enemy (like a Blow, or other
outward Violence) that good Men may be deprived in this Life of some Rewards of
their good Deeds, and may also suffer diverse outward Evils; Yet since these are
more often repelled by the Force of Concord, and Civil Government, or are often
shook off after some short Disturbances, either by our own private Power, or
else by that of the Civil Sword, as Diseases are thrown off by a healthful
Crisis, or Effort of Nature. So that notwithstanding all these Evils, Men are
more often recompensed with greater Goods, partly from the Assistance of
others, but chiefly from that of Civil Government, or else of Leagues made with
Neighboring States: From whence it is that Mankind has never been yet
destroyed; notwithstanding all the Tyranny and Wars, that Men's unreasonable
Passions have exercised, and raised in the World, and that Civil Governments,
or Empires, have been more lasting than the most long lived Animals. From all
which it is apparent, that the deprived Appetites of diverse Men, or those
Passions which do often produce Motions so opposite to the common Good, ought
no more to hinder us from acknowledging the Natural Propensions of all the rest
of Mankind (considered together) to be more powerfully carried toward that
which we every Day see may be procured thereby, (viz.) The Conservation and
farther Perfection of the whole Body of Mankind, than that diverse Diseases
breeding in the parts of Animals, or any outward Violence should hinder us from
acknowledging, that the Frame of their Bodies, and the Natural Function of
their parts are fitted, and intended by God, for the Conservation of Life, and
the Propagation of their Species.

But that we may carry on this Similitude, (between a living Body and its
particular Members, with the whole Body of Mankind, and all the Individuals
contained under it,) a little farther, I will here give you Monsieur Pascal's
Excellent Notion concerning this common Good, as it is published in those
Fragments, Vide Chap. des Pensees Morales.
Entitled, Les Pensees de Monsieur Pascal, since it both explains and confirms
our Method. He there supposes, That God having made the Heavens, and the Earth,
and diverse other Creatures, not at all sensible of their common Happiness,
would also make some rational Beings which might know him, and might make up
one Body consisting of rational Members; and that all Men are Members of this
Body, so that it is necessary to their happiness, that all particular Men, as
Members of this Body, conform their particular Wills to the Universal Will of
God, that governs the whole Body, as the Head or Soul thereof. And though it
often happens, that one Man falsely supposes himself an independent Being, and
so will make himself the only Center of all his Actions; yet he will at last
find himself whilst in this State, (separated from the Body of rational Beings,
and who not having any true Principle of Life, or Motion, does nothing but
wander about) distracted in the uncertainty of his own Being; but if ever he
comes to a true knowledge of himself, he will find, that he is not that whole
Body, but only a small Member of it, and has no proper Life, and Motion, but
as he is a part thereof: So that to regulate our Self-love, every Man ought to
imagine himself, but one small part of this Body of Mankind, composed of so
many intelligent Members, and to know what Proportion of Love every Man owes
himself, let him consider what Degree of Love the Body bears to any one small
single part, and so much Love, that part (if it had sense) ought to bestow upon
it self, and no more: All Self-love that exceeds this is unjust. So far this
sagacious contemplative Gentleman thought long since, though I confess he does
not proceed to show in what manner the Good of every individual Person depends
upon the Happiness of the whole Body of Mankind, as our Author has here done;
though no doubt, he was excellently well fitted to do it, if he had lived to
reduce those excellent Thoughts, into a set Discourse.

We have delivered in this Epitome the Sum of that Method, by which we have
enquired into the Sanction of the Laws of Nature, in which we have considered
all the Felicity naturally flowing from good Actions, as a Reward annexed to
them by God the Author of Nature, and their Loss, or contrary Evils that follow
them, as a Punishment naturally flowing from their Transgression: And indeed,
our Method seems very much confirmed from the common Consent of Mankind, since
all Men, of however different Opinions concerning moral Principles, do yet
agree in this, that good Actions ought still to be encouraged by Rewards, and
evil ones to be restrained by Punishments; in this all Sects of Philosophers,
however quarrelling among themselves, do agree; As also the Founders of all
Religions, and the Makers of all Civil Laws, have made this their main
Foundation; Nay, those, who would seem most to neglect all Rewards, and would
deduce all Virtues from Gratitude alone, yet find it necessary to acknowledge
this Gratitude to proceed from the Memory of Benefits received: But sure it
still argues as much Love toward ourselves, when we are persuaded to do our
Duty by a Consideration of Benefits already received, as when we do it for the
same things to be received hereafter; yea, he seems to act more generously, who
is moved to act for a good only in expectation, than he who does as much for
the like good things, which he already enjoys.

But this Method which we have here taken to reduce all the Laws of Nature to
this single Proposition of endeavoring the common Good, seems the more
convenient, because its proof is more easy, and expedite than that of so many
Rules, which are wont to be proposed by Philosophers, and the Memory will be
less burdened by the daily Remembrance of this one Proposition, than of many;
especially when we are directed to it from the Nature of this common Good, as a
Measure whereby the Judgment of any considering Man, may put Bounds to his own
Actions, and Passions, in the doing of which all Moral Virtue consists. And
this Work Aristotle has recommended to the Judgment of every rational Man in
his Definition of Virtue, though he has not indeed shown us the Rule of making
this Judgment; whereas our Proposition teaches us, that the Rule is to be
taken from the Nature of the best, and greatest End; that is, Respect being had
to all the parts of the whole System of rational Beings, or of that
Commonwealth of which God is the Head, and all the Members are his Subjects.

And from this Principle is also to be derived that Order, or Preference among
all the particular Laws of Nature, according to which, the former does still
retain, or limit the latter, which Dr. Sharrock has prudently, and solidly
observed in his Book De Officiis, Chap. 10. As for Example, that there is a
Prior Reason for abstaining from invading that which is another, than of
observing Promises; and likewise there is a greater Account to be made of Faith
once given, than of returning Benefits, etc. But the true Ground of all these
Rules is only to be found in our Principle, because it more conduces to the
common Good, that a Prior Law of Nature concerning making, and preserving
Properties should not be violated by the Invasion of another's Right, than that
any one should observe a Compact, or Promise, when it cannot be done without
such an Invasion; and there is the like Reason in observing those other Laws,
which we have reckoned up in the following Discourse, according to their due
Order and Dignity: so that indeed no Man ought to wonder, that we have so
positively asserted, that no Virtue can be explained without a Respect to the
State of all rational Beings, or of the whole intellectual World; for we see in
Natural Philosophy, that the Accidents of Bodies daily obvious to our Senses,
such as are the communication of Motion, Gravitation, and the Action of Light
and Heat, Firmness and Fluidity, Rarefaction and Condensation, can never be
explained, without a Respect to the whole System of the corporeal World, and
the Motion therein to be preserved: Lastly, from this order among the Laws of
Nature, whereby all the special ones are still made subordinate to this general
one of the common Good, and the lowest of them to the highest, it may easily be
shown that God never dispenses with them, unless in those Cases, in which the
Obligation of a lower, or less Law, may seem to be taken away, and the nature
of the Action so changed, as that there may be only place left for the
Observation of the higher.

To conclude, we have here likewise shown, that the Generation of all
Commonwealths is to be deduced from these two Principles, tending to this great
End of the common Good of Rationals, viz. first; from that which Commands the
Constitution of a distinct Property in things, and in the labors, or
endeavors of Persons, whereby no such Property is yet instituted, and where it
is found to be so, to preserve it inviolate, as the chief and necessary Medium
to this common Good. 2. From that Law which Commands a peculiar Love, or
Benevolence of Parents toward their Children; for this could never have
exerted it self, unless our first Parents had permitted their Children when
grown up, to enjoy a part of those necessaries of Life, which were needful for
their future Subsistence, and so from many such Fathers of Families joining
together by mutual Compacts for common Defense, might arise the first
Governments in the World, of whatsoever kind you please to suppose.

But in the following Discourse, we have thought it best to confine our selves
within the bounds of Philosophy, and have wholly abstained from Theological
Questions: And therefore we have not said any thing concerning Good, or Evil
Spirits, or Angels, or taken in their Good or Happiness, into our Hypothesis;
for though I doubt not of the Existence of such intelligent Beings, yet it is
certain, all we can understand of them proceeds wholly from Divine Revelation,
or humane Tradition, neither of which are true means of obtaining
Philosophical, or natural Knowledge.

As for the Second part of this Treatise, in which is contained the
Confutations of some of Mr. H's Principles, or Arguments; since the First part
is entire without it, and that the truth is a sufficient Proof to its self, I
leave it to the discretion of the Reader, whether he will trouble himself to
peruse it, or not, since all Men's tempers, do not alike suit, with the study
of Controversies; but it was necessary not only to lay a Foundation of better
moral Principles, but also to show the Falsehood, and Vanity of those he has
laid down; since otherwise it might have been thought by some* that they were
altogether unanswerable: Yet I hope we have performed that unpleasant Task,
without reflecting upon the Memory of the dead, and disturbing the Ashes of a
Person, who whilst he lived, was (as must be acknowledged) even by his Enemies,
considerably famous, both for Wit and Learning.

I have little more to add, but that I doubt not, but our learned Author (whose
work I have now abridged) has hit upon that true method of proving the Law of
Nature, which the Lord Bacon in his Advancement of Learning, Book 8. chap. 3.
tells the Reader that he desired to see well performed, and that his Design
was to make enquiry into the true Fountains of Justice; and public Vtility,
and so in every part of the Law, to represent a kind of real Character, or Idea
of that which is truly just; by which general Mark, he that will bend his study
that way, and examine the Grounds, or endeavor the Amendment of the Laws of
particular Kingdoms, or States, may be truly guided in this noble Undertaking;
And he there proceeds to give some general Aphorisms, which he calls the Idea's
of Universal Justice, and his Fifth Aphorism is very home to our purpose, for
he there tells us, that the main End to which all Laws should tend, and
whereunto they should direct their Decrees, and Sanctions, is only the common
Good, or Felicity of the People: And sure this could have no Foundation, but as
the Felicity of any particular People, or Nation is contained in general, or
the common Good, and Happiness of rational Beings.

And though I grant that our Faculties are not fitted to pierce into the internal
Fabric, and real Essences of Bodies as the abovementioned Author of the Essay
of humane Understanding, has very well observed: Yet in the same place he also
grants, That the Knowledge we have of them, is sufficient to discover to us the
Being of a God, and of a Divine Providence, and that the Knowledge of our
selves, and the Nature of other things are sufficient to lead us into a full,
and clear Discovery of our Duty toward him, as being the great Concernment of
our Lives, and that it becomes us as rational Creatures to employ our Faculties
about what they are most adapted to, and follow the direction of Nature, where
it seems to point us out the way. So that it is highly reasonable to conclude,
that our proper Employment lies in moral, rather than natural Truths: And
therefore the same Author has in his Fourth Book, and Third Chapter, page 274.
this Passage: The Idea of a supreme Being, infinite in Power; and Wisdom, whose
Workmanship we are, and on whom we depend, and the Idea of our selves as
understanding, rational Creatures, being such as are clear to us, these would,
I suppose, if duly considered, and pursued, afford such Foundations of our
Duty, and rules of Action, as might place Morality amongst the Sciences capable
of Demonstration; wherein I doubt not, but from Principles as incontestable as
those of the Mathematics, by necessary Consequences, the measures of Right and
Wrong might be made out to any one that will apply himself with the same
indifferency and attention to the one, as he does to the other of these
Sciences: And in the Twelfth Chapter of the same Book, he says, p. 325. This
gave me the Confidence to advance that Conjecture, which I suggested Chap. 3.
viz. That Morality is capable of Demonstration as well as Mathematics; For the
Idea's that Ethics are conversant about, being all real Essences; and such as
I imagine have a discoverable Connection, and Agreement one with another: So far
as we can find their Habitudes, and Relations, so far we shall be possessed of
certain, real, and general Truths; And I doubt not, but if a right method were
taken, a great part of Morality might be made out with that clearness that
could leave to a considering Man, no more reason to doubt, than he could have
to doubt of the Truth of any Propositions in Mathematics which have been
demonstrated to him.

And I am confident our Author has found out this only right method; and made
use of the fittest Demonstrations for the Proof of this Principle of the common
Good of rational Beings, as the Sum of all natural Laws; so that I hope you
will have no cause to doubt, but that he has as fully demonstrated it to be
so, as if he had given us so many Mathematical Demonstrations of it.

But since as in the Mathematics, there are required certain Principles, or
Postulatums, which must be taken for granted, before its professors are able to
demonstrate any thing from them; so we shall reduce all we have to say on this
Subject, into Six plain Postulata; the Three first of which having been already
made out by others both in Latin and English; I shall wave the Proof of them,
and shall confine my self wholly to the Three last: The Propositions are these,

1. That there is one Infinite, most powerful, intelligent Being, which we call
God, who is the Author, and Creator of the Universe, or World.

2. That God as he has created, so he likewise governs, and preserves this
World, consisting of Bodies and Spirits, by certain corporeal Motions, and
Dictates of Reason, by which Spirits act as the chief Instruments of his
Providence.

3. That God, thereby maintains, and preserves all his Creatures, and farther
designs the Happiness, and Preservation of such of them as are sensible, as far
as their frail, and mortal Natures will admit, and that Power which God has
given to mankind over them.

4. That of all Animate, or sensible Creatures, God has made Man alone to be
conscious of his own Existence; and also that it is more particularly his Duty,
to act as his subservient Instrument; not only for his own private Good, and
Happiness, but also for the common Good of all rational Beings.

5. That this knowledge of God's Will, as our Duty, is plainly discovered to
us, from the Being and Nature of God, as also of our selves, and of those
things without us, which he has made necessary for our use, and Preservation.

6. That these Dictates, or Conclusions of right reason, all tending to one
great End, viz. the common Good of rational Beings (in which our own is
contained) being given us by God as a Legislator for the well governing, or
right ordering of our Actions to this End, constitute the Law of Nature; as
being established by sufficient Rewards and Punishments, both in this Life, and
in that to come.

TO THE BOOKSELLER.
THE Learned Author of this Treatise sent it to me (then being in a Private
Station) above a year ago, but then concealed his Name from me, either through
his great Modesty, or because in his Prudence he thought that if I knew him, I
might be biassed in my judgment, by the Honor which I am obliged to have to
his Family, and especially to his Grandfather by his Mother's side, the most
Learned Primate of Ireland. Wherefore I read the Book without any respect to
the unknown Writer, and considered only the Merits of the Performance. Thus I
found that he had not only well translated and epitomized in some places what I
had written in Latin, but had fully, digested the chief things of my Design in
a well chosen Method of his own, with great Perspicuity, and had added some
Illustrations of his own, or from other Learned Authors, with a Philosophical
Liberty, which I must needs allow. For this Reason I judged that the then
unknown Author had give too low a Title to his Book; and that I was to esteem
him a good Hyperaspistes, or able Second, in this Combat for Truth and Justice,
rather than a Translater or Epitomizer of what I had written. This obliged me
to enquire diligently after the Author's Name and Quality, and then I soon
obtained the Favor and Honor of a more intimate Conversation with him. Hereby
I soon found that I might safely leave the Maintenance of that good Cause in
which I was engaged, to his great Abilities and Diligence. And I hope that
since this Learned Gentleman has conquered the Difficulties of the Search into
the Rise of the Laws of Nature, now many of our younger Gentry will be
encouraged to follow him in the way which this his Treatise makes plain before
them. For from thence they may receive assistance, not only to discern the
Reasonableness of all Virtue and Morality, which is their Duty and Ornament as
they are Men, but also they may here see the true Foundations of Civil
Government and Property, which they are most obliged to understand, because, as
Gentlemen, they are born to the greatest Interest in them both. I need add no
more to give you Assurance that I freely consent to your Printing of this Book,
and am,

Your affectionate Friend, Ric. Peterborough.

The Contents of the First Chapter.
A Brief Repetition of the Preface; That the Law of Nature can only be learnt
from the Knowledge of a God, and from the Nature of Things, and of Mankind in
general, 1.

A state of the Question between us and the Epicureans and Scepticks, 2.

The method proposed, in what manner we are to enquire into the Nature of
things, and of mankind, in order to prove certain general Propositions, that
shall carry with them the Obligation of Natural Laws, 3.

The Soul supposed to be rafa Tabula, without any innate Idea's. Our method
proposed of considering God as the Cause of the World, and all Things and
humane Actions, as subordinate causes and effects, either hindering, or
promoting our common Happiness and Preservation, 4.

All the Laws of Nature deduceable from hence, as so many practical
Propositions, and all our observations or knowledge of it reduceable to one
Proposition, of the highest Benevolence of rational Beings toward each other;
as the sum of all the Laws of Nature; and what is meant by this Benevolence, 5.

What things are necessary to be known or supposed, in order to the knowledge
of this universal Benevolence, 6.

The Connection of the Terms of this Proposition proved, and what is to be
collected from thence; The true happiness of single Persons inseparable from
that of Mankind; The general Causes of its Happiness to be considered in the
first place, 7.

Therefore no Man's particular Happiness can be opposed, or preferred before
the Happiness of all other rational Beings; The contrary practice unreasonable
and unjust, 8.

Yet that this Proposition cannot be of sufficient efficacy, till we have
proposed the Common Good of Rationals for the great End of all our Actions, 9.

The Effects of this Proposition not prejudiced by the ill use of Men's
Free-wills, 10, 11.

By what steps and degrees the Knowledge of this Common Good comes to be
conveyed into our minds from the nature of things, 12.

First Natural Observation that in our free use and enjoyment of all the
outward Necessaries of Life, and in our mutual administering them to each other,
consists all men's happiness and preservation, from whence also proceeds a
Notion of the Common Good of Rationals, 13.

That Men are able to contribute more to the good and happiness of those of
their own kind, than any other Creatures, 14.

Nothing a surer help and defense to Mankind, than the most sincere and
diffusive Benevolence, 15.

Nor any thing more destructive to it, than their constant Malice and Ill Will,
16.

That these Principles are as certain as any in Arithmetic and Geometry,
notwithstanding the supposition of Men's free will, 17.

Yet that they are only Laws as proceeding from God the first Cause, and as
established with fit Rewards and Punishments, 18.

That from these natural and general Observations we attain to a true knowledge
of the Causes of all Men's happiness, and that by the Laws of Matter and Motion
these Causes act as certainly as any other, 19,20.

Hence arises a true notion of things naturally and unalterably good or evil,
21.

That Men's natural Powers, and the things necessary for life, can neither be
exerted nor made use of contrary to the known rules of Matter and Motion, 22.

Some Conclusions deduceable from hence, as that we chiefly concern our selves
about those things and actions that are in our Powers, 23.

No man self-sufficient to procure all things necessary for his own
preservation and happiness, and therefore needs the good will and assistance of
others, 24.

None of these necessaries for Life can produce the Ends designed, but as they
are appropriated to Man's particular uses and necessities for the time they
make use of them, 25.

From whence arises the Right of Occupancy or Possession, which may be
exercised even during a natural Community of most things, 26.

That as this natural Division and Propriety in things is necessary to the
preservation of particular Persons, so it is also of Mankind considered as an
aggregate Body, 27.

That these Principles destroy Mr. H's Hypothesis of the Right of all Men to
all things in the state of nature, 28.

The necessity of a farther Division and Appropriation of things now Mankind is
multiplied on the Earth, 29.

No Man has a Right to any thing any farther than as it conduces or at least
consists with the common good of rational Beings, 30.

The knowledge of these natural Causes and Effects alike certain in a natural
as civil State, with a brief Recapitulation of the Grounds and Arguments
insisted on in this Chapter, 31.

The Contents of the Second Chapter.
MAN to be considered as a natural Body, as an Animal, and also as a rational
Creature. Some Observations from the first of these Considerations, as that
humane Bodies and Actions are subject to the same Laws of Matter and Motion
with other things, 1, 2.

No Actions or Motions more conducive to Man's happiness, than what proceed
from the most diffusive Benevolence, 3.

Mankind considered as a System of natural Bodies, does not make any
considerable difference between them, when considered as voluntary Agents
endued with sense, but that they rather act more powerfully thereby, 4.

Men's greatest security from Evils, and hopes of obtaining Good, depends upon
the good will and voluntary Assistance of others, 5.

Several natural Conclusions drawn from these Observations, 6.

The like being found true in animate as well as inanimate Bodies, will make us
more sollicitous toward the general good of those of our own kind, 7.

That loving or benevolent Actions toward each other constitute the happiest
state we can enjoy; and also it is ordained by a concourse of Causes, that all
rational Beings should be sensible of these Indications, 8.

This proved from several natural Observations, as,

1. That the bulk of the Bodies of Animals being but narrow, the things
necessary for their preservation can be but few, and most of them communicable
to many at once, and so requires a limited self-love consistent with the safety
and happiness of others, 9.

2. That Creatures of the same kind cannot but be moved to the like affections
toward others, as toward themselves, from the sense of the similitude of
their natures, 10.

Animals do never deviate from this natural state, but when they are seized
with some preternatural Disease or Passion, which as often as it happens are
absolutely destructive to their natures, 11.

All Creatures express a delight in the society of others of the same kind;
some cases or intervals wherein Nature seems to act otherwise, no contradiction
to this general Rule, 12.

All Animals impelled by the natural Constitution of their parts to a Love of
those of a different Sex, and to a natural Affection to their Offspring, 13.

All Animals take delight in the sweeter Passions of Love, Joy, Desire, etc. as
helpful to their natural Constitution; whereas the contrary Passions, when
inordinate, are highly destructive to it, 14.

Mr. H. cannot deny these natural Propensions, and therefore is forced to
suppose somewhat in Man's nature that renders him more unsociable than Brutes,
15.

Other peculiar Observations relating to Man, whereby he is made more capable
of promoting the common good; as first, from the greater quantity of Brains in
Men, than in Brutes, 16.

2. From the natural Constitution of their Blood, and Spermatick Vessels, from
whence arises a Necessity of Marriage, and of a more constant and lasting Love
to their Offspring, 17.

3. From the wonderful structure of Men's hands it is proved, that this
Instrument was given us, for some more noble use than bare self-preservation,
18.

Lastly, From the upright posture of Men's bodies, and way of motion, 19.

The next Set of Observations tending to prove Men more fitted for the
promoting of this common good, is taken from the natural and peculiar faculties
of Men's Souls above those of Brutes: And, 1. from that of deducing effects
from their Causes; and vice versa; especially in that of distinguishing of real
or natural, from apparent Goods, 20.

What is understood by us, by a natural or moral Good or Evil. Certain Axioms
for the plainer understanding their Nature and Degrees, 21.

How we arrive to an Idea of a species or kind of Creatures, and also to a
notion of the general or common good of Mankind, 22.

Speech and the Invention of Letters peculiar faculties of Man's nature, 23.

And the great Benefits arising from thence in order to the common good, 24.

Men do infinitely exceed Beasts in their discursive Faculties, as also in the
knowledge and use of Numbers, 25.

As also in the Power of Understanding the different Quantities and Proportions
between Bodies, which we call Geometry, 26.

The two great remaining Prerogatives of humane Souls, Freedom of Will as to
moral Actions, and the Knowledge of a God, 27, 28.

What knowledge we can have of his Attributes* which can never be truly
understood, but with respect to their great End, the Prosecution of the common
good of the Universe, 29.

The Contents of the Third Chapter.
A Brief recapitulation of the former Chapters, and a summing up all those
Observations into a general Proposition of God's Willing and Commanding the
Common Good of rational Beings, as the main End of all our Actions, 1.

A brief Explanation of the Terms of our Description of the Law of Nature, and
that words are not always essential to Laws, 2.

That all moral Truths or Duties as declared by God, are contained in this one
Proposition of Endeavoring the common good; certain Principles laid down for
the proving it, 3, 4, 5, 6.

That this being once discovered to us, we lie under a sufficient Obligation to
observe this Proposition, as a natural Law, with the Explanation of the Term
Obligation, and who has Authority to oblige us, 7, 8, 9.

Yet that this Obligation may well consist with the freedom of our wills; the
difference between a mere animal, and a rational or natural Good, the neglect
of which distinction is the Cause of Epicurus and Mr. H's Errors, 10.

The last part of the Obligation to this Law, viz. its Sanction by Rewards and
Punishments; certain Axioms necessary to be known in order to the right
understanding the true nature of a moral Good or Evil; and of Man's true
happiness and perfection, with its difference from that of other Beings, 11.

That though all moral Obligation does not consist in Rewards or Punishments;
Yet that by reason of the weakness of humane Nature, it is insignificant
without them; with a Scale of Nature, showing the difference between Vegetables
and inanimate Bodies, and between Men and Brutes, 12.

The strictest Sanction, and consequently Obligation to all Laws consists in
Rewards and Punishments duly distributed; God's right of Dominion not to be
resolved into his irresistible Power, 13.

The internal Rewards ordained by God in Nature, are, first, the inward
satisfaction of the Soul, and also the pleasure all men take in the exercise of
the sweeter passions of Love, etc. 14, 15.

The external Rewards are all the like returns of this Benevolence from others,
with the praise or commendation of all good men, together with the peace and
protection of the civil Government, 16, 17.

Lastly, from God, Soundness of mind and body, with all those outward blessings
he usually bestows on the peaceable and virtuous; with a Solution to the
difficulty, why God often afflicts Good men, 18.

The internal Punishments ordained by God for the transgression of this Law,
are, the absence or privation of the former good things, which is, an Evil and
a Punishment, 19.

Error, and being governed by the Passions, a real Evil, and an internal
Punishment, 20.

3. That such evil Actions cannot but be often displeasing to the Person that
does them, 21.

4. That Vices and Crimes seldom come alone, but let in a train of others of
the same kind, or worse, along with them, 22.

5. That such an Offender cannot get out of this state when he will, at least
not without the trouble of Repentance, 23.

6. The fear of Punishment both from God and Man, 24.

The external Punishments are, 1. The Evils thot happen to the body from
violent and unsociable Passions, 25.

The 2d. Those returns of hatred or contempt which all such men must expect
from others, 26.

The 3d. Returns of revenge from those they have injured, 27.

Lastly, Those Punishments which are often inflicted by the civil Powers; all
which natural Punishments Mr. H. himself acknowledges to be ordained by God, 28.

That where these Punishments fail in this Life, they will be supplied by
others infinitely more grievous and durable in that to come, 29.

A brief recapitulation of this Chapter, that this Proposition of our
Endeavoring the common good, etc. is truly a Law, as containing all the
Conditions requisite thereunto, 30.

The Contents of the Fourth Chapter.
A Brief repetition of what has been said in the first Chapter, That no man
can have a right to preserve his own Life, but as it conduces to the common
good, etc. That in all Societies the good of the lesser part must give place
and be subordinate to that of the greater, 1.

That a due consideration of this Law will lead us to a knowledge of the reason
and grounds of all the particular Laws of nature, 2.

And also that all moral Virtues are contained under this one Law of
endeavoring the common good. That Prudence is nothing but the knowledge of our
duty, in order to the graet End, the Common Good, as Constancy in the
prosecution of it, is therefore true fortitude, 3.

That Temperance or Moderation in all corporeal Pleasures is no otherwise a
Virtue, than as it conduces to the happiness and preservation of Mankind; That
under Love and Benevolence are contained the Virtues of Innocence, Meekness,
etc. 4, 5.

Equity a Virtue as it promotes the common good of mankind, 6.

The same proved likewise of Justice, since nothing can be called ours, either
by natural or civil Laws, but as it conduces to this great End, and a natural
and civil Property necessary thereunto; the one in a natural state, the other
in a civil society, 7.

From Property arises the necessity of Contracts, Promises, Gifts, etc. all
which are still to be governed by this great Law, 8.

From this natural Property arises the Virtue of Moderation, setting bounds to
inordinate self-love in order to the common good; Frugality no otherwise a
Virtue, than as it renders us not burdensome, not injurious to others, 9.

The natural Love of Parents to their Children to be exercised and limited
with respect to the common good, 10.

All the rest of the moral Virtues, such as Temperance, Frugality, etc. more
particularly explained to proceed from the same original, and not to be
understood without it, 11.

The same more particularly applied, and made out in every particular Virtue,
which constitutes Justice, 12.

All the homolitical Virtues, i. e. such as respect conversation, or the due
use of speech, explained after the same manner, with a like respect to the
common good, 13, 14, 15.

Self-love and Self-preservation only lawful in order to this End, 16.

Some farther Explanations of the nature of Temperance, and wherein it
consists, 17.

That part of it called Chastity, a Virtue only as it tends to the good and
propagation of mankind, 18.

Another part of it, viz. Modesty in seeking of riches, honor, etc. Virtues
only as they limit our self-love from pretending to more than we have need of,
or deserve in order to the common good, 19.

That a regard to this great Rule runs through all the moral Virtues, which are
all of them contained under the most diffusive Benevolence toward rational
Beings, 20.

Right Reason explained to be only a due consideration of this End in all moral
actions toward God or Men; and that the knowledge of these moral rules is as
certain as that of the knowledge of any other natural causes and effects
concerning the preservation of Animals, 21.

And that from their true understanding proceeds all the certainty we can have
of natural Laws, notwithstanding there may be a sufficient latitude left us for
indifferent actions, 22.

The Common Good as it is a collection of all other goods, so it is a true
standard, or measure of them, as showing what goods are to be sought for or
desired before others, 23.

It is only to be learnt from hence, what degrees of passions or affections are
lawful, that is, consistent with the Common Good, and consequently thereby to
judge of the several degrees and proportions of goodness and happiness, 24.

Piety toward God a Virtue, as it conduces to the common good and happiness of
rational Beings, 25.

Nothing a Good, but as it contributes to this great End, 26.

The reason of this disquisition into the true grounds of Good and Evil, as
being that which makes all moral Philosophy a practical Science, and not merely
speculative, like that of the Stoics, 27.

A brief Conclusion out of Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Laws of Nature, 28.

The Contents of the Fifth Chapter.
THE Objections of two sorts of Men, Platonists and Epicureans, against this
Notion of the Common Good; the Objections of the former to be first considered;
their first Objection, That it is more suitable to God's goodness to imprint
certain Innate Idea's of good and evil on our minds, 1.

Answer thereunto out of Mr. Lock's Essay, etc. 2.

A farther Answer from St. Paul, That the visible things of the Creation are a
sufficient proof of the Being of a God, and of the Laws of Nature, 3.

The laboriousness of our Method no material Objection, 4.

An explicit Idea of this Common Good, not always necessary to its observation,
5.

Another Objection against our Method, That it makes every man's obligation to
endeavor this Common Good, to arise from its being chiefly good to himself.
Answer, That this, if it be considered, will prove a mistake; though I grant
our Obligation to it as a Law cannot extend farther, than as it concerns our
happiness or misery, 6, 7.

A Reply to the Objections of the Epicureans; The first Objection, That it
seems not suitable to God's goodness, etc. to permit this great End of the
Common Good to depend upon the unreasonable Passions and Lusts of mankind.
Answ. That God intended Man for a voluntary Creature, to be moved by moral
Evil, as well as Good; and that God notwithstanding all this restrains his
Actions by his infinite Power and Providence, 8, 9.

Second Objection, If this Law of Nature is so easy to be known, how comes it
to pass, that so many Nations seem wholly ignorant of it, many living without
any knowledge of a God, or of a moral Good or Evil? 10.

Answer. This Objection is of no more weight against the Certainty of this Law,
than it is against that of Arithmetic and Geometry, but that if they are
guilty of this ignorance, it proceeds either from the Loss of the Tradition of
the Creation, or else from want of time or opportunities to consider these
things, 11.

Men's not making a due use of their faculties in discovering these Truths, no
objection against their certainty, 12.

The last Objection, That this Notion of the Common Good, is a mere Platonic
Idea, without any reality in Nature, 13.

This Objection in vain, if it be considered, That this Notion of the Common
Good is made up of particulars, and that from thence arises an Idea of a common
or general Good, which though a complex one, is as true and real as any other,
and as agreeable to the Nature of things, farther proved from Lock's Essay; and
that Mr. H. himself cannot deny the Truth of this Notion, 14.

Mr. H's great Rule of doing as you would be done by, signifies nothing without
respect to the Common Good of Mankind, 15.

So neither that of preserving a Man's self, or any other innocent person,
unless as it conduces to the Common Good of Mankind, 16.

Not only the whole Law of Nature, but the revealed Law of Moses, and the
Gospel of Jesus Christ reducible to this one Proposition, of Endeavoring the
Common Good, and that this was the great design of Christ's coming into the
World, 17, 18.

A Conclusion of the whole, 19.

TO THE BOOKSELLER.
THE Learned Author of this Treatise sent it to me (then being in a Private
Station) above a year ago, but then concealed his Name from me, either through
his great Modesty, or because in his Prudence he thought that if I knew him, I
might be biassed in my judgment, by the Honor which I am obliged to have to
his Family, and especially to his Grandfather by his Mother's side, the most
Learned Primate of Ireland. Wherefore I read the Book without any respect to
the unknown Writer, and considered only the Merits of the Performance. Thus I
found that he had not only well translated and epitomized in some places what I
had written in Latin, but had fully digested the chief things of my Design in a
well-chosen Method of his own, with great Perspicuity, and had added some
Illustrations of his own, or from other Learned Authors, with a Philosophical
Liberty, which I must needs allow. For this Reason I judged that the then
unknown Author had given too low a Title to his Book, and that I was to esteem
him a good Hyperaspistes, or able Second, in this Combat for Truth and Justice,
rather than a Translater or Epitomizer of what I had written. This obliged me
to enquire diligently after the Author's Name and Quality, and then I soon
obtained the Favor and Honor of a more intimate Conversation with him. Hereby
I soon found that I might safely leave the Maintenance of that good Cause in
which I was engaged, to his great Abilities and Diligence. And I hope that
since this Learned Gentleman has conquered the Difficulties of the Search into
the Rise of the Laws of Nature, now many of our younger Gentry will be
encouraged to follow him in the way which this his Treatise makes plain before
them. For from thence they may receive assistance, not only to discern the
Reasonableness of all Virtue and Morality, which is their Duty and Ornament as
they are Men, but also they may here see the true Foundations of Civil
Government and Property, which they are most obliged to understand, because, as
Gentlemen, they are born to the greatest Interest in them both. I need add no
more to give you Assurance that I freely consent to your Printing of this Book,
and am,

Your affectionate Friend, Ric. Peterborough.

OF THE Law of NATURE, And its OBLIGATION.
CHAP. I.
Of the first Means of discovering the Law of Nature; (viz.) the Nature of
Things.

1. HAving, in the Introduction to this Discourse, shown you those several
Methods, by which diverse Authors have endeavored to prove a Law of Nature; and
having also given my Reasons, (though in short) why I cannot acquiesce in any of
them, as laying too weak Foundations whereon to raise so great and weighty a
Building; and having likewise given you the only true Grounds, by which it can,
as I suppose, be made out, (viz.) from the Existence of a GOD declaring his
Will to us; from the Frame of the World, or by the Nature of all Things without
us; as also from our own Natures, or that of Mankind in general, we, by the
Power of our natural Faculties, or Reasons, drawing true Conclusions from all
these. This being premised, I shall now proceed particularly to declare, in the
first place, what I understand by the Frame of the World, or Nature of Things,
in order to the proving the Existence and Obligation of the Law of Nature, and
that it is really and truly a Law obliging all Persons of Years of Discretion
and sound Minds, to its Observation: Which being performed, I shall then
proceed to our own Nature, as included in that of all Mankind.

. 2. But though the ancient, as well as modern Scepticks and Epicureans, have
of old, and do still at this day, deny the Existence of any Law of Nature,
properly so called; yet, I suppose, that we are both sufficiently agreed what
we understand by this Term, since we both thereby mean certain Principles of
immutable Truth and Certainty, which direct our voluntary Actions concerning
the election of good, and the avoiding of evil Things, and so lay an
Obligation, as to our external Actions, even in the state of Nature, and out of
a Civil Society, or Commonweal. That such eternal Truths are necessarily and
unavoidably presented to, and perceived by Men's Minds, and retained in their
Memories, for the due ordering or governing of their Actions, is what is here
by us affirmed, and by them as confidently denied. And I farther conceive, That
the Actions so directed and chosen, are first known to be naturally good, as
productive of the greatest public Benefits; and afterward are called morally
Good, because they agree with those Dictates of Reason, which are here proved
to be the Laws, or Rules, of our Manners, or voluntary Actions: So also the
Evil to be avoided, is first the greatest natural Evil, which afterward for
the like Reason is called Moral.

. 3. Therefore that the Existence of such Propositions may more plainly appear,
and be demonstrated to the Understandings of all indifferent Readers, it is
necessary that we first carefully consider the Nature of diverse Things without
us, as also that of Mankind; and what we mean by Good and Evil, whether Natural
or Moral. Lastly, we shall show what those general Propositions are, which we
affirm carry with them the Force or Obligation of Natural Laws, as declaring
their Exercise or Performance necessary to the compassing of an End, that ought
to be endeavored or sought after, in order to our true and greatest Happiness.

. 4. Nor let it seem strange, that I suppose the Nature of diverse Things, about
which we are daily conversant, ought first to be looked into, and considered:
For I will here suppose the Soul, or Mind of Man, to be at first, rasa Tabula,
like fair Paper, that has no connate Character or Idea's imprinted upon it (as
that noble Theorist Mr. Vid. his Essay concerning Humane Understanding, Book I.
Chap. 11.
Lock has, I suppose, fully proved) and that it is not sensible of any thing
at its coming into the World, but its own Existence and Action; but receives
all its Idea's afterward, from such Objects as it has received in by the
Senses: So that our Understandings being naturally destitute of all Notions or
Idea's, we cannot comprehend how they can operate, unless they be first excited
by outward Objects. And indeed how can we understand what may be helpful and
agreeable, or else hurtful and destructive to Men's Minds and Bodies, unless we
first consider (as far as we are able) all the Causes, as well near as remote,
which have made, constitute, and still preserve Mankind, or else may tend to
its destruction, either for the time present, or to come? Nor indeed can it be
understood what is the fittest and best Thing, or Action, any Person can
perform in a Case proposed, unless first all those Effects which may proceed
from it, in all its various Circumstances, be duly considered and compared
together. So that the Contemplation both of the Causes on which Men's Safety
and Happiness depends, as also of the Effects which may be produced by their
joint or concurring Forces and Endeavors, must necessarily lead our Minds,
first to the Consideration of all other Men, and next of our selves, as a very
small part of Mankind.

And in the next place, that we proceed to contemplate this System of Things,
called the Visible World, but more especially GOD, as its Creator and
Governor, according to the Method laid down in the Introduction to this
Discourse; the Idea's of which being duly considered and digested in our Minds,
we may draw from thence certain Conclusions, by which we may judge or determine
what Humane Things and Actions are certainly and necessarily conducing to the
Common Good and Happiness of all Rational Beings, and in which every particular
Person's Felicity or Well-being is contained, as a part thereof; and in which
Rational Dictates, or Conclusions, I shall hereafter prove this Law of Nature
to consist.

. 5. No body, I suppose, will think it necessary to the matter in hand, that I
should here make Physical Disquisitions into the Natures of all Things that are
the Objects of our Senses, that being the Business of professed Naturalists: It
is sufficient for us to show, That all the Rules of Moral Philosophy, and the
Laws of Nature, may be at last resolved into certain natural and easy
Observations, gathered from common Experience; or else into certain
Conclusions, established upon the known Principles of Mathematics and
Physics; by which, I do not only mean all those natural Laws of Matter and
Motion in Bodies, but also the Operations of our own Souls, as far as we are
able to know or enquire into them. From all which, by the Order of Natural
Causes, we may be led to the Knowledge of GOD their Creator and Ordainer, and
so may acknowledge Him as the only Cause of all these excellent Effects, since
this Nature of Things does as well suggest to our Minds the Idea of a Creator,
as of the Things created; and so supplies us with sufficient matter from which
we may deduce all the Laws of Nature, as so many true Practical Propositions,
though it is only the Knowledge of the First Cause, or Creator, that can stamp
any Authority or Obligation upon them.

Now although there may be many Things collected from our Knowledge of several
Beings in the World, that may serve for our Moral Instruction, and the
cultivating of our Manners; yet I shall, for Brevity's sake, only select some
of the most material of them, and such as may serve to explain our short
account of the Law of Nature, which (notwithstanding several Authors have so
much enlarged upon it) I think may very well be reduced to this single
Proposition, viz. The most universal Love, or most diffusive Benevolence of all
Rational Beings toward each other, constitutes the happiest State they can be
capable of: So that their Endeavor of the Common Good by this Benevolence, is
the sum of all the Laws of Nature, and in which they are all contained. Note,
That by this Love or Benevolence, I do not mean only a fruitless Desire, or
Well-wishing, but an active Affection, exerting it self in all the Acts of
Piety toward God, Duty toward Parents, Kindness and Gratitude toward our
Country, Friends, and Relations, and of Charity and Humanity toward all the
rest of Mankind, as often as any opportunity offers it self.

. 6. In the making out of which Description of the Law of Nature, it is here
needless to inquire into the Nature of our Souls, and the manner of our
Knowledge and Understanding; since the former has been so Learnedly performed
by the Reverend Dr. Ward late Bishop of Salisbury, and the latter so exactly
done already in English by the above mentioned Author of the Essay of Humane
Understanding. I shall only briefly suppose upon his Principles, that our Souls
do, 1. From the very birth, by degrees, receive Idea's drawn from outward
Objects by our Senses. 2. That it is their faculty from diverse single Notions,
or Idea's put together, to come to make complex ones, that is, to make diverse
Propositions or Conclusions; not only concerning their own inward Actings, but
also about all those outward Objects, with which they are daily conversant, and
which may tend to the finding out the readiest means of attaining to, and
preserving themselves in the happiest State and Condition they are able to
acquire. These things being supposed, it were needless to trouble you with any
farther descriptions of this Love, or Benevolence, since every Person cannot
but be sufficiently sensible of its Nature, Degrees, and various Operations,
that will but make any Self-reflection upon his own Inward Affections.

. 7. But as for the due Connection of the Terms of this Proposition, in which
its Truth does chiefly consist, it seems to me plain enough: It being no more
than to affirm, That our endeavor of procuring all the good things in our
Power, and which are most conducing to our own preservation and Happiness, and
of all other Rational Beings, is the best, or chiefest thing that all Persons
can do, to render both themselves, and all others, as happy as their Natures
will permit or can require; and that there is no surer, or more powerful means
to be discovered by us, whereby we may obtain a full enjoyment of all the good
things of this Life, and the hopes of that to come, than by endeavoring our
own Felicity in Conjunction with that of others So that from what I have
already advanced, the Reader may Collect these two Propositions, 1. That the
Foundation of all our Natural Happiness consists in an habitual determination
of the Will to the utmost of its Ability and Perfection, whereby we may be
always ready and prepared to endeavor this Common good of Rationals. 2. That
the true Happiness of each Individual Person, cannot be separated from that of
other Rationals, since the whole does not differ from all its parts taken
together; so that this Proposition, concerning this general or diffusive
Benevolence, is thus to be understood; viz. Not to mean, or only intend, what
any single, or a few Persons may perform toward the procuring of their own
private Happiness, or that of their own Party or Faction, distinct from that of
the rest of Mankind; but what all particular Persons may jointly contribute to
render themselves and others happy; that is, what each of them may rationally
perform toward the obtaining this Common Felicity. For it ought first to be
known in general what all Men are able to do, or not to do, toward any common
end, (such as is the common happiness of Rationals) and then what it is
possible for any particular Person in this or that Case to perform; for
example, toward his own private happiness, as separate from that of all
others; though such cases being Indefinite, cannot be certainly or distinctly
known.

. 8. But indeed the care of any particular Persons, or a few Men's happiness is
rendered useless for the present, nor can be hoped for the future, if it is
sought by opposing, or postponing the happiness of all other Rationals; because
the mind being thus affected, a main, and essential part of its own felicity
must needs still be wanting; ( viz.) That inward Peace of Conscience proceeding
from a solid Reason, and true Prudence, always constant and agreeable to it
self. For whilst such a Person resolves to act by one rule toward himself, and
by another toward all others, who are of the same Nature, and therefore need
and require the same things with himself, he must needs contradict his own
Reason, and so wants that true Joy and Satisfaction constantly springing in the
mind of a Just, Benevolent, and Good-natured Person, from the sense of
another's good and happiness when promoted, or procured by himself: So that it
is impossible for any Man to be truly happy, who not only neglects the
necessary causes thereof; God, and all other Men, (on whose Help and Assistance
his true Happiness, and Well-being wholly depends) but also provokes them to
his certain ruin and destruction; so that there is no surer way, which can
bring any Man to the attaining his own particular Happiness, but that which
leads him also to endeavor the Common Good of all other men, as well as his
own.

. 9. But I here acknowledge, that this Proposition concerning Universal
Benevolence, cannot be of sufficient efficacy for the due ordering our Actions,
and correcting our Manners, until we have first proposed to our selves this
Common Good of Rational Beings; ( viz.) Our own Felicity (in conjunction with
that of others) as our main end, and that we are convinced that the various
Acts contained under this general Love, or Benevolence, are the only true means
to procure it: The truth of which Proposition, is, in the first place, to be
made manifest to us; in the next all those other Propositions that can be
deduced from thence; such as are those less general ones, which determine
concerning the Natural Power of Fidelity, Gratitude, Paternal and Filial
Affection, as also of all other particular Virtues, necessary for the obtaining
any part of this humane Felicity; for as well the whole truth of this
Proposition, as of all those which follow from thence, depend upon the Natural,
and Necessary Power of such Actions, as real Causes producing such Effects.

. 10. And though perhaps it may at first sight seem to detract from their
certainty, that they depend upon such an uncertain Cause as Man's Will. Yet
however it suffices, for their truth and certainty, that whenever such
voluntary Causes shall exert themselves, such Effects will certainly be
produced. Thus in Arithmetic we freely Add and Subtract; that is, we can
choose whether we will perform those Operations or not; but if we reckon truly,
we shall always find the Total, equal to all the particulars either Added or
Subtracted. And there is a like certain, and true Connection between all the
Causes and Effects, which can be known in any other Science. And this I have
likewise imitated in this Treatise of Moral Philosophy, by reducing all the
parts, of which it consists, to this one Head or Sum, ( viz.) Love or
Benevolence; which Idea I shall improve by enquiring into its several Kinds,
and showing the necessary Connection of this, or that particular Action, with
the Common Good of Rationals, which ought to be the great end sought for by us.

. 11. But since our voluntary Actions alone can be governed by Reason, and
those only which concern intelligent Agents, are to be considered in Morals; it
is evident, that from none of all these Actions we can frame a higher, or more
comprehensive Idea, than this of Universal Benevolence, which comprehends the
willing, and endeavoring of all good things, and the removal, or hindering of
all evil ones, from those Objects about which it is conversant: And this
Benevolence extends its self to all Moral Actions, as well those of
considering, and comparing diverse goods with each other, as of inquiring into
the means by which they may be produced; nor is it more certainly true, that
the Addition of several numbers makes a Sum Total, than that this Benevolence
produces a general good effect to all those toward whom we exert it. Thus it
is as certain, that Piety, Fidelity, Gratitude, paternal and conjugal
Affection, together with filial Duty, make up the chief and constituent parts
of this Benevolence, as that Addition, Substraction, Multiplication and
Division, are several parts of Arithmetic; so that it is no material
Objection, That this Universal Benevolence may be prejudiced or lessened by the
wickedness or ill nature of Men. So that the great end, or Sum of the Law of
Nature, cannot be thereby generally obtained as it ought, any more than it is
an Objection against the certainty or usefulness of Arithmetic, or Geometry,
that some Men should through Lazyness and Inadvertency, altogether neglect
their Rules, or make false Conclusions from those Sciences, or should through
Ignorance or prejudice, deny their certainty. So likewise it is in the Science
of Morality, as contained in the Law of Nature, which is chiefly employed in
weighing, and taking a true account of those humane Powers, that contribute to
the Common Good of Rational Beings; which since they may vary somewhat in so
great a variety of possible Cases, he may be said, (and that deservedly) to
have well performed this task, who first affirms in general, that all those
Powers are comprehended under the most general and diffusive Benevolence;
though he may be able afterward more particularly to demonstrate; that a just
division of things, Fidelity, Gratitude, and all the other virtues are
contained under it, and also show in what Cases they become useful to this end;
by which means Religion, and humane Society, with all other things which may
render Men's lives happy and safe, will be certainly improved and advanced. And
herein consists the Solution of that most useful Problem concerning the Common
good of Rationals, procured by the most diffusive Benevolence, which Moral
Philosophy teaches us to search after. Nor is the truth or authority of such
Precepts at all prejudiced or diminisht, though very many Persons will not obey
them, or will set themselves to oppose them; since this only can be the
consequence of it, That they will thereby lose their own happiness, and perhaps
may draw others by their false reasons into the same misery: and so I doubt not
on the other side, but that Men would think themselves obliged to perform all
the Acts that constitute this Benevolence, if they were but once convinced that
so great and noble an end, as the Common Good of Rational Beings, (and in which
their own happiness is likewise contained) will be certainly procured thereby,
and cannot be had by any other or contrary means.

. 12. I come now to consider, that together with the knowledge of this visible
World, (of which our selves make but a small part) there is likewise conveyed
into our minds by our Senses a certain knowledge, 1. Of diverse natural outward
goods. 2. And those not only peculiar to our selves alone, but common to all
those of our own kind. 3. Of which goods some are greater than others, and that
good which has none that we know excels it, we may call the greatest or
highest. 4. Also of those, some are commonly in our Power, others we understand
to exceed the narrow limits of our humane forces; but since the Nature of these
things is by two several ways discovered to us, either more confusedly by
common experience and daily Observation, or else more distinctly from
experimental Philosophy, and the Mathematics; the former of these methods
being easy, and obvious to every one, I shall rather make use of that; whereas
the other would be only proper for Philosophers and Mathematicians, since the
Grounds or Principles of the Law of Nature, ought to be alike evident to the
Illiterate as well as to the Learned, for all are under the like obligation to
observe them; and therefore I shall only put you in mind of such vulgar and
easy Observations, which no Rational Man can dispute, or deny: and such, as
from which I undertake to prove, that the Knowledge and Coherence of the Terms
of this Proposition may evidently be deduced.

. 13. Our first Natural Observation therefore is, that by our free use, and
enjoyment of those products of the Earth, that come under the general Titles of
Food, Clothing, Houses, etc. and also by that help or assistance, which one or
more Persons can afford each other; Men may be preserved, and live as happily
and contentedly for several years, as their frail Nature will permit.

And in the next place, that these effects being not only agreeable, but
necessary to our Natures, are naturally good, as tending to their Preservation
or Perfection; and therefore by the same reason, Men's affections, from whence
these outward things and acts do proceed, and which produce all these good
effects, are conceived under the notion of good Will, or Benevolence, which
must be also good; since whatever goodness is contained in the effects, must be
likewise in the cause. And we are also sensible, that by this Benevolence, we
are not only able to help our selves, or some few Persons, but many others, as
well by our advice, as by our strength and industry; especially when we see
diverse others of our own kind who are able, and seem also willing to requite us
in the like manner. So that each of us in particular, may be provided with a
sufficient stock of all the necessaries of Life, by our mutual help and
assistance, all which would not only be wanting to us, but we should be exposed
to innumerable mischiefs and hazards, as also to a great want even of
necessaries, if all Persons looking only to themselves, should always show
themselves ill-natured, malevolent, and enemies toward other Rational Beings;
whereas the contrary endeavors being thus helpful, and necessary to so many
others, may easily and naturally produce in our minds a notion of this Common
good of Rationals, which from the obvious Similitude of Rational Beings to each
other, must equally respect all those, which we have opportunity or occasion of
knowing, or conversing with, as also those with whom we have not.

. 14. And I may add farther from constant experience, that we are able to
contribute more to the good, and assistance of those of our own kind, than any
other Creatures, because their Nature (and consequently what is good, or
destructive to it) is more evident to us from the knowledge we have of our
selves, than of other Creatures. For as our Nature is capable of more, and
greater goods than they, and in the attaining of which we can better assist
each other; so we must also confess it to be liable to greater Dangers and
Calamities; for the declining and removing of which, God has appointed our
mutual Benevolence expressed by our endeavors, and assistance of each other,
as the most suitable and necessary means thereunto.

. 15. And we may also observe, that by our Advice and Counsel, communicated by
apt Signs or Words, we are able to contribute many helps and conveniences of
Life to those of our own kind, of which other Animals are altogether incapable
either of acting or receiving. And farther, because of the Similitude of those
of our own kind with our selves, we cannot but think it agreeable to our
Rational Natures to do, or to procure the like things for them, as for our
selves, and can also be sensible of greater Motives to benefit Men, than other
Creatures; since we have all the reason to hope, that those we have thus done
good to, or obliged, being moved by our benefits, will make us a suitable
return whenever it lies in their power, and that they may one time or other, in
the like, or some other way oblige us. So that it is evident from Common
Experience, that there can be no larger Possession, nor any surer defense for
Mankind, than the most sincere Piety toward God, the Head of Rational beings,
and the most diffusive Love, and sincere Benevolence of all Persons toward
each other; since if they prove malevolent, or ill-natured, they may easily
bereave us of all things we enjoy, together with our Life it self: nor can the
Love or Good Will of others, be obtained by any more certain or powerful means,
than that every one should show himself so affected in his Actions toward
others, as he desires they should be toward himself; That is, Loving and
Benevolent upon all occasions, though more particularly to those to whom we are
obliged by Friendship or Relation.

. 16. Last of all, the same Experience that demonstrates the mutual Benevolence
of particular Persons to be the most powerful Cause of their Felicity, does as
necessarily teach us from a like parity of Reason, that the Love, or Good Will
of any greater number of Men, toward any the like number, has a-like
proportionable effect; so on the other side, the constant Malice or Ill Will of
all Men toward all, expressed by suitable Actions, would soon bring
destruction to the whole Race of Mankind, since it would soon destroy all the
Causes requisite to their Happiness, and Well-being, and introduce a perpetual
Enmity and War, which are the certain Causes of the greatest Miseries and
Calamities, which can befall Mankind: all which, though Mr. H. himself
acknowledges, yet he will not own the necessity of Men's mutual Love and
Concord, to be also as necessary to their Preservation. But why the Causes of
Men's Preservation and Happiness, as being Prior in Nature, should not be more
evident than those of their Destruction; since the one is altogether as evident
and necessary, and may be as easily foreseen and prevented, as the other, I can
see no reason; and I should be glad if any of Mr. H's Disciples could show us
any sufficient Reason for that Opinion.

. 17. So that these things which I have now laid down concerning the Natural
means of Men's happiness, do appear so evident from our common Reason, and
daily Experience, that they are of like certainty with the Principles of
Arithmetic and Geometry, in all whose Operations, there are still supposed
certain Acts depending upon our free, humane, Faculties; and yet neither of
these Sciences are rendered the more uncertain, from the supposition of Men's
Free Will, whether they will draw Lines, or cast up Sums, or not; since it
suffices for their truth and certainty, that there is an inseparable Connection
between such Acts, which are supposed to be in our Power to exert, and all the
effects sought for; To the finding of which, both the pleasure annexed to their
Contemplation, and the various uses of Humane Life do at once invite us. And in
the like manner, the truth of all Moral Knowledge is founded in the Immutable
Coherence between the highest Felicity, which Humane Power can attain to, with
those Acts of universal Benevolence, that is of Love toward God and Men, and
which exerts it self in all the particular moral Virtues; yet in the mean time,
these two things are still supposed, That Men desire, and seek the highest
Felicity they are capable of; and also, That they are able to exercise this
Benevolence, not only toward themselves, but God and Men, as partakers with
them of the same Rational, or Intelligent Nature. This I have thought fit to
add, to prevent all those Cavils which Mr. H's Disciples are used to make
against Morality, from the necessity of our Wills.

. 18. But before I proceed farther to inquire into the Nature of things, I
desire you to remember what I have already hinted in the Introduction to this
Discourse, That this truth concerning the efficacy of Universal Benevolence,
for the Preservation and Happiness of Rational Beings, as also all other
Propositions alike evident, and contained under it, do all proceed from God, as
the first Cause, and Ordainer of all things; and consequently of our Humane
Understanding, and of all truths therein contained. And since these Rules drawn
from the Natures of things, tend to the procuring God's End and Design, viz.
The Preservation, and Happiness of Mankind; and also that it has pleased Him
to annex certain natural Rewards, to the Observation of these Dictates of
Reason, and Punishments to their Transgression; so that they thereby becoming
apt, and sufficient for the due ordering of our Thoughts, and governing our
Actions toward God, our selves, and all others, (as I shall farther make out
in this Discourse) I see nothing wanting to give it the Essence, and Vigor of
a Law. And I shall farther show before I have done, that under this general
Rule of endeavoring the Common Good of Rational Beings, or Universal
Benevolence, is contained Piety toward God, and the highest Goodwill or
Charity toward Men, and is the Sum both of the Moral Law of Moses, and of the
Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ.

. 19. These Things being thus proposed in general, I come now more particularly
to show, that a due Observation and Knowledge of these natural Things without
us, will truly and clearly teach us what Operations or Motions of them are
good, or evil, for all other Men, as well as our selves; and also show us how
necessarily and unalterably all these Things are produced; for Natural
Knowledge searches into the true Causes of that Generation and Corruption which
daily happens to all Natural Bodies, and especially to Men, and so can
demonstrate the necessary coherence of these Effects, with their Causes; and
therefore those Causes that help to generate or preserve Men, and that make
them live happily in this Life, are Natural Goods, as the Causes of their
Misery and Dissolution are Natural Evils: And it then as plainly follows, That
by this Knowledge we can as certainly demonstrate and foretell what Things are
naturally Good, or Evil, for all Mankind, as for any single Person.

. 20. Therefore we may truly conclude, That the Knowledge of all these Effects,
which either Nature or Humane Industry can produce for Men's Food, Clothing,
Habitation, and Medicine, is part of this Natural Knowledge: To which we may
also add the understanding of all other Humane Operations, and of the Effects
proceeding from thence, for the Uses of Humane Life. For although the voluntary
Actions of Men, as they exert themselves toward Things without them, do not
work exactly after the same manner as mere Mechanic Motions, viz. from the
Pulsion or Motion of other Bodies, but either from their Reasons, or Wills; yet
since all the outward Motions we exert, receive their Measure and Force from
the Natural Powers of Humane Bodies, which are of the same Nature with others,
and so must perform their Natural Functions, as they are regulated by the
necessary Laws of Matter and Motion, much after the same manner as other
Natural Motions, it is evident, that these voluntary Actions, whenever they are
thus exerted, are regulated by the same Natural Laws: And it is commonly known
how much Men's Industry, by the various Motions of their Bodies (which a
Philosopher can easily resolve into mechanic ones), does contribute to their
own and other Men's Preservation, by providing and administering Victuals,
Cloths, Physic, Houses, etc. In performing which Effects, Men's Strength, and
Skill in Husbandry, Building, Navigation, and other manual Trades, are chiefly
employed. Nor are the Liberal Arts absolutely free from these Laws of Motion,
since by the help of certain sensible Signs, and articulate Notes, or Marks, as
Words, Letters, or Ciphers, the Minds of Men come to be endued with Knowledge,
and directed in most of their Civil and Moral Duties. I have only thought fit
to hint thus much concerning Humane Actions, considered as mere Natural Things
existing without us; but I shall treat more fully of them in the next Chapter,
when I come to treat of the Nature of Man, considered as a voluntary Agent.

. 21. Hence it plainly appears, That all these Natural Things, and the mutual
Helps by which they are procured, may be certainly known, and foreseen by us,
to be naturally and unalterably Good; that is, tending to the Preservation and
Happiness of Mankind. And for the same Reason all those contrary Causes, or
Motions, by which Men's Bodies are weakened or destroyed, by lessening or
taking away the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life, such as Food, Raiment,
Liberty, Quiet, etc. And also those Actions by which Virtue and Knowledge may
be rooted out of Men's Minds; and Errors, and unbridled Passions, destructive
to the Common Good of Mankind, introduced into their Rooms, are necessarily and
in their own Nature Evil. Therefore when we determine of Natural Goods, or
Evils, according to the Law of Nature, we are not only to consider the
Preservation of a few particular Persons, since the Punishment; nay, Death of
these, may often conduce to the Common Good; but rather that of the aggregate
Body of Mankind, subordinate to GOD, as the Head of Rational Beings, in this
Natural System or Commonweal, established by Natural Laws: For the good of an
aggregate Body, is nothing else but the Chiefest Good that can accrue to all
its Parts, or the Individual.

. 22. Having now found out from the Nature of Things, by what means our Minds
can receive the Idea's of a Common Natural Good, and Evil, and these no less
certain and stable, than those by which the Causes of Generation and Corruption
are exhibited to them; I come next to consider, That that Matter and Motion, in
which the Powers of Humane Bodies (as well as other Parts of this Visible
World) consist, and exert themselves after a limited manner, and have a finite
Quantity, and certain Bounds, beyond which, they cannot act; from which
Principles, flow those known Laws of Natural Bodies, as that they cannot be at
once in diverse Places, and therefore cannot be moved toward contrary Points,
at the same time; or so as to be subservient to the contrary Wills of diverse
Persons, at once; but are so bounded and determined in their Natures, as to be
only ordered or disposed of, according to the Will of one Person alone, or else
of diverse consenting or conspiring to the same End, or Design. For if Men
should think thus to make use of them, they would be so far from conducing to
their Benefit, or Preservation, that they would only tend to their Hurt, and
Destruction; since if the Stronger had a Right to take from the Weaker by
Strength, and the Weaker from the Stronger by Cunning and Surprise, any of
these Necessaries of Life, which he was once possessed of; yet when he had
them, he could be no more assured that he should keep them, than he was that
last possessed them, since one Stronger, or more Cunning than himself, may yet
come, and serve him as he had done the other before; and so on, 'till all Men
that enjoyed them should be destroyed, and the Things contended for, perish
without use: So that there could remain neither any Owner, nor Thing to be
owned.

. 23. From all which that has been now laid down, I shall draw some
Conclusions of great moment to our Subject; as, (1.) From this Knowledge of the
Nature of Things, (and especially of our own Humane Nature) we may learn that
so much celebrated Distinction of the Stoics, between the (...) ( i. e.) those
Things which are in our own Power and Disposal, such as are the voluntary
Motions and Inclinations of our Bodies and Minds; and (...) ( i. e.) the Things
out of our Power, such as are those Corporeal Motions, so violent and
irresistible, which we daily observe to proceed from the Nature and Frame of
the World, which we weak Creatures are not able to resist, and from whose
irresistible Force, all things here below are in a perpetual flux; whence also
there happens to us Men, a perpetual vicisfitude of Things, as well Adverse as
Prosperous, as also of Maturation, Decay, and Dissolution: So that this
Distinction (if duly observed) will be of singular use, as well in forming our
Manners, as governing our Affections: For from hence we are taught not to
expect any other or greater Happiness, as a Reward of all our Labors and
Endeavors, than what may proceed from a prudent Management of our Rational
Faculties, and from those External Helps which we may expect Divine Providence
will afford us, in its governing the World; by which means we may befreed from
those fruitless Labors and Endeavors, to which Men's vain Fears, and
groundless Hopes, so often transport them: Nor shall we too much afflict our
selves for those Evils, which either do now, or may hereafter, without our own
Faults, inevitably befall us, whence the greatest part of those Troubles and
Molestations, which are wont to proceed from Grief, Anger, and Discontent at
our present Fortunes, or Conditions, may, by our Prudence, or Patience, be
prevented: Neither are we hereby only directed to the avoiding of Evils, but
here is also chalked out to us, a more short and compendious method, by which
we may, by degrees, attain to those two greatest Blessings which can be enjoyed
by us in this Life; the Culture of our own Minds, and the Government of our
Passions.

. 24. I need not prosecute this Subject any farther, but shall proceed to take
notice of those obvious Observations to our Purpose, viz. That it is evident
from common Experience, That the natural Forces, or Powers, of any one Person,
are too weak, scanty, and inconsiderable, toward the obtaining all that
Happiness he desires and is capable of; to procure which, he still wants the
Help and Assistance of many other Persons and Things, to render his Life safe,
pleasant, or contented: And, further, that it is in the Power of any one of us,
to contribute many Things toward the use of others of our own kind, which we
do not need our selves; and which though of no use to us, yet may be of
singular use to their Happiness, or Preservation. But since we are certain,
from those known Bounds of our Power, that we are not able to compel all those
by force, whose Assistance we stand in need of, to cooperate with us, toward
this our main End and Design, viz. Happiness; there can be no surer Means, or
safer Defense left us, than that by a constant offering and affording those
Necessaries of Life, together with our Assistance to others, as often as it
lies in our Power; we may thereby probably render them likewise Benevolent and
Helpful to us in the like Necessities, or Occasions: So that this Benevolence,
or Charity, is only a constant Will and Endeavor of acting thus sincerely and
diffusively, whenever any Opportunity offers it self; and that even in those
Cases, in which it may oftentimes be probably foreseen, that no return can be
immediately expected from the Person to whom the Benefit is done; since,
however, it still contributes to the general Good of Mankind, of which that
Person we so benefit is a Member: Which general Benevolence does not yet
hinder, but that we may bestow and exercise a larger share, and higher degrees
thereof, toward those from whom our own long Acquaintance, and nearer
Relation, may persuade us to hope for larger Returns of Friendship.

. 25. Whence we may, in the next place, observe, That if our Assistance, and
other Things in our Power, certainly contribute to the Use, or Benefit of
others, they can only perform this, as they are assigned, or appropriated, to
the particular Persons, that are to make use of them, according to some certain
time and place. So that if Right Reason prescribe a Use of Things, and Humane
Helps, as necessary for the Happiness and Preservation of Mankind, it, as
necessarily, prescribes, that this Use of these Things, should be appropriated
to them, that are thus to use them, for the time they stand in need of them,
and according to the place in which they are to be used. The Consequence is
evident, because Right Reason can only prescribe that to be done, which will
consist with the nature of the Things that are to be used, and the Persons that
are to use them. So that it is evident, a Division, or Appropriation of Things,
and Humane Assistances and Labors, is absolutely necessary for the Subsistence
and Happiness of all Men; whence it also follows, That this necessary
Limitation, or Appropriation of any of these Things to particular Persons, for
the time they stand in need of them, is a natural Separation of them, from the
use of all others, during the time they are so made use of. By One Thing, I
mean such single Things as are incapable of division; and to make use of which,
it is absolutely necessary that it be possessed whole and entire, such as are
Food, Cloths, and the like; for there are other Things which are likewise
called One, as one Island, one Field, and the like, which may very well serve
for the Use of diverse Persons at once, and whose Division arising from the
positive Consent of Men already entered into Civil Societies, or Commonweals, I
need not now treat of.

. 26. But from this natural Division, or Appropriation of Things, and its
Necessity for the Preservation of Mankind, arises that Natural and Primitive
right proceeding from Occupancy, which both Philosophers and Civilians grant to
have place in the state of Nature, supposing a Community of most Things: For
Right is but a certain Faculty, or Power of Acting, or enjoying any thing
granted us by a Law; but in this state, there is no other Law but that of Right
Reason, given by GOD, concerning such Actions as are necessary for the Common
Good of Rational Beings. Therefore since Right Reason requires a separate use
of particular Things, and Humane Assistances, as necessary and conducing to
this End, there must needs follow from thence, a Right to the Use and Enjoyment
of any particular Thing, during the time the Possessor so makes use of it; for
a Man has the same Right to live tomorrow, as he has to day; and consequently
has the same Right to all the Means which are necessary for his Preservation:
Therefore if this House, Servant, or any thing else that I am now possessed of,
be necessary for my Happiness or Preservation to day, I shall have also a like
Right to it for the future as long as it continues thus necessary: And in this
state, there being no other Judge of the Means of my own Preservation but my
self, I shall have a Right to it as long as I live, for the same Reason for
which I had a Right to it at first. So that unless, the Use or Necessity
ceasing, I alter my Mind concerning it, or assign my Interest in it to another,
I have a perpetual Right in it, excluding that of any other, during the time
that I am thus possessed of it: Not that I hereby grant every Man a Right, in
the state of Nature, to all Things which his unreasonable Passions, or
Appetites, shall fancy to be necessary for his own Preservation, or Happiness,
but only to so much of the Means conducing thereunto, as any Man, whilst he
judges according to Right Reason, or Equity, and the natural Necessities of
himself and Family, shall rightly so determine, without arrogating, or assuming
to himself more than is really necessary for those Ends, and without robbing
others of what is also necessary for them, which is downright Violence and
Injustice.

. 27. Whence it plainly appears, That this natural Division, or Property in
Things, first proceeding from Occupancy and Possession, as it is necessary for
the Preservation of all particular Persons, so it must be likewise for that of
Mankind, considered as an aggregate Body, consisting of diverse Individuals, the
same Means being necessary for the preservation of the whole, as are requisite
to all its constituent Parts or Members, though this kind of Property may very
well consist with Community, as at Ord'naries and Theaters, every one that pays
his Money has a Right to his Dinner, or Place; yet none can tell which it is,
or where it shall be, 'till he has it on his Plate, or is actually seated in
it.

. 28. Whence it may appear, That these Principles being truly drawn from the
Nature of Things, will, without any more ado, destroy Mr. H.'s wild Hypothesis,
concerning the Natural Right of all Men to all Things, that he may thereby
prove a Right, in the state of Nature, in all Men* of doing whatsoever they
please toward others, necessary to their Preservation; so that thence may
arise a natural state of War of all Men against all. And hence it likewise
appears upon what grounds every Man has a Right to his own Life, Limbs, and
Liberty, viz. because they are the natural Means by which we are enabled to
serve GOD, and assist Mankind; in doing which, we prosecute the Common Good of
Rational Beings. And from these Principles here laid down, it clearly appears,
That Mr. H.'s Doctrines concerning the Law of Nature, and Dominion, are not
only precarious, but manifestly false; which, first, suppose (without any
sufficient Proof) an unlimitted Right of all Men to all Things, to be necessary
to their Preservation, as the Foundation of all Natural Laws, and Civil
Societies. For the proving of which, he only makes use of some false and
specious Arguments, as I hope I have sufficiently made appear in the Second
Part of this Treatise.

. 29. Having now established a Natural Property in such Things, and Humane
Helps, or Assistances, as are necessary for Men's Happiness and Preservation,
in order to the Common Good, I shall not concern my self to prove the
Convenience of Civil Property, as now established in most Commonweals; nor
shall now trouble you with those Mischiefs, which Aristotle, in his Politics,
has very well proved, would follow from a Community of Things, from those
unavoidable Strifes and Contentions, which would daily arise from our using the
Fruits of the Earth in common: Only I think I may say thus much, That since
Mankind is so multiplied in well-inhabited Countries, that there is not Land
sufficient to be divided amongst all the Inhabitants, so as to serve for each
Person's comfortable Subsistence without foreign Trade, or mechanic
Employments, there must necessarily follow a more full and exact Division and
Appropriation of the Necessaries of Life, such as are Land, or the Use and
Products thereof; as, Corn, Cattle, and the like, in order to the Preservation
and Happiness of that Nation, or Civil Society, by whose Consent such a
Division and Appropriation of these Things were at first introduced; which
being once settled by Civil Laws, there is the like Reason for its continuance;
and Men have as much Right to those Things they thus enjoy, by the particular
Laws of the Countries where they live, as they had before in the state of
Nature, to whatever they could possess by the Right of Occupancy, or
Possession; since it is evident, That this more exact Property, or Dominion,
consisting in a stricter and more limited use of these Things, has a greater
efficacy in order to the Happiness and Preservation of that Nation, or part of
Mankind, which have thus agreed to it, than the bare Occupancy, or Possession
of these Things had before such a Division made, or agreed upon; nor can it now
be altered, however, perhaps, hard and unequal it may prove to some particular
Persons, since it will always conduce to the Happiness and Tranquillity of each
particular Civil Society, or Commonweal, that it should continue as it does,
than it should be still altered, according to every Man's particular Fancy, or
Interest, since such a Change can never be made, without inconceivable
Discontents, and Civil Dissentions, which would quickly end in open Violence
and Hostility.

. 30. So that from these Principles here laid down, there is no Right conferred
upon any Man, of doing whatever his own wild Fancy, or unbounded Appetite may
prompt him to, but only, what he shall, according to right Reason, truly judge
necessary to his own, or Family's Happiness and Preservation, in order to the
Common Good of Mankind. Therefore I here desire you to take notice, that
whatever Right we enjoy, even to the things most necessary for our
Preservation, it is founded, if not in the Precept, yet at least permission of
this great Law of Nature, of endeavoring the Common Good of Rational Beings,
when we truly judge according to the Nature of things, concerning the means
necessary, and conducing to this great End; so that it can never be proved,
that any one has a right of Preserving himself, unless it be first made out,
how this Right of Self-preservation, conduces to, or at least consists with
this Common Good. Since no Rational Man can ever believe, that God intended the
Preservation, much less the Sensual Pleasures of any one Man, as the Sole End
of His Creation. Which Principle being once established, as the Foundation and
Original of all the Natural, or Civil Rights we enjoy; our own natural Powers
and Rights, will appear so limited thereby, that we cannot without injury, and
injustice, violate or invade the Rights of others, much less break out into
open War against them without just Cause; nay all those Arguments by which any
one Man can assume a Right to Preserve himself by the Law of Nature, will
likewise be of the same force to prove, that he ought to Preserve others also;
and that it can never become lawful for us in any State, to rob Innocent
Persons of what is necessary for their Well-being and Preservation; but rather
on the contrary, that all Men's natural Rights, should be secured from the
mischiefs of unreasonable Violence, and War, and Contention; which natural
Security in a Civil State or Commonweal, is highly improved and increased by
the Assistance of Humane Skill and Industry, according to the established Laws
of Property or Dominion.

. 31. I have spoken thus much concerning the necessary Connection between the
particular Actions above mentioned, and the Common Good of Mankind, that by
considering their relation to this Great End, the Nature of all Humane Actions
may more certainly be known and predetermined. Since the Dependence of natural
Effects on their Causes, are absolutely necessary and immutable; for as well in
the state of Nature or Community, as of Civil Society, or separate Property,
those Humane Actions which cause, or procure, that the minds of all other
Persons should not be prejudiced by Errors, Lies, or Perfidiousness; nor their
Bodies hurt, nor their Lives, Goods, Fames and Chastities violated, or taken
away, and also by which a grateful return is rendered to those that have done us
good; or in short, all those Actions by which the true happiness of any one
Man, or more is procured, without injury to others, as they always were, so
they ever will be the certain Causes of the Common Good, and Happiness of
Mankind, and are therefore distinguished by the Titles of moral Virtues, as I
shall more at large demonstrate in this Discourse, when I come to show how all
moral Virtues are derived from, and at last resolved into this Principle of the
Common Good of Rational Beings.

But least the variousness of the Observations treated of in this Chapter, and
their Independance upon each other, should render them perplexed, and
consequently unconvincing to Common Readers, who may not be able to carry so
long a train of consequences in their minds; I shall contract what has been
now said into these few plain Propositions.

1. That though all particular men are mortal, and but of a short duration, yet
that God has still preserved mankind without any sensible failure or decay.

2. That in Order to this, God has made man to be propagated by Generation,
and also to be preserved by diverse outward means, which we call necessaries of
Life.

3. That these Natural means can no way answer this End, but as they are
allowed, or appropriated to the uses and occasions of particular Persons,
during the time they stand in need of them, and so cannot at the same time
answer the different or contrary desires, and necessities of diverse men,
endeavoring to use these things after contrary or different manner.

4. That the taking away those necessaries of Life, which another is rightly
possessed of, does not only cause the ruin and destruction of that Person and
his Family, who were thus possessed of them; but by causing a perpetual strife
among Mankind, will render these things incapable of being made use of at all
for their Common Good and Preservation.

5. That such a Strife, if prosecuted to the utmost, will certainly end in the
destruction, not only of particular Persons and Nations, but of all mankind
contrary to God's design.

6. From all which we may Rationally collect, that God designs the Preservation
and Happiness of Mankind, as also of all Individual Persons as parts of it, as
far as their frail and mortal Natures will permit, and in subordination to the
good of the whole body thereof.

7. That therefore there are no surer means to procure this great End of the
Common Good of Mankind, than an Universal Benevolence toward Rational Beings;
consisting, First, in Divine Love or Piety toward God, and in Respect of Men,
not only in permitting each other quietly to enjoy all the necessaries of Life,
but also in making a settled division of them to others, so as to be
appropriated to several men's uses or occasions; which dictates being given us
by God as a rule of all our moral Actions, (in the exercise of which is
contained our truest Happiness, as in its violation, our greatest Misery) is
therefore truly and properly a Law, and indeed the Sum of all the Laws of
Nature.

CHAP. II.
Observations and Conclusions, drawn from the consideration of Humane Nature
and Right Reason, as also from the Nature of God.

. 1. HAving in the former Chapter drawn such easy and obvious Observations,
from the Nature of those things without us, which we daily stand in need and
make use of, as may serve to prove, after what manner we ought to make use of
them, and whence that Right arises we have to them. I come now to make the like
Observations from the Nature of Mankind, in order to the proving, that we are
designed by God for the Good and Preservation of others besides our selves, and
that in the doing of this, we procure (as far as lies in our Power) the Good
and Happiness of all Rational Beings, in which our own is likewise included. To
perform this task, I shall first take notice of those Qualities or Properties
that belong to man (1) as a mere Natural Body, (2) such as belong to him as an
Animal, (3) such as are peculiar to him as a Rational Creature, endued with a
higher and nobler Principle than Brutes, viz. an Immortal Soul.

. 2. To begin with the first of these, it is evident, that as a Natural Body,
he is endued with these Properties common to all other Natural Bodies. First,
that all his motions, in which his Life, Strength, and Health consist, do all
proceed from God, the first and Original, or Cause of them, and are necessarily
complicated with, and depend upon the motions of innumerable other Bodies,
among which the Corporeal motions of others, (which do often limit and restrain
our own) are first and chiefly to be considered. (2) That from them, as from
other Bodies, motion may be propagated Indefinitely, and which does not perish,
but concur with other motions to perpetuate the Succession of things, that is,
contribute to the conservation of the Universe; and as the former teaches us,
that a particular end, viz. our own Preservation, depends upon our Common or
joint Forces, or Natural Powers; so this latter instructs us, that such Powers
and motions of particular Persons, are often most Beneficial, and conducing to
the Common Good of all men. The first of these Conclusions forbids us to hope
for, or endeavor our own private Good or Happiness, as separate and distinct
from that of all others, and so excites us to seek the Common Good of
Rationals, as the Original of our own particular Happiness. The other
Conclusion shows, that this endeavor of the Common Good can never prove in
vain, or to no purpose, since it concurrs with the Will of God, and conduces to
the Preservation of the Universe, and of all Humane Creatures therein
contained; and farther, that in each complicated motion, as well in that,
toward which diverse Causes concur for the Preservation of any Body for a
certain time, as also in that, whereby each particular Body concurrs to the
Conservation of the whole System. There is a certain order still observed,
whereby some motions are necessarily determined by others in a continual
Series, or Succession, all which are yet governed or overruled, by the motion
of the whole System of Natural Bodies. And although this sort of Contemplation,
may seem remote from common use, yet is it not to be contemned as altogether
unprofitable in Humane Affairs; for it makes us more distinctly perceive from
some certain general Principles, how necessary a constant and certain order is
amongst those Causes, that Act from Corporeal forces; so that many of them, may
each in their order Successively concur to an effect foreseen, or designed by
us; and farther shows us a rule how we may certainly judge, what Cause does
more or less contribute to the Effect sought for, or desired; so that from the
Natural Power of these Causes, their Order, Dignity or Power, in respect to
each Effect, are to be determined and judged of; and we are taught from the
Nature of things, as well what Causes are to be most esteemed for those good
Effects they have, or may produce, as also which are most diligently to be
sought, for the obtaining those ends which we desire, and by which means it may
be also known; that those Causes which Philosophers call Universal, viz. God
the first Cause, and the motion of the Celestial Bodies as proceeding from Him,
are the Original Causes of the Common Good or Happiness of Mankind, a part of
which we either always do actually, or can hope to enjoy.

. 3. But omitting those Motions which are not in our Power to influence or
alter, it is certain, that among the things which are in either our Power to do
or forbear; those voluntary Humane motions proceeding from an Universal
Benevolence of all Men toward all others, are the principal Causes of their
Common Happiness, and in which every one's private Good is included. Since from
this source proceed all those Actions, by which Men's Innocence and Fidelity
toward each other are preserved; as also by which Humanity, Gratitude, and
almost all the other Virtues are exerted and performed, after as certain a
manner, as the Natural motions of the Spirits, Bowels, Nerves, and Joints in an
Animal, do wholly proceed from the motion of the Heart, and Circulation of the
Blood: which judgment or determination, being taken from the Nature of things
duly considered, should, without doubt, cause us to yield Obedience to all the
Laws of Nature, as contributing to this Common Good of Rational Agents, and may
make us also diligently to take care, that the same be observed by others, so
that there may be nothing wanting that can be done by us, whereby we may not be
rendered as happy as our frail Natures in this will allow; since right reason
can propose no higher or nobler End, than this of all our moral Actions.

. 4. Yet whilst we compare the Aggregate Body of mankind, (as far as we can Act
by Corporeal force) with the Natural Systems of other Bodies. I am not
unmindful of the manifest difference there is between them, viz. That all the
Effects of mere Corporeal Systems, are produced by the Contiguity, and
immediate Operation of Bodies, moving upon others that are to be moved by them;
without any Sense, Deliberation, or Liberty, which are only to be found in
Humane Actions, in whose Motions and Operations on each other, though a great
difference often intervenes; yet for all that, it is evident, that the
Corporeal Powers of Men when exerted, are subject to the same Laws of motion
with other Bodies, and that diverse Men may often cooperate to one certain
Effect, relating to the Good or Hurt of others, so that there is the same
necessity of a Subordination between Humane motions, as there is between those
of other Bodies. And I must here farther take notice, that Men have frequent
opportunities of meeting together, and also many other means by which they may
hurt or help each other, by Words, Writing, or other Actions. So that, if we
consider the Nature of Mankind, in the whole course of their Lives, it ought to
be considered as one entire System of Bodies, consisting of several particular
parts; So that nothing almost can be done in Relation to any Man's Life,
Family, or Fortune, which does not some way or other, either benefit or
prejudice, those things which are most dear to others also: as the motion of
any one Body in the System of the World, Communicates it self to many others.
For that great Prerogative of Knowledge and Understanding, with which Man is
endued, supplies the Contiguity required for motion in other Bodies. Men being
often excited to Action, by certain Arbitrary signs or words, by which they
understand, what has been done by others in places far distant. So also our
Intellect apprehending a likeness of Desires and Aversions, between those of
the same Species with it self, as to things necessary or hurtful to Life, as
also being able to remember other Men's Actions toward themselves, or those
they love, are from thence excited to hope for, or expect the like things from
them, and are also provoked to a requital when occasion is offered. Such
Properties being plainly Natural, and constant in Humane Nature, are no less
efficacious to excite Men to such Actions or motions, than a mutual contact
between Bodies, is to Communicate motion between all the parts of any Corporeal
System.

. 5. From which Natural Observations it is plainly manifest, that particular
Men may hence Learn, that both their greatest Security from Evil, and all their
hopes of obtaining any Good or Assistance from others, toward making
themselves Happy, does truly and necessarily depend upon voluntary Actions,
proceeding from the Benevolence of others, who do likewise themselves stand in
need of the like means for their Happiness and Safety. From whence we easily
perceive, that these mutual Helps and Assistances of Men toward each other,
are highly beneficial to all of them, and answer that Concourse of Natural
Bodies, and that Cession or giving place to each other, which is so necessary
for the performance of their motions. So that from this necessity of these
mutual helps, it as necessarily follows, that he who would consult his own
Happiness and Preservation, should procure (as far as he is able) the Good will
and Assistance of others, since he cannot but be sensible, that he is able to
afford and perform to others, diverse like Offices of kindness, and so is able
to conspire with the whole System of Rational Beings, toward the same End, (
viz.) the Common Good of Rational Beings: and that on the contrary, the weak
and inconsiderable forces of any one Man, are not sufficient to compel so many
others, each of them equal (if not Superior) to himself, both in Wit and
Power, to yield him their help and assistance, to their own prejudice, whether
they will or no; which would prove as impossible, as that a hundred pound
weight placed in one Scale of a Balance, should bear down several other hundred
weights, put on the opposite Scale: So likewise the force and cunning, of any
single Person, is of no sufficient Power or Force, against the several
Necessities, Counsels, and Endeavors, of innumerable others toward their own,
and the Common Good, without any consideration of his particular Happiness
alone. Therefore it is manifest from this natural Balance of Humane Powers,
that men may be more certainly induced by our Benevolence, or Endeavor of the
Common Good, to yield us those things and assistances we stand in need of, than
by using force or deceit, which Mr. H. Vide, The Preface to De Cive.
supposes, even the Good and Virtuous may lawfully exercise in the State of
Nature, as the only natural means of Self-preservation, in his Imaginary State
of Nature.

. 6. So that from these Natural Observations, concerning all the means
necessary to the Conservation of the Corporeal Universe, and of the several
sorts of Beings therein contained, we may draw these conclusions. 1. That all
things are so disposed, that not the least quantity of matter and motion, can
ever be lost; but the same Species of Animals, are still continued, and are
rather increased than lessened, notwithstanding all the opposition of the cruel
Passions, and unruly Appetites of some other Animals, so that in this
perpetuity of matter and motion, by a continual succession of things, the
Natural Good, or Conservation of the Corporeal Universe consists, and toward
which it is carried according to the immutable Laws of motion; nor can there be
any sufficient reason given, why the Conservation of Mankind may not be looked
upon as established by as certain and natural a Power of Causes, as the
Successive Generations of any other Creatures, since they depend alike upon the
lasting Nature of the Corporeal Universe; and agree in all the Essentials of
Animals. And certainly the Addition of a Rational Soul to our Bodies, does very
often put us in a better Condition than that of Brutes, but can never make us
in a worse; which will be evident to any Man that considers the benefits, which
accrue to our Bodies from the Government of our Reason, and which do abundantly
recompense some inconveniences which may happen to them from the errors of
our minds. Nay, it is most certain, that its errors concerning Food, Pleasure,
and other things which concern the Preservation of our Bodies, proceed from the
Soul's yielding, against the Admonitions of Reason, to Carnal Appetites, and
Corporeal or Animal Passions. 2. That the matter and motion of all Bodies, as
also of Men (considered only as such) do Mechanically, or whether they will or
no, promote the motion of that of the Corporeal Universe, since the motion of
all particular Bodies is determined, by the general motion of the whole System.
In short, our Judgments concerning the necessary means of the Happiness of
Mankind, may be convinced from these Natural causes operating after the same
manner, and by the same Natural Laws, by which the Corporeal Universe is
preserved, since they consist in these two Rules: 1. That the endeavors of
particular Persons toward their own Preservation, are as plainly necessary for
the Conservation of the whole Species of Mankind, as the mechanic motions of
particular Bodies, are to the general motion of the whole Corporeal System. 2.
That the Powers of particular Persons, by which they defend themselves against
the force of others, should be so equally Balanced, as that (like the motion of
other Bodies) none of them should be destroyed or lost, to the Prejudice or
Detriment of the whole. Somewhat like which, is seen in all the motions of the
Corporeal System of the World, which proceed from its Plenitude, and the mutual
Contact of Bodies, and so extend themselves through the whole mass of matter;
but it is the proper Talent of Humane Reason and Understanding, to observe that
each Man's particular Happiness, does depend upon the voluntary Actions of
other Rationals, after a much nobler manner, even when they are far distant,
and can therefore take care that all Humane Actions may in like manner conduce
to the Common Good of Rational Agents, as the motions of all Bodies, do to the
Conservation of the whole Corporeal System; which will be truly performed, if
in all voluntary Actions which respect others, those two Rules aforegoing be
observed. So that we are taught from the real Natures of things, as well as
that of Inanimate Bodies, after what manner, and to what Degree we ought to
pursue our own particular Happiness, that is, only as it conduces to, and is
included in that of the Common Good of Rational Agents. So we are hence also
instructed, what Actions are prescribed, or forbid by the Laws of Nature; since
such Actions only are thereby commended, as promote this great End, and the
contrary Actions forbidden, which disturb or hinder it; which is also supposed
by all Princes and States in their Deliberations and Treaties of Peace, it
being that, in which they all agree, as contributing to their Common Safety and
Preservation, (viz.) That the Powers of all the several states concerned,
should be so justly moderated and equally balanced, that none may destroy or
oppress each other. Thus between neighboring Nations, not Subject to the same
Common Power; it is chiefly provided in all their Leagues and Treaties, that
the Forces of each particular Commonwealth, should be so equally balanced by
the Assistance, and Support of their Consederates and Allies, that it should be
impossible for any one of them to swallow up, or destroy another; but that
there should be still left to each of them Power, and means sufficient to
preserve themselves, and their Subjects in Peace and Safety, as being the main
ends, for which they were at first ordained by God, and Instituted by Men.

. 7. And as it is proper to all Natural Bodies, that whilst they persevere in
their own motion, there is likewise a necessity they should also contribute,
and be subservient to the motions of innumerable other Bodies, from the general
Laws of motion, for the Conservation of the Universe, and which Rule being also
found true in Animals; it seems to admonish us, not only as mere Animals, but
rational Agents, that we contribute our particular endeavors toward the
general Good, or Preservation of all those of their own Kind, since it is not
only a possible effect, but also such a one, as depending upon Causes so
perfect and certain, we may with reason believe, that it will endure to the end
of the World. But if we farther add to these Observations, those things that
distinguish Animate from Inanimate Bodies, they will yet more strongly convince
us, and make us see more sufficient reasons, wherefore (not so much concerning
our selves with other Corporeal Beings) we should be chiefly sollicitous in
giving our assistance to those of our own Kind: First, then the Nature of
Animate is distinguished from that of Inanimate Bodies, by such a fit
disposition of parts, and an apt conformation of their Natural Organs, as
suffices for their Generation, Sensation, Imagination, Affections, Nourishment,
and also all spontaneous motions. And it is by these Actions, that all sorts of
Animals endeavor their Conservation, and Happiness for the time that is
appointed them, and thereby procure the Preservation of the whole Species.

. 8. But I shall not dwell too long upon these common obvious things, which are
so evident in themselves, but shall from hence deduce something more material
to our purpose, ( viz.) that from the same intrinseck Constitution of all
Animals, whereby they are determined to this Endeavor of Preserving
themselves, there are besides given manifest Declarations, that Loving and
Benevolent Actions toward those of their own Kind, are also necessary for
their own defense, and constitute the happiest State of Life they can enjoy.
And likewise that it is farther ordained from the same concourse of External
and Internal Causes, that all Rational Agents cannot but be sensible, or
mindful of these Indications. The first of these Conclusions contains the
Sense, and Sanction of the Law of Nature, as the latter regards its
Promulgation, or the manner whereby it comes to be made known to us. I shall
explain each of them in their order.

. 9. It is therefore first to be observed, That the corporeal Bulk, even of the
largest Animals, is contained within a small and narrow compass; as also that
the space of Time wherein they can live, or be preserved, is not long: From
whence it follows, That but a few Things, and a small quantity of them, are
really necessary for their Nourishment and Preservation; or where there is need
of a Concurrence of more of them, they are only such as may be freely
communicated to many at once; whence they are naturally led to desire but a few
particular Things, but daily stand in need of diverse others in common, whose
use may yet be well communicated to many at once, without exhausting their
store; such as are the free Enjoyment of Air, Light, Fire, Water, etc. And
farther, if we consider the Structure of their Bodies, we may observe, That the
same superficies of the Skin which hinders the effusion, governs also the
Circulation of the Blood, and does at the same time fix bounds to those
Appetites and Necessities by which they are urged to seek their own
Preservation: So that those few Things that suffice to repair the vital Flame
which daily consumes, are likewise sufficient not only for the Conservation of
their life, and natural strength, but also for inabling them to contribute
their Help and Assistance to others of the same kind. And, lastly, the
Structure and Capacity of the Vessels, in which their Aliment is digested, and
of those that convey the Chyle, as also of the Veins and Arteries that receive
it, being but narrow, require but a small quantity to fill them. So that I
think no Brute can be guilty of Mr. H's Error, of judging or desiring all
Things whatever, as necessary for its own Preservation; since from the
intrinseck and constituent Parts of all Animals, it plainly appears, That but a
few Things suffice to allay their Hunger and Thirst, and to prevent the
Injuries of the Weather. And if, so few Things are necessary for their
Happiness and Preservation, they may very well leave the rest of those Products
which the Earth so plentifully brings forth, to be enjoyed by others of their
own kind, since the finite quantity of their Bodies limitting their Appetites
to the desiring, and their Powers only to the using a few necessary Things:
From this Use and Necessity, there arises a natural Division or Appropriation
of Things, amongst diverse Animals of the same kind (as I showed before in the
last Chapter.) The allowance or permission of which Distribution, is the
Foundation of all that mutual Concord and Benevolence amongst them, and which
their Nature requires for their Preservation: So that if this innate Love, or
Desire of Self-preservation in Animals, be limited after the manner we have now
described, this once satisfied, there can be no Reason why they should
withstand, or obstruct the Conservation of others of the same kind, either by
hindering their Enjoyment of those Things which they themselves do not need, or
in refusing to lend them their Help and Assistance, when there is occasion, and
that it is not needful for themselves.

. 10. The next Observation we make, is from the Effects of the Senses, as also
the Imagination and Memory in Animals when they are taken up, and employed
about others of the same kind: For since from the Impressions made on their
Organs of Sense, they cannot but perceive, that such Creatures are of the same
Nature with themselves; such Notions must, from the Constitution of their
Nature, move them to somewhat a like affection toward them as toward
themselves. But I shall here avoid all Controversies concerning the Knowledge
of Brutes, or which way their Affections are moved by their Imaginations; and
shall only suppose, That their Imagination excites their Passions, and that
these Passions do likewise often produce the like Motions, or Inclinations, in
their fellow Animals: From whence I collect, That this Similitude of Nature
does highly conduce to the procuring of Benevolence, or Concord, amongst those
of the same kind, unless there be some unaccountable Antipathy, or
Dissimilitude of Disposition, which may happen to excite Enmity, or Discord
between them; which yet not often happens: Whence it follows, That Animals, as
long as they are in their Right Senses, and are mindful of themselves, cannot
forget others of the same kind, since under the same Idea's by which they
conceive their own Nature, and the Necessities thereof, they cannot but have an
Idea of that of others of the same Species with themselves; and must also be
sensible, that such Animals, being urged by the like Appetites of Hunger and
Thirst as themselves, are thereby moved to seek Food when hungry or thirsty;
and cannot but be also sensible, that it is highly grateful to them, when the
use of these Necessaries is left free and undisturbed, or else is administered
to them by others, or that they are any ways assisted by them in the obtaining
them.

. 11. But since Idea's of this sort do constantly spring in the Minds of
Animals, as also produce perpetual motions to love or Good Will, arising
necessarily from this similitude of Nature; it also follows, that they never so
far deviate from their natural state, as when, through Madness, or any other
violent Appetite, or Passion, they act contrary to these first and most natural
Dictates; as all Men grant it to be a preternatural Disease in a Dog, when
seized with Madness, he bites all other Dogs he meets with; or when a Sow,
through a depraved Appetite, eats her own Pigs. Nor indeed can I see any reason
why all other kinds of inordinate Passions, which disturb the natural
Disposition of an Animal, so as to make it do extravagant Actions, and hurtful
to its own Species, without any just Cause, (such as Anger, and vehement Envy
often times produce) may not be justly esteemed as preternatural Distempers of
the Blood, or Brain, very like to that of a mad Dog; for there often appears in
those that are transported with these Passions, all the Symptoms of those
Diseases that proceed from an overflowing of Choler, or a violent effervescence
of the Blood, such as an icterial blackness of the Face, paralytick Tremblings,
and other Signs well enough known to Physicians. Nor is an immoderate needless
Fear of Animals of the same kind, to be less reckoned among such Diseases,
since it is not only preternatural, or besides their Constitution when in
Health, but does likewise, as well as other Diseases, destroy the Body, by
driving them into an immoderate Sadness, unseasonable Solitude and Watchings,
with other Symptoms of predominant Melancholy, whence an untimely Death is
often accelerated. Neither can there be any Mean, or End, put to this
unreasonable Fear, when once the Mind is touched and infected with a false
Imagination, that all other Men design to kill and destroy them; which Madness
is very like that of those, who being bitten by a mad Dog, are afraid of Water,
and all Liquids, though they cannot live without them, of which I have met with
a famous Example in the French Chronicles of King Charles VI. Vid. Mezeray's
Hist. in the Life of this Prince.
who being seized with a violent apprehension, that all his Servants were
bribed, by his Son the Dauphin, to poison him, did quite abstain from all Food,
'till at last he died, as truly of Hunger, as Fear.

. 12. And it is evident (and Mr. H. himself confesses it) that Men, as well as
other sociable Animals, do more or less delight in the society of each other of
the same kind, as may be observed from those signs of Joy and Satisfaction
which they express when they meet after any long absence: But since it is as
plain, that the Causes of this Association and Agreement, proceed from the
intrinseck Nature of the Creatures, and are no other than those by which the
Blood, Spirits, and Nerves are continued and preserved, in a due and healthy
state; it as evidently follows, That the Safety and Preservation of each of
them, cannot be separated from a Propension, at least, to a friendly
Association with those of their own kind; so that though they sometimes quarrel
about the same Meat, or Female, yet this does not any ways cross or contradict
this great End of Nature, of procuring the Common Good of the Universe; but is
rather in order to it, viz. when the Desire of Food, in order to their own
Preservation, or Lust, to propagate their Species, prompts them to fight, and
sometimes to destroy each other; the time of which Contention, is yet but
small, in comparison of the greater part of their Lives, in which they are
observed to live in peace: And that all Animals are determined by Nature, to
prosecute and endeavor the Common Good of their own Species, by the same
Causes that preserve the Lives of each of them in particular, appears from the
great Love and Kindness, which Creatures of the same Species, but of different
Sexes, express toward each other, and by virtue of which, they perform the Act
of Generation, so highly grateful and pleasing to each other, and thereby
propagate their Offspring; which when brought forth, they love and defend, as
part of themselves, unless some unusual Distemper intervene, which may
sometimes disturb or change these natural Propensions; as when Sows or Rabbets
eat or destroy their young ones; which happening but seldom, is rather to be
accounted among the Diseases of the Brain, or Distempers of the Appetite, than
to be ascribed to their natural State, or Constitution; and does no more
contradict this general Law of Nature, than the ascent of Water in a Pump, does
oppose that general Rule of the constant descent of heavy Bodies. So that we
may, for all that, affirm, That the Procreation of their young, and that (...)
or natural Affection they have for them, and desire of breeding them up, 'till
they are able to shift for themselves, are seldom or never separated; for
Preservation is but, as it were, the Generation of the same Creature still
continued. So that the same natural Causes excite Animals to the one, as well
as the other. But it is evident, That their Offspring can neither be
generated, or preserved, unless those of different Sexes do, for some time,
maintain Peace, and a Co-habitation with each other, which in many others of
them, continues much longer than the bare time of Generation, (viz.) for the
whole season of Coupling and Breeding up of their young ones; and in diverse
others, as Doves, Pigeons, etc. This Affection continues (like Marriage) as
long as their Lives. And that Creatures are excited to generate their like,
from the same natural Causes for which their own Preservation is procured,
appears from this anatomical Observation, that part of the same nutritious
Juice passes into the Nourishment of the Body, and the rest to the Propagation
of Seed; and the whole Circulation of the Blood, with the Causes that produce
and promote it, as the muscular force of the Heart, and that strange and
wonderful Artifice of the Valves in the Veins, do by one and the same Action,
serve for the particular Nutrition of the Animal, and also perform the more
public Duty of Propagation of the Species, whilst it does, at the same time,
send down part of that matter to the Spermatick Vessels out of which the Seed
is produced.

. 13. But leaving the nicer Disquisition of these anatomical Observations to
Naturalists and Physicians, I shall only add this one Observation, That it is
evident that all Animals are, by these means, impelled to the Love of those of
a different Sex, and also of their own Offspring, and so are brought to impart
some of that Self-love, with which they are first endued, to others of their
own kind, from an irresistible instinct of Nature: And hence it is truly
observed of Men, That after they are married, and have got Children, they are
more prone to, and sollicitous after Peace than before; but that this desire of
Propagation, disposes Men to a greater Affection toward those of the Female
Sex, is so evident, that it needs no proof. But since Mr. H. and others of his
Opinion, do grant these Observations, concerning the natural Propensions of
Creatures to be true, but are wont to evade them, by affirming, That they only
proceed from the sole Love of their own Pleasure and Satisfaction; and that all
the Actions proceeding from thence, tend to no higher end than the Love and
Preservation of themselves; as I do not in this part of the Discourse, intend
to dispute, so have I not omitted to answer this Objection in the last Chapter,
which is designed on purpose for answering all those Objections that can well
be made against our Definition of the Law of Nature.

. 14. The last general Observation to be drawn from the Nature of Living
Creatures, may be taken from that Sweetness and Pleasure they take and enjoy in
those Actions and Passions that tend to the Common Good of their own Kind,
since it is very well known to Naturalists, that in those sweeter Passions of
Love, Desire, Hope, Joy, (especially when employed about any great Good toward
others) the vital Motions of the Blood and Heart are then highly helped and
promoted. So that the Veins and Arteries are filled with a milder and nobler
Juice, whilst brisker and more active Spirits are thereby generated, and the
Circulation of the Blood, and consequently all the other animal Functions, are
more easily and nimbly performed. So that by those very Affections by which
they do good to Animals of their own Kind, they themselves are also satisfied
and delighted, and as far as they feel this naturally rooted in their very
Natures, they must needs incline to these Affections so highly conducing to
their own Happiness and Preservation; whereas, on the contrary, in Hatred,
Envy, Fear, and that Sadness and Ill-humour which necessarily springs from
those sour and immoderate Passions; the Circulation of the Blood is obstructed,
and the Heart rendered more heavy, and unapt to motion. So that it thereby
expels the Blood with greater difficulty in its Systole, from whence proceeds
meagerness and paleness of the Countenance, with innumerable Inconveniences to
the whole Economy of the Body, but chiefly in the Functions of the Brain and
Nerves, such as are those Diseases which are attributed to the Spleen, deep
Melancholy, and Discontent. But these things being rather of a medicinal
Consideration, I shall but only just mention them, though the Writings of
Physicians may yield us diverse Examples of such who have hastened their own
Fate, through immoderate Envy and Regret, that they could not satisfy their
Malice or Revenge; of which I may chance to give you a taste when I come to
consider the Sanction of the Law of Nature by Punishments, proceeding from the
undue and immoderate exercise of those Passions.

. 15. But as Mr. H. and his Disciples cannot deny these Natural Propensions in
Brute Creatures toward mutual Concord, so they have no other way to evade
these Instances, but by supposing some things in Man's Nature, that render him
worse Natured, and more unmanageable than Bears, Wolves, etc. That so being
naturally in a perpetual state of War, they can no way be kept from destroying
each other, but by some Common Supreme Power set over them to keep them all in
awe; which Arguments, and the Answers to them, since by their length they would
too much perplex the Connection of this Discourse, I shall refer you to the
Second part, wherein I hope I have made it appear, that there is nothing in
Man's Nature considered as an Animal, that ought to be governed by right
Reason, (and in which alone he excels other Creatures) that can lay any
necessity upon him of being more fierce, and unsociable than Brutes.

. 16. Having now dispatched these common and easy Observations concerning Man,
considered as a mere Body, and also such as concern his Nature as an Animal,
tending to prove, that the endeavor of the Common Good of his own Species, was
one great End and Design of God in His Creation. I come in the next place to
consider those particulars, in which the Nature of Man excels that of Brutes,
and whereby he is rendered much more capable than they of promoting, and
performing this great End, viz. the Common Good of Rational Agents: which I
shall divide into two Heads, either those belonging to the Body, or else to the
Soul or Mind; as to the former, though there are diverse Anatomical
Observations, made by curious Anatomists and Learned Physicians, concerning the
differences between the Constitution of the inward parts, or vessels in Men and
Brutes; yet I shall take notice of no more, than what are absolutely necessary
to our purpose, and which may serve to show, what are the natural Causes of
that Excellency and Superiority, that is commonly found in Humane Intellects,
above those of Brutes. The first of which Observations may be drawn from the
large quantity of brains which is found in Humane Bodies, and which bears a
much greater proportion in respect of their bulk, than in any other Creatures;
for though the weight of an ordinary Humane Body, does seldom exceed above a
fourth part of that of a Horse or Bull; yet for the motion and government of so
much a smaller Body, Nature has allowed him near double the quantity of
brains, viz. about the weight of four or five pounds, so that there is eight
times as much brains, appointed for the government of the like bulk in a Man,
as in an Ox or Horse. And though the Carcases of the largest Sheep and Hogs, do
often weigh near as much as a Humane Body: yet their brain is not above an
eighth part of the weight in proportion to ours; which seems to be thus
ordained by Nature, that by reason of the greater largeness of the Vessels, the
Animal Spirits should be prepared in greater plenty, and also have more room to
work, and so should become more lively and vigorous in Man, than in other
Creatures; since all the Nerves do either spring from the brain, or else from
the Spinal Marrow which is continuous, and of the same substance with it;
whence it may follow that this larger quantity, and consequently greater
strength of brain in a Man above other Creatures, was intended to serve him to
direct, and govern that greater variety of Motions and Actions depending
thereupon, with a more exact care and deliberation.

. 17. A second Observation to prove, that Man is a Creature ordained by God for
a fuller and more constant Association with those of his own Kind, (which also
tends to the promoting of the Common Good of his Species) than other Creatures,
may be taken from the natural Constitution of his Blood, and Spermatick
Vessels, by which his Appetite to Copulation is not confined (as in most other
Creatures) to some certain times, but are equally the same at all seasons of
the Year; from whence proceeds a desire of Marriage, or a constant Cohabitation
with one, or more Women, from whence must likewise follow a more constant
generation of their Offspring, and a more lasting care of them when generated
and brought forth. For whereas Brutes quit the care of their Young, and drive
them away from them as soon as ever they are able to shift for themselves; Man
alone loves and cherishes his Offspring, and continues his love and care of
them as long as they Live, and still loves them the more the longer they have
continued with them, and the more care and pains they have bestowed on their
Education: and so likewise Man is the only Creature we know of, that makes any
returns for this care, by Acts of Duty and Gratitude toward his Parents; for
as for the Gratitude of Storks to their Sires or Dams when old, I look upon it
as an old Fable.

. 18. Lastly, I shall consider the wonderful Frame and Structure of the Hand in
Man, which though I grant it not peculiar to him alone; all Creatures of the
Ape or Monky kind, having their fore-paws very like it, and in many Actions
using them to the same ends, both in feeding themselves, and carrying their
Young ones; yet since we see our Hands were not given us instead of Feet to go
upon, (as in them) we may justly conclude, that they were Framed for some
Higher and Nobler Use, than our bare Preservation, or the hurting or destroying
of others. Since if God had ordained them only for this end, sharp Teeth, Claws
and Horns, would have done much better, and would have saved us the trouble of
making Swords, Spears, and such like Instruments, not only of self-preservation
but destruction; whereas we find that by the help of our Hands, directed by our
reason, we are able to do much more than any of those weak silly Animals can do
with their Paws, since they cannot serve them to make any of those ordinary
Instruments, or Utensils of Life, which even the most Barbarous Nations cannot
be without; or so much as to administer to each other, many of those ordinary
helps and assistances, which Men by means of their Hands do daily afford each
other. So that if we consider the Ordinary use of these Members, especially in
laboring Men and Mechanics, we shall find, that they do not only serve for
their own Sustenance and Preservation, but also for the benefit and maintenance
of many others of their own kind, who cannot well Subsist without the manual
Labor of others. And though I grant this noble Instrument the Hand, is often
abused by wicked and violent Men, to make unjust Wars, and commits Murders and
Robberies, and by lesser Thieves to pick Pockets, Pilfer, etc. and that without
this they could never commit such Villainies; yet does it not follow, that
their Hands were bestowed upon them by God for that end. Since if He intended
the Common Good and Happiness of Mankind, as His great end, He never could
intend that these Instruments should be made use of to a quite contrary design,
viz. their Ruin and Destruction. So that whoever will but strictly consider
all this, cannot but confess, that we are made and ordained to depend upon each
others assistance, and that Man was Created for a higher purpose than his own
single Self-preservation.

. 19. Which may be farther made out from the natural Constitution of Humane
Nature, as that no Man is born Self-sufficient, or able to procure all things
necessary for his bare Subsistence, much less for a quiet or pleasant Life, but
needs the Assistance of others to breed him up whilst an Infant, or to tend him
when he is sick, old, or unable to help himself; or if it be sometimes possible
for a time, yet it must be with great hardship and scantiness, that any Man's
own single Labor, unassisted with the Help of others, can provide himself all
the Necessaries of Life. Whence first arises another necessity of Marriage in
the state of Nature, which is the Contract of a Man and a Woman to live
together, for the propagation of their Species, and breeding up of their
Offsprings, and also for mutual Help, and a joint Provision of the Necessaries
of Life for themselves and them. And, secondly, a necessity of a Man's living
in concord, or society, with all other Men, especially those of his own Nation,
or Commonwealth. So that it is evident, the chief Happiness and Well-being of
Mankind, depends upon their mutual administration of these Things, as often as
need shall require; that is, upon Acts of the highest Love and Benevolence, in
order to the Common Good.

To all which may be added another Observation, of the great difference in the
Frame of Men's Bodies from those of Brutes, in the upright posture of their
progressive motion; Man alone going upon two Legs, whereas most other
terrestrial Animals go upon all four, whereby Men have the constant use of
their Hands, both to help and assist themselves and others, to a much greater
degree, and in a much more powerful manner than what Brutes are able to
perform. But whereas some Atheists have alleged, That this Posture proceeds
rather from Custom and Example than Nature; I desire them to show me any Nation
in the World so barbarous, that does not go upon two Legs as well as we: And
though Children, it is true, before they can go, must crawl; yet it is not upon
their Hands and Feet, but Knees: For a Man's Legs (as is notorious to
Anatomists) are so much longer than his Arms, and are likewise so set on, that
they cannot be brought to move in Right-Angles with the Arms, or Forelegs, as
in Brutes: And though I grant that some Beasts, as Apes, Monkeys, and Bears,
can sometimes go upon their Hind-feet, yet is not this constant; but as soon as
the present Necessity is over, they soon return to their natural posture. To
conclude, I think I may leave it to any indifferent Reader to judge, whether
from all these natural Observations from the Frame of Humane Bodies, and the
Nature of their Passions, it does not evidently appear, That Man's Happiness
and Subsistence in this Life, was not designed by GOD to depend upon his own
particular sensual Pleasure, or the mere satisfaction of his present Appetites
and Passions, restrained to himself, without any Consideration of others of his
own Kind, but was rather intended for the Common Good and Preservation of the
whole Species of Mankind.

. 20. Having now dispatched those natural Observations that may be drawn from
the Constitution or Frame of Man's Body, in order to the rendering him capable
of serving the Common Good in the propagation of his Species, I shall proceed
to the next Head before laid down, ( viz.) those Excellencies, or Prerogatives,
of the Humane Soul, or Mind; and in which he excels all other Creatures: And,
in the first place, Mr. Leviath. Part I. Chap. 12.
H. very well observes, That it is peculiar to the Nature of Man, to be
inquisitive into the Causes of the Events they see; and that upon the sight of
any thing that has a beginning, to judge also that it had a Cause which
determined the same to begin when it did: And also whereas there is no other
Felicity amongst Beasts, but the enjoying their daily Food, Ease, and Lust, as
having little or no foresight of the time to come for want of Observation and
Memory of the Order, Consequence, and Dependence of the Things they see. Man
alone observes how one Event has been produced by another; and therein
remembers the Antecedence and Consequence. Whence he certainly must be endued
with a larger Capacity, for observing the natures of Things without himself;
and is also able to make more curious and exact Searches into their Causes and
Effects, than the most sagacious Brutes; who though they are endued with some
few Appetites, or Inclinations, toward those Things that are necessary for
their Preservation, and an Aversion for others that are hurtful to them; yet
this seems to proceed from some natural instinct, or impression, stamped by GOD
on their very Natures, and not from Reason or Deliberation: As, young
Wild-Ducks (they say) will run away from a Man, as soon as they are hatched;
and Chickens know the Kite, though they never saw her before; and this not from
any Experience or Rational Deduction. But as for Man, it is his Faculty alone,
to proceed from some known Principles, to draw Rational Deductions, or
Conclusions, which were not known before: The exercise of which Faculty, we
call Right Reason, or Ratiocination; which though I grant is not born with him,
and so is not a Property belonging to him as a mere Animal (since we see
Children, 'till they come to some Years, and Fools, and mad Folks act without
it so long as they live) yet is it not therefore Artificial, (as some would
have it) since all Persons of Years of Discretion, and who will give themselves
leisure to think, may attain to a sufficient degree of it, for the
well-Government of their Actions, in order to their own Preservation, and the
discovering that Duty they owe to GOD and the rest of Mankind: Which Notions
being peculiar to Man, and also common to the greater part of Mankind, either
from Men's own particular Observations, or Rational Deductions; or else from
the Instructions of others, who themselves first found out such Rational
Conclusions, and taught them to their Children, or Scholars, with their first
Elements of Speech, come, in process of time (having forgot when those early
Notions were first instilled into them) to be taken for connate Idea's: So that
I doubt they have been, by too many, (who have not well considered their
Original) mistaken for Idea's, or Notions impressed by GOD upon their Souls.

But leaving this, of which others have said enough, it cannot be denied but
that from this Faculty of deducing Effects from their Causes, Man has been
always able to find out sufficient Remedies for his own natural Weakness, by
the Invention of several Arts, such as Physic and Chyrurgery for his
Preservation and Cure, when sick or hurt: And also those of a more public
Nature, such are the Knowledge of Policies, or the well-Government of
Common-weals, of Navigation, Warfare, or the Art Military, for his Happiness
and defense, as a Sociable Creature. So that, though Man is born naked, and
without those natural defenses and Weapons, with which diverse Brutes are
furnished by Nature; yet by the power of this Faculty, he is able, not only
much better to secure himself from the violence and injury of the Weather, by
providing himself with Cloths, Houses, and Victuals beforehand, since Nature
has not made him to live like Beasts upon those Fruits of the Earth, which it
spontaneously produces, but can also tame, subdue, and kill the strongest,
fiercest, and cunningest Brutes, and make them subservient, to those Ends and
Designs for which he pleases to employ them: So likewise from this Faculty of
Judging of Consequences from their Antecedents, and foreseeing the Probability
or Improbability of future Events, he thereby distinguishes between real and
apparent Goods; that is, between such Things that may please for the present,
and do afterward hurt him; and those which though they may seem displeasing
for a time, yet may after do him a greater Benefit; which Principles, since
they contain Foundations of all Morality, and the Laws of Nature, which we now
treat of, it will not be amiss here particularly to set down, as the Grounds of
what I have to say on this Subject.

. 21. First, It has been already proved, That every Animal is endued with a
Natural Principle, whereby it is necessarily inclined to promote his own
Preservation and Well-being (yet not excluding that of others of their own
Kind) that therefore which most conduces to this end, is called a natural Good;
and, on the contrary, that which is apt to obstruct and hinder it, is evil.
Among which Goods and Evils, there are several kinds or degrees, according as
Things are endued with more or less fitness or power to promote or hinder this
End. All which, may be reduced to these plain Maxims, or Propositions, as I
have taken them out of Dr. Moor's Enchiridion Ethicum; so that I have collected
these Axioms, and put them together in this method, as they are represented by
those excellent Authors abovementioned, that you may see them all at one view;
though I grant there are many other natural Truths, which are also useful to
prove what Actions are productive of the Common Good, diverse of which we have
given you dispersedly in these two Chapters.

Principle I.

THe lessening or escaping of an Evil, is to be reckoned under the Notion of
Good.

Principle II.

The lessening or loss of Good, is to be reckoned under the Notion of Evil.

Principle III.

That which is Good, is to be chosen; that which is Evil, to be avoided.

Principle IV.

The greater Good is to be preferred before the less; and a less Evil to be
endured, rather than a greater.

Principle V.

Such Things, or Events, whether Good or Evil, as will certainly come to pass,
may fall under Computation, and be estimated according to their several Degrees
as well as Things present: And the same likewise is for such Things as may
probably come to pass, though this Probability may be somewhat remote, as it is
counted a valuable Thing, and may be estimated at a certain rate; for a Man to
be one amongst four or five equal Competitors for an Office, or to be the
fourth or fifth Expectant of an Inheritance; and though in such Cases there may
be the odds of three or four to one, yet the Price that is set upon this, may
be so proportioned, as either to reduce the Purchase to an equality, or make it
at least a very advantageous Bargain.

Principle VI.

A present Good may reasonably be parted with, upon a probable Expectation of a
future Good, which is much greater, and more excellent.

Principle VII.

A present Evil is to be endured, for the avoiding of a probable future Evil
which is far greater.

Principle VIII.

The greater the Evil, the more reason there is to venture the loss of a
greater Good, or the suffering of a less Evil for the escaping it.

Principle IX.

It is better to be without any Good, than by the enjoyment of it to endure an
Evil, as great or greater than that Good comes to.

And these last Principles respecting our selves, may serve to produce
Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude in our Minds; the rest that follow, respect
our Duty toward others, and are the Foundation of all Right and Wrong among
Men.

Principle X.

We ought to pursue the Chiefest, or Common Good, with the highest; and all
less or subordinate Goods, with a less Affection, or Desire: Neither ought we
to make the Highest, or Common Good, subordinate to the Meaner, or middle
Goods, or the middle Goods to the least.

Principle XI.

Whatsoever Good you would have done to your self, in such and such
Circumstances, you ought to do the same to another, in the same or like
Circumstances, as far as may be, without prejudicing the Community.

Principle XII.

Whatsoever Evil you would not have done to your self, you ought to abstain
from doing that to another.

Principle XIII.

Good is to be recompensed with Good, and not with Evil.

Principle XIV.

It is good for a Man to enjoy all the Means wherewith he may live happily.

Principle XV.

It is better for the Public, or Common Good, that one Man should not live
voluptuously, than that another should thereby live miserable.

Principle XVI.

If it is a Public, as well as a Private Good, for any one to have enough
wherewith to live happy; it follows from the same Rule, That it is doubly
better, when there is sufficient for two Men; and by the same Rule of
Proportion, a thousand times better if there be sufficient for a thousand to
live happy: So that at last, from the same Principle, it must be confessed,
That if all the Men in the World, or all Mankind, could live happily, it were
the greatest Good we could suppose them capable of.

Principle XVII.

It is necessary to the Public Good, That every Man's Right and Property be
allowed him, and its free Use or Possession be likewise permitted him, without
any Injury or Molestation from others, though it must be granted, that a Man
may so behave himself, as whatsoever is his, whether by Possession, Gift, or
Purchase; may lawfully cease to be so, as a Punishment for his Crimes, in
transgressing this great Law of Nature, of endeavoring the Common Good.

Principle XVIII.

It is better to Obey God, declaring His Will to us by the true Principles of
Natural Reason, than our own unreasonable Lusts and Passions, or the wicked
desires or Commands of Men.

These and the like Principles may fitly be called Natural, as well as Moral
Axioms, as being the true results of Natural Reason, and are so clear and
manifest of themselves, that if any one will consider them without prejudice,
or being biased by Passion, or too much Self-love, they will not need a long
train of Arguments to prove them; since they appear true and evident at the
first Proposal. So also these Moral Principles, considered as Propositions
declaring the Connection of all Humane Actions, with the Natural effects that
depend upon them; as for example, when they show us any Action which will most
certainly conduce to our own, and all others happiness, and that it appears to
be not only our Duty but Interest to perform them. These Principles thus
considered, with relation to our future Actions, may be called Practical
Dictates, since they do not only show us the highest End we can propose to our
selves, in order to our present and future happiness; but do also direct us to
the choice of the fittest means to attain it.

But I think it does sufficiently appear, that we are not only able to form a
complex Idea of this Common Good of Rational Beings; but also from the faculty
of comparing the likeness of our own Nature with that of all other Men, can
also frame an universal or complex Idea of a Species, or kind of Creatures
agreeing in the same natural Properties, and requiring the same things for
their Happiness and Subsistence as himself. Note that I do not mean by this,
any adequate Idea of the true Physical Nature of Mankind, since of this (as of
all other substances) we have no other knowledge but by their sensible
qualities, therefore I mean only here an Idea fori, or such a common and
inadequate Idea of the Nature of Man, as serves us for all the moral Rules of
Life, which Idea he can give a name to, and call mankind, and so comes to
consider, and understand all the Causes and means, not only of his own
Preservation and Happiness, but that of all other men's, considered as an
aggregate Body. And from thence is able to draw diverse Conclusions concerning
the proportion, and degrees of men's natural Good or Happiness, according to
the Principles before laid down; till he at last arrive at this Universal Idea
of the Common Good of Rational Beings, as the highest and noblest that he can
attain unto, and which is most inseparably conjoined with his own particular
Conservation and Happiness. But whereas God has Created other Creatures to act
for their own present Satisfaction and Preservation, without any consideration
of that of others: He has made man alone, not only able to contribute to the
good and Preservation of his own kind, but has also made him sensible of this
Ability: and I shall farther show in this Discourse, that he has laid a
sufficient Obligation on him to exert it.

. 22. Another faculty of the Rational Soul, and only proper to Man as a
sociable Creature, is, That of Speech, or expressing our Notions by significant
Words or Sounds; which though it be not born with us, yet however may be
reckoned amongst the Natural faculties of Mankind, as well as going with two
legs; since we find no Brute Creatures capable of it, though diverse of them are
endued with Tongues like ours, and that diverse Birds can pronounce whole
Sentences, yet have they no notion of what they say: whereas there is no
Nation, though never so Barbarous, but has the use of Speech. And to show you
farther, how natural some sort of Speech is to Mankind, I have heard of two
young Gentlemen that were Brothers, (and I knew one of them my self) who though
born deaf, and consequently dumb; yet by often and long Conversation with each
other, came to frame a certain Language between themselves, which though it
seemed perfect Gibberish to the standers by, yet by the sole motion of their
Lips and other signs, they perfectly understood each other; which was likewise
evident from this, that in the dark they were not able to converse at all. So
that this faculty seems to have been bestowed by God on Mankind, not for his
Preservation as a mere Animal, Since diverse Brutes are able to subsist for more
years without it; and therefore seems to be intended to render Man a Sociable
Creature, and who was by this Faculty to benefit others of his own kind, as
well as himself; for we are not only hereby able to impose certain Arbitrary
names to particular things; but having first framed Universal Idea's, can
likewise give names to them, as to this general Idea applicable to all
particular Men in the World, we can give the name of Man; and herein consists
the main difference between Men and Brutes, and not in Ratiocination alone.
Since I suppose even Brutes have right Idea's of those Objects they have
received by their Senses; and can likewise infer, or reason right about them:
As when a Dog by often seeing his Master take down his stick before he goes
abroad, does thence argue when ever he does so, that his going abroad will
follow, expressing his Joy by barking and leaping: yet we cannot find that
Brutes have any general or complex Idea's, much less names for them, having no
more but a few Ordinary signs, whereby to express their present Appetites and
Passions; but the main benefit of Speech seems to respect others more than our
selves, since we are hereby able to instruct them in many Arts and Sciences,
necessary for their Happiness and Preservation, and also to advise and admonish
them in all Civil and Moral Duties; and there is scarce any one so Brutish, who
is not sensible that in the exercise of this Faculty, consists one of the
greatest pleasures of Humane Life, ( viz.) Conversation: and supposing Men in a
state of War, I do not see how they could ever well get out of it again, were
it not for Treaties and Articles of Peace; but must (like game Cocks and Bulls)
fight it out, till one side were either quite destroyed, or forced to run away,
and quit that Territory or Country where they Lived.

. 23. Nor can we omit another great benefit we receive from Speech, ( viz.) the
Invention of Letters, by which we are not only able to Register our present
Thoughts for our own remembrance; but can likewise Profit and Instruct, not
only the present, but also all future Generations; by Books or Writings, as we
do now make use of the Knowledge and Experience of those who dyed, some
Thousands of Years before we were born. But since Mr. H. and others, have made
some Objections against the benefit of Speech and Letters, as that they tend
oftentimes to promote false Opinions, and War amongst Mankind. Granting it to
be so, it is no more an Objection against the benefits we receive by them, than
it were to say, that the Air, Water, or Food, (the only means of Life) are
hurtful to Mankind; since by the necessary course of Nature, or else our own
Intemperance, they often become the causes of Plagues, Surfeits, and diverse
other diseases, whereby Mankind is destroyed. Yet since that Author has made
the use of Speech, one great Reason why Men cannot live so peaceably as Brutes,
and therefore fancies they must be in a Natural state of War: I shall therefore
referr the Answering it to the Second Part, since my Intention is not here to
Argue, but Instruct.

. 24. Men do also far exceed Brutes in their Rational or discoursive Faculty,
as appears in the Knowledge of Numbers, or Collecting diverse single things into
one Total Sum, which we call Arithmetic; so necessary for all Affairs of a
Civil Life, and the Duties of distributive Justice. And though I grant it is an
Art, and that diverse Barbarous Nations want that exact knowledge of it which we
have; yet by reckoning upon their fingers they have a sufficient use of it, as
much as is necessary for their purpose or business; and if they did but apply
their Minds to it, I doubt not but that they would arrive to the same
perfection in Arithmetic as we do. But I look upon this Faculty as peculiar to
Mankind, since we cannot perceive Brutes to have any knowledge of it. Thus if
from Bitches or Sows, you take away never so many of their Young ones; yet if
you leave them but one or two, they do not miss the rest; which shows that they
have no Idea's of Numbers, whatever they may have of Quantity.

. 26. To this Observation may likewise be added as a Consequence thereof, that
Faculty so proper to Mankind, of measuring the quantities of Bodies, the
distances between them, and the Proportions they bear to each other, which
Science we call Geometry or Mathematics; which Arts were certainly invented by
Man, as a Creature intended for a Sociable Life; since on some of these depend
most Trades, all Commerce, Architecture, Navigation, and most of the Rules of
distributive Justice, with other Arts needless here to be set down. So that
whoever will but seriously reflect upon the excellency of these Sciences, as
well in the certainty of their Demonstrations, as in the vast and Stupendous
effects they produce; cannot but acknowledge that our Rational Faculty, exceeds
that of Brutes by many degrees.

. 27. But there yet remain behind two of the greatest Prerogatives of Man's
Soul, and in respect of which alone he is made a sit Subject of the Law of
Nature. The first is freedom in Actions, or the power of doing or forbearing
any Action; which does not only consist in indifferent things, as when a Man of
two different Objects, chooses which of them he pleases; but is also able to
choose a greater Good, before a less, and does likewise often prefer (though
unjustly) a present less Good grateful to his Senses, before a greater Good
approved of by his Reason; yet however it cannot be denied, but that Man by the
power of his Reason, is able to move and excite his Passions of Love and Pity,
when he sees Objects that require his help and assistance: Nay, can also by
deliberation, command and overrule those domineering Passions of Lust, Anger,
and Revenge, etc. When they happen to prompt him to Actions that are contrary
to his own true Good, and that of the rest of Mankind. And lastly, Man being
capable to comprehend all particular goods, and to add them together into one
Sum, viz. the Common and General Good of Rationals, as the best and most noble
End he can employ himself about, is also able to divert his thoughts from his
own private pleasure and profit alone; and fix them upon the care of his
Relations and Friends, or the more public Good of his Country. And though I
grant it is difficult, exactly to explain after what manner we exert this
Faculty, since the Nature and Actings of the Rational Soul, are very abstruse;
yet I appeal to every Man's own Heart, whether he does not find in himself, not
only a Liberty to do or forbear indifferent Actions, such as going abroad or
staying at home; but likewise such as are certainly better by a Rational
estimate, if he will but give himself time to consider, and weigh the Nature
and Consequence of them, or else to what purpose is he sorry? Or why does he
repent the having done any foolish, wicked, or rash Action? Since if all
Actions were absolutely necessary, it were as idle and insignificant as if he
should be sorry, that he were not made a Prince, rather than a private Person;
or instead of a Prince that he was not an Angel. So that certainly, God would
not then have endued Man with these two Properties peculiar to him, viz. That
of Conscience, or a Reflection upon the Good or Evil of his own Actions, and
that of Repentance or Sorrow, for having done amiss, altogether in vain, since
both were needless, if all Actions were a-like necessitated.

. 28. But the last and highest Faculty, and whereby Man's Nature is chiefly
distinguished from that of Brutes, is, when by the force of his Reason, (acting
by the method and means here described) he becomes sensible of the existence,
Providence, and other Perfections of the Deity; from whence we may infer, that
it is highly improbable, if not impossible, that this most Wise and Powerful
Being, which we call God, should have Ordained any Power or Faculty in Man's
Soul to no purpose. If therefore He has Endued Man alone of all his Creatures,
with the Knowledge of his own Existence and Attributes, as far as is necessary
for us Finite Creatures to conceive of them; since I grant we are not able to
comprehend Infinite Perfections, it is not likely, that God should endue Man
alone with this so excellent a Knowledge, for so useless an End as bare
Speculation; which alone is of no great Use or Benefit, either to himself, or
the rest of Mankind, whose Good and Happiness God chiefly intended in their
Creation: So that indeed we cannot apprehend any End more worthy his Divine
Wisdom and Goodness, in Creating us capable of these Idea's, than what is
Practical, that is, as it some way serves to direct our Actions, as free and
voluntary Agents toward the obtaining our own Good and Happiness, Conjoined
with that of other Rational Beings. Nor can any Actions render us more Happy,
than those that testify our high Veneration of God's Infinite Perfections, and
a deep Sense of his Goodness toward us, and whereby we may be disposed to an
entire Obedience to his Laws, whether Natural or Revealed, whenever they are
made known to us; so that if it can be proved, that these Dictates of right
reason, called the Laws of Nature, derive their Authority from God as a
Lawgiver, and were intended by Him for the Happiness and Preservation of
Mankind, and as Rules whereby he would have us direct all our Actions to this
great End; there can be no doubt but we lie under a sufficient Obligation to
observe them; and to prove this, will be the next and greatest part of our task.

29. But before I undertake this, it will not be amiss to Treat a little,
concerning those Attributes of the Deity, as far as we can have any Idea's of
them; since from the consideration of the Nature of things, and also of our own
Humane Nature, we cannot but be carried on to consider the Nature of God
Himself; and if from the Creation of the Universe, we cannot but conceive Him
of Infinite Power; so from His Acting and Ordaining all things, for the best
and Worthiest End, we may likewise affirm Him to be also Infinitely Wise and
Good; so that His Infinite Power always Acting for the best and wisest Ends, is
still so limited by His Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, that it cannot Act any
thing destructive to the Common Good of Rational Beings, of which Himself is
the chief; and from hence proceeds the certainty of the Law of Nature, as also
our perpetual Obligation to it. For as I will not affirm that God could not
have made the World, and the Things therein, after another manner than He has
done; so since He has made it in the Order we now find it, this great Law of
Nature, of endeavoring and procuring the Common Good of Rational Beings, is of
the same Duration with that of the Universe it self; and so consequently of
constant and perpetual Obligation in respect of Himself, and all those whom He
has Ordained to be His Subordinate means, or Instruments to procure it,
especially as Men, whom He has made Conscious of our Duty, and able to
Cooperate with Him for this Great and Excellent End.

CHAP. III.
Of the Law of NATURE, and that it is reducible to one single Proposition,
which is Truly and Properly a LAW, as containing all things necessary thereunto.

1. HAving already in the Two former Chapters from the Great Book of Nature,
(that is, as well that of things without us, as of our selves in particular,
and of Mankind in general) made several Observations for the proving of this
Proposition, That Man was Ordained by God for a Sociable Creature, whose Being,
Preservation and Happiness, was to depend upon the Assistance and Good Will of
God his Creator, as also those of his own kind; I come in the next place to
show, That every one is obliged to a return of the like Benevolence to others;
for we can by no means be better assured of the like Good Will from them, than
by doing them the same good Offices, as often as it lies in our Power, which we
desire they should do for us, and that this constitutes the happiest state Men
are capable of in this Life, viz. Peace and Concord, not only among particular
Men, but also between all Commonwealths and Nations, of which the whole body of
Mankind consists, so that it evidently appears, that the true and Natural state
of Mankind, is, That of Peace, Love, or mutual Benevolence, and which indeed
would require no other Rewards, than what proceeds from it self, (were Man a
Creature always governed by right reason and his own true Good) Rewards and
Punishments being Ordained for Men, as too often governed by their Passions and
Sensual Appetites, and not according to the perfection of their Rational
Nature. Yet since it pleased God, to Create Man a mixed Creature, consisting of
a Body and a Soul, and being too often drawn aside by Passions, not directed by
right reason, and to stand in need of Punishments as well as Rewards, to keep
him to his duty; thence arises a necessity of His dealing with Man as a
Legislator, and of giving him certain natural Laws or Rules, whereby to govern
his Actions, with certain Penalties and Rewards annexed to them; which Laws may
be very well contracted into one single Proposition, or practical Conclusion
drawn from the Nature of God, our own Nature, and that of things without us, by
the Observations already laid down, viz. That God wills or commands, that all
reasonable Persons should endeavor the Common Good of Rational Beings, as the
great End for which they were Created, and in pursuance of which, consists
their own true Good or Happiness, as in its neglect or violation, their
greatest Misery.

. 2. Having given you this summary description of the Laws of Nature, as coming
from its first Cause, God, I shall now explain the terms therein contained, to
avoid all Ambiguity and Exception. (1) By Wills and Commands, I do not mean any
Commands by Words, that being the method of God's Revealed, and not Natural
Will, and so is not the Subject of this Discourse; and therefore I do here only
understand that Will or Command of God, which is to be learned from the
Consideration of his Divine Nature, our own, and that of all other things,
consisting not in Words, but in Idea's; that is true Conclusions drawn from
right Reason; but that words are not always Essential to a Law, or that it
cannot be made known to the Subjects, without some set form of Speech, may
appear by Persons born Deaf and Dumb, whom we often find to have Notions of a
God, and a Law of Nature, though they were not conveyed in their Minds by Words
or Writing, for it is sufficient if the Will of the Legislator may be
discovered by any other sit means or signs, especially when (as in this Law we
now treat of) there are such certain Rewards and Punishments, annexed to their
Observation or Transgression, as may make it their Interest, rather to observe
than transgress them; which is not only visible in Men but Brutes. Since we
see, that by certain Signs imprinted in their Minds, by the means of fit
Rewards and Corrections; Elephants, Horses, Dogs, etc. are made Susceptible of
Humane Commands, (and as far as their Natures permit) are governable by Laws of
our Prescribing; For we can show them by such signs, what Actions are to be
done or omitted by them; and certainly God has not left us less plain
demonstrations of his Will, in reference to our Duty toward him, from that
Knowledge he has given us of his Existence, as also of our own Nature, as I
shall farther prove in this Discourse. By Rational Persons, I mean, all those,
though of never so mean a Capacity, who are able to make such easy and natural
Observations and Conclusions, as I have already laid down: And therefore
Children, under the Years of Discretion, Idiots and Mad-folks, are still to be
excepted from this Law, who not having the actual use of right reason, are not
able to draw those Observations and Consequences from the Nature of things, as
are already laid down, and which are necessary for the right understanding
thereof. By Endeavor, I mean all such voluntary Actions, which Persons of
sound Minds can knowingly, and deliberately perform toward the good of others,
without destroying or hurting their own true Happiness; which endeavors,
though (by many unforeseen accidents in the Course of Nature) they may be often
frustrated, and so fail of their intended design: yet when we have done the
utmost we are able, we have sufficiently performed our Duty, since no Laws
require the performance of more, than is in our Power to perform. By the Common
Good of Rational Beings, I understand the collective Happiness of the Deity, as
the head of them, and that of all the individual Persons of Mankind, existing
together with us, as the constituent parts or members; and in which each Man's
particular Good and Happiness is included; since it is impossible to endeavor
the Happiness of others, as voluntary Agents, unless each particular Person
whose duty it is so to do, have first a right to preserve, and make himself
happy, jointly with others in his Proportion, to the whole Body of Mankind. By
true Good or Happiness, I mean, all those Goods whether of Body or Mind, by
which Men may be rendered truly Happy, and contented in this Life, and in that
to come; but in which, whenever the former stand in Competition with the
latter; the Goods of the Soul are to be preferred; that is, the good of our
better or Eternal part, before that of our Body, which is less valuable and
temporal. But I need add nothing here to prove, That God is the Head of all
Rational Beings, and in what Sense we may be said to procure or endeavor his
Good and Happiness, since I have spoken so largely of that in the Preface to
this Discourse; and as for the difference between Natural and Moral good, I
have said so much concerning it in the Second Part, in the Confutation of Mr.
H's Sixth Principle, that by Nature nothing is Good or Evil; that it would be
impertinent to repeat it here. I shall now prove, that this Proposition,
containing this Description of the Law of Nature is true, that is, agreeable to
the Will of God, as far as it is declared to us; by what we are able to know of
His Divine Nature, or can collect from our own, and the Natures of all things
without us, and that all the Moral Duties we owe, either to God, ourselves, or
others, are contained in, or may be reduced to this one Proposition, Of our
endeavoring the Common Good of Rationals; in order to which, I shall lay down
these Propositions.

. 3. 1. That God in the first place Wills and Intends His own Glory and
Service, and in the next, the Good and Preservation of all Mankind, and of all
particular Persons therein contained, as far as consists with that frail and
Mortal state wherein He has Created them. This Proposition has already been
made out in the First Part of this Discourse; wherein I have proved, that the
Preservation and continuance of all the Species of Creatures, (and consequently
of Mankind as one of them) does wholly depend upon God's Providence. And as for
the Individuals, or particular Persons, since God's Knowledge is Infinite, and
extends even to the least things; and also that of these Particulars, each
Species of Creatures is made up, and consists. It is likewise as evident, that
God designs their Good and Preservation, as well as that of the whole kind;
though I grant He prefers the Good of the whole Species, before that of the
Individuals.

2. It is the Will of God that all Men of sound Minds, should be made conscious
of this His intention of the Good and Preservation of Mankind, and that they
should operate as His Subordinate means, or Instruments toward this great End.
Which I shall prove thus: 1. It is evident that all Men of sound Minds, have a
notion of the Good and Happiness of others as well as of themselves. 2dly. That
this Notion or Idea, when truly pursued, will at last extend it self to all
Mankind; for it can never stop short of it, as long as it may still proceed
farther, and find new and fit Objects to work on; every Individual Member of
Mankind making a part of this Universal Idea.

3. That this Notion of endeavoring the Common Good of Rational Beings, is not
only possible to be performed, but is also highly Rational, and the greatest
and noblest End we can imagine or propose to our selves, as comprehending the
Good and Happiness of the whole System of Rational Beings, and is also true, i.
e. agreeable with the Divine Intellect: which I thus make out, these grounds
being supposed.

. 4. First, It is certain, that all the truths our Minds are endued with, or
capable of, are from God, since whatever perfection is found in the effect,
must needs have been first more eminently in its Cause. Therefore if the
Knowledge of Truth be a perfection, (as doubtless it is) it must be much more
so in God, the Original Cause thereof, so that if this Idea of the Common Good
of Rational Beings, as the highest Good we Men are capable of knowing, it being
a clear and perfect (though complext) Idea, drawn from the Nature of God and
all other things; and being a Collection of the Good and Happiness of the
Deity, and of all other Rational Agents; it must be true, and consequently from
God. And the Divine Intellect, does as certainly agree with our Idea's
concerning it, as it does when we judge, that the Base of an Equilateral
Triangle, is equal to either of the Crura or Legs. Therefore this Idea of the
Common Good is true, and that it is also certain, that all Truth is from God,
as likewise that He has made us truly to understand, that he Wills the Good
and Happiness of Mankind; it is likewise as certain, that he would have us act
as Rational Agents, conscious of this His great design.

. 5. The Second Part of this Proposition ( viz.) That God would have us Operate
as his Instruments to this End; will be likewise as clear when you consider
what I have already said, That God who has made nothing in vain, would not
have endued us with an Idea of this Common Good, as the greatest End we can
propose our selves, for mere Speculation, but rather for some practical End, in
order to our own Good and Happiness, with that of others; especially since God
has placed it so much in our Power to promote and procure this Common Good,
since as far as we endeavor the Good and Happiness of particular Persons, we
do so far contribute our share to that of Mankind, considered as one aggregate
Body. Thus whatsoever does good to any one Member, does so far benefit the
whole Body; and the Good and Happiness of an aggregate Body consisting of
diverse distinct Members, consists in that of each of its parts. So then, if God
intends the End, ( viz.) the Common Good of Mankind, (as I have already proved)
he designs likewise the means to produce it: Nor can there be any better means,
or fitter Instruments for this End, than the joint Endeavors of all Men,
expressed by all the Acts of Benevolence and Kindness toward each other; since
it is certain (as I said before) that Men can contribute more to the Hurt, or
Benefit, of each other, than all the rest of the Creatures put together.
Therefore as God has designed the End, and ordained sufficient means to
produce it, ( viz.) Men's kind and benevolent Actions; so it is as evident,
That he will make use of Men, as the necessary means for this End. Though I grant
he has ordained us to operate, not only as mechanic Causes, but rather as
free and voluntary Agents to produce it; that is, as true Subjects to this Law
of Nature. Vid. Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Law of Nature, page 24.
Thus by the same steps that we arrive at the knowledge of God the Supreme
Being, we are likewise brought to an acknowledgment of this his great Design,
of the Common Good of Rational Beings. And if from all the wonderful
Observations, and curious Contrivances (observed in this last Chapter) drawn
from the Nature of Things, and Mankind, we cannot but conclude, That they were
so disposed by a most Wise, Intelligent Being, toward this great End: And the
very same appearances that discover these Things, must likewise declare his
Intention of making use of us men, as necessary means thereunto.

. 7. The last Proposition for the proving this Description of the Law of Nature
to be true, is this: That GOD having made this Discovery of his Will unto us,
we thereupon lie under a sufficient Obligation, to observe this great Law of
endeavoring this Common Good: To prove which, I first suppose that Obligation
to an Action enjoined by the natural Law, is the necessary and constant effect
thereof, upon every Person subject to it; and that this immediately results
from its own Nature, this Law being always just and right as the Will of GOD,
the Legislator is, from whence it proceeds: So that I understand Obligation to
Active Obedience to be the immediate effect of this Law, yet that it primarily
flows from that Will of GOD, which ordained this Law, and made Man a Creature
subject to it; as Heat in us is the immediate Effect or Action of Fire upon us,
but originally both the Fire and Heat is from the first Cause. Now there is no
legal Liberty left us in the case of natural Laws, to choose whether we will be
obliged to the Actions therein commanded, or rather will submit to the
Punishment attending the Violation thereof; and although our natural Liberty of
Will be not destroyed thereby, yet we have no Right left us to determine our
selves otherwise than natural Law directs, because all Moral Truth, or
Rectitude, is comprehended within that Law. But in Humane Laws, because they
may enjoin something amiss, there a Right is often left to us to choose rather
to bear the Penalty, than to obey them, (because we are obliged rather to obey
GOD than Man) in case they command any Action contrary to the Divine Law,
whether Natural or Revealed.

. 8. For the further clearing of this, I shall premise somewhat to explain this
Word Obligation, which the Civilians thus define: Obligatio est vinculum Iuris,
quo quis astringitur debitum persolvere. That is, an Obligation is that Bond of
Law, whereby every one is obliged to pay his Debt, or Due: Which Definition
does well include all sorts of Obligations, if by the Word Ius, or Law, we
understand that Law whose Obligation we propose to define. So that by vinculum
Iuris in this Definition, we understand that Bond, or Tie, of the Law of
Nature, by which every one is obliged to pay this natural Debt, i. e. to
perform that Duty which he owes to GOD his Creator, by reason of his own
Rational Nature, or else to undergo those Punishments which are ordained for
his Disobedience or Neglect. So that there is a twofold Tie, or Obligation, in
all Laws; the one active in the Debt, or Duty; the other passive, in a patient
submission to the Punishment, in case of any wilful neglect, or omission
thereof: Of both which, we shall speak in their order.

. 9. But you are first to take notice, That none can oblige us to do, or
forbear any Action, but such who have a right to Command us: So that this
Obligation proceeds from that just Right of Dominion, which a superior Power
has over us and our Actions; and as far as we are subject to others, we are so
far under an Obligation to their lawful Commands, which obliges us to a
discharge of that Debt, or Duty, we owe them; that is, when we are obliged to
do, or forbear any Action from the Will, or Command of a Supreme Power, or
Legislator, to whom, when sufficiently made known to us, we are bound to yield
Obedience to the utmost of our Power: And herein consists the Obligation, or
Duty, (viz.) in the Conformity of our Actions to a Rule, such as is declared by
the Will of the Legislator. So that all our Obligation to the Laws of Nature,
is at last resolved into that absolute Dominion, which GOD, as he is the Great
Creator and Preserver of Mankind, has over us: For I cannot understand a Right
(especially of Dominion) to be invested or seated in any Supreme Power, but by
virtue of something which may be called (at least analogically) a Law. 2. That
every Dictate of the Divine Wisdom, concerning Matter fit to be established by
a Law, is such a Law: And so Cicero (the best Master of Language) speaks,
toward the end of his First Book de Legibus. 3. That the Eternal Wisdom of
GOD, contains eminently, or analogically, in it, all that we can know to be
Natural Law. 4. But to know that it is Natural Law, or the Dictate of true
Reason, concerning the fittest means to the best End, or greatest Good, it is
necessary to this purpose, That the Supreme Government of all Things (and
especially of Rational Creatures) should be in him, who is most able and
willing to pursue and attain that greatest End; that is, it must be settled in
GOD. 5. So that by this Dictate of Eternal Wisdom, or of performing all Things
for the best End, the Sovereignty becomes his Right; and our Knowledge that
this Dictate of Eternal Wisdom is in him, assures us, That this Right is
immutably fixed and vested in him. 6. Although in the method of investigating
the Laws of Nature, as they subsist in our Minds, the first Law respects the
End, and this concerning the Means, comes in the second place: Yet in our
Thoughts concerning GOD, we know that infinite Wisdom comprehends all these
Dictates together; and therefore that the Dictate, or Law, settling Universal
Dominion in GOD, is coeternal with him; and so is as early in his Nature, as
the first Natural Law; the Obligation of which, we are establishing in this
Chapter. And here arises the difference between a Moral Obligation (which is
that we now treat of) and a Civil one, or that by which we are obliged to Laws
in Civil Governments, the former being in respect to GOD's immediate Will, as
the Supreme Legislator; whereas all the Duty we owe to our Civil Magistrates,
Parents, and Masters, etc. is only in subordination to GGD's Will so declared
unto us, and who has ordained this Obedience for his own Worship and Glory,
and in order to the Common Good of all Humane Societies and Commonwealths, that
is, of Mankind in general.

. 10. Yet I think notwithstanding all we have said of the Force and Nature of
this Obligation, it may well enough consist with the natural Freedom of Man's
Will, since all these Considerations do still but excite, not necessitate Him
to act one way or other: For it is still left in his Power either to choose that
which is absolutely the best in obeying this Will of God, or else to prefer a
less present Good before it, in the satisfaction of his Appetites, or Passions:
And herein likewise consists the difference between an Animal Good, or Evil,
and a Moral one; the former being those natural Means conducing to each Man's
preservation, or destruction, considered as a mere Animal, without any respect
to God as their Author, or the Common Good of Rationals as their Rule. The
latter, that is of all Humane Moral Actions, or Habits, considered as
agreeable, or disagreeable unto the Laws of Nature, ordained by God as a
Legislator, and made known to Man, in order to the Common Good of Rational
Beings; so that they are thus morally Good, or Evil, only in respect of their
Conformity, or Disagreement with the Will of God; and as their Observance, or
Neglect, brings either Good, or Evil (that is, Happiness, or Misery) upon us in
this Life, or in that to come. From whence you may observe the necessity of
putting God, in all our descriptions, or definitions of the Law of Nature, as
the Author thereof: For were it not for his existence, in whose divine
Intellect the Idea's of Moral Good, and Evil, are eternally established, and
into whose will so ordaining them, they are ultimately to be resolved. Mr. H.'s
(or rather Epicurus's Assertion) would certainly be true, That there is nothing
morally Good, or Evil, in its own Nature. And it may here be also observed,
That the great omission of diverse Writers on this Subject, in not placing God
as the Cause, or Author of the Law of Nature, in their definitions, has been
perhaps the main, if not only Reason of that false Assertion, That the Laws of
Nature are not properly so, 'till they are established by the Authority of the
Supreme Civil Power; so on the other side, if it be made evident, That God
Wills, or Commands, all Men should endeavor the Common Good of Rationals, as
the greatest they are capable of; it must necessarily follow, That we lie under
a sufficient Obligation, by all the Ties of Duty and Gratitude, to concur with
God's Will and Design, in pursuing and endeavoring this great End.

. 11. But since God has thought fit to make Man a Creature consisting of two
different and distinct Parts, or Principles, a Soul and a Body, both capable of
Good and Evil, i. e. of Rewards and Punishments; I come now to the other part
of this Duty, or Obligation, by which we are bound, by all the Rational
Motives, or Rewards, that Man's Nature is capable of, to observe this great
Law; and deterred by all the contrary Evils, or Punishments, from neglecting or
transgressing it: In order to which, I shall lay down these plain Axioms, drawn
from the Nature of Moral Good and Evil, which you may find in the Learned
Bishop Wilkin's excellent Discourse of Natural Religion.

Axiom 1. That which is morally good, (i.e.) agreeable to the Will of God, is
to be desired and prosecuted; and that which is evil, i. e. contrary to his
Will, is to be avoided.

Ax. 2. The greater congruity there is in any thing to the Reason of Mankind,
and the greater tendency it has to promote or hinder the Perfection of Man's
Nature, in the endeavor of the Common Good; so much greater degrees it has of
moral Good, or Evil; and according to which, we ought to proportion our
Inclinations, or Aversions thereunto.

Ax. 3. So that it is suitable both to the Reason and Interest of Mankind, that
all Persons should submit themselves to God's Will, upon whom they depend for
their Happiness and Well-being, by doing such Things as may render them
acceptable to Him, and avoiding those contrary Actions which may provoke his
Displeasure, that is, in short, in prosecuting the Common Good of Rational
Beings.

Ax. 4. Hence the Rational Nature, and the Perfections belonging to it, being
more Noble than the Sensitive, a moral Good is to be preferred before an animal
Pleasure; and that which is morally evil, is more to be avoided, than that
which is merely animal.

Ax. 5. A present animal Good may be parted with, upon a probable Expectation
of a greater future moral Good.

Ax. 6. A present Evil is to be endured, for the probable avoiding of a
greater, though future Evil.

But since all the Rewards which God can bestow upon us, for our observing this
fundamental Law, of endeavoring the Common Good of Rationals, does only amount
to the truest and highest Happiness that Man's Nature is capable of; it is fit
that we sufficiently state that Happiness, and wherein it consists: For the
clearing of which, I shall lay down these two plain Propositions.

. 12. Prop. 1. That which gives, or constitutes the Essence of any thing, and
distinguishes it from all other things, is called the essential form of that
thing.

Prop. 2. That State, or Condition, by which the Nature of any thing is
advanced to the utmost perfection which it is capable of, according to its
kind, is called the Chief End, Good, or Happiness of such a Being: Thus, for
Example, (to give you a Scale, drawn from the Nature of those Beings we know to
be endued with Life or Motion) 1. The Nature of Plants consists in having a
vegetative Life, by which they receive Nourishment and Growth, and are enabled
to multiply their kind. The utmost Perfection which this kind of Being is
capable of, is to grow up to a state of Maturity, to continue unto its natural
Period, and to propagate its kind. 2. The Nature of Brutes (besides what is
common to them with Plants, consists in their being endued with Faculties,
whereby they are capable of apprehending external Objects, and of receiving
Pain or Pleasure from them, in order to their own Preservation, and the
propagation of their Species. The utmost Perfection of these, consists in mere
sensitive Pleasures; i. e. of doing and enjoying such Things as are grateful to
their Appetites and Senses. But the Nature of Man, (besides what is common to
him with Plants and Brutes, both in the vegetative and sensitive Life) consists
in the Faculty of Right Reason, whereby he is made capable of understanding the
Law of Nature, and of its Rewards and Punishments, either in this Life, or that
to come, to induce him to their Observation, and deterr him from the
transgression of them: Which Sentiments, as no Creature in this visible World,
except Man, does partake of; so his Chief Good, or Happiness, consists in the
improvement and perfection of this Faculty; that is, in such Actions as are
most agreeable to Right Reason, and as may best entitle him to the Divine
Favor, and afford him the greatest Assurance of a lasting Happiness, both in
this Life, and after it is ended. So that all the Actions of Man, considered as
voluntary and subject to the Law of Nature, and thereby capable of Rewards and
Punishments, are called Moral, as being directed by God the Supreme Legislator,
to the greatest and most excellent End, viz. the Common Good of Rational Beings.

. 13. Having laid down these Principles of moral Good and Evil, in order to the
settling and clearing the Nature of this Obligation, and wherein it consists; I
shall, in the next place, particularly declare the Sanction of this Law, (viz.)
those Rewards which God has ordained for the Observation of this Law of
Nature, of endeavoring the Common Good, and those Punishments he has
appointed for its Breach, or Transgression. But I have already laid down, That
all Obligation upon the Soul of Man, arises properly from the Commands of some
rightful Superior Power; that is, such a one who has not only force sufficient
to inflict what Evils he pleases upon the Disobedient; but, who has also given
us just Grounds, or Reasons, wherefore he requires us to determine the natural
Liberties of our Wills, according to his Pleasure; both which, whenever they
meet in any Supreme Power; and that he has once signified his Will to us,
ought to produce in our Minds not only fear to offend, but also a love of, and
obedience to his Commands. The former, from the Consideration of his
irresistible Power: The latter, from their own intrinseck Goodness, as also
from all those Motives which ought to persuade us to perform his Will. For as
one who has no other Reason than downright force, why he will have me perform
and submit to his Commands, whether I will or no, may indeed so far terrify
me, that to avoid a greater Evil, I may think it best to obey him; yet that
fear once removed, there will then remain nothing that can hinder me from
acting according to my own, rather than his Will, or Humor: So on the other
side, he who can give me never so good Reasons why I ought to obey him; yet if
destitute of Power, to inflict any Punishment upon me for my Disobedience, such
his Commands may, without any outward inconvenience, be neglected by me, if I
think fit, unless he is endued with sufficient Power to vindicate the Neglect,
or Contempt, of his Authority. Therefore the strictest Sanction which any
Sovereign Power can give unto its Laws, is, when it is not only able, but has
also sufficiently declared, That it will conferr a sufficient share of good
Things, or Rewards, for so doing; and of Evils, or Punishments, upon any
breach, or neglect of its Commands: So though I grant the whole force of this
Obligation is properly resolved into the Will of the Legislator, or those to
whom the Custody of these Laws are committed; all which, are included in this
Law of Nature, since we find God commanding it, to whom we ought to yield
absolute Obedience; though not in Right of his irresistible Power alone, but
rather as he has, by his Eternal Wisdom and Goodness, in his Creation and
Preservation of us, an absolute Dominion over, and an undoubted Right to
Command us; and consequently we are obliged to yield Obedience to his Laws, as
they are not only highly reasonable, (being ordained for the Common Good of
Rationals) but are also established by sufficient Rewards and Punishments. But
since the former seem more plainly declared to Mankind, and are likewise more
agreeable to our Rational Nature, which should rather delight to be allured by
Rewards, than terrified by Punishments; I shall first begin with the natural
Rewards annexed to the Observation of this great Law of Nature, of endeavoring
the Common Good: Which may be divided into Internal, or External; that is,
either in relation to the Soul alone, or to the Body and the Soul jointly
considered.

judice to his Health, do so much indulge his Genius, as to keep a Table above
his Estate, and thereby become unable to provide for his Family, or to
contribute to the public charges of the Commonweal, he is highly guilty of
Intemperance, though perhaps he may do it without any prejudice to his Health.

. 18. And as for that other sort of Temperance, called Chastity, or Continence,
I need not farther to declare how much the Common Good and Happiness of Mankind
depend upon it, having already shown diverse of those Evils, and
Inconveniences, that do necessarily follow the contrary Vices: I shall only
add, That it is sufficient that the commission of this Offense of Incontinence,
makes a Man guilty of another's Sin, as well as his own: Therefore I define
Chastity to be the abstaining from all inordinate, or forbidden Lusts, in order
to the Common Good, or for the propagation of Mankind; and therefore is not
only confined to the bare forbidding of Fornication, but also extends it self
to that moral Obligation, or Contract, which we call Marriage: So that out of a
consideration of this great End, those promiscuous Copulations between Brothers
and Sisters, and diverse other near Relations, which upon the first Peopling of
the World were lawful because then necessary for the propagation of Mankind,
are now, for the same Reason, become unlawful; since without an abhorrence of
this Copulation between Brothers and Sisters, it were hard, if not impossible,
that the Chastity of such young Persons, conversing so constantly and
intimately together from their youth, should be otherwise preserved, without an
early prepossession of the horror of such promiscuous Copulations. And hence
also I suppose, That Natural Reason taught most Nations, after Mankind began to
be multiplied upon the Earth; and the memory of their first original Relation
they had to each other, to be forgotten, to prohibit Marriage between near
Relations, that by this means new Friendships, and stricter Bonds of Amity,
should be contracted between Families and Persons not nearly related in Blood;
from whence a larger diffusion of Friendship and Kindness, proceeding from this
Relation, might be spread amongst Persons not only of the same Commonweal, but
of diverse Nations; and also that those Factions, and Enmities, which would
often happen between particular Men, and Families, were they only to marry into
their own Clan, or Tribe, may be prevented; or if begun, may, by fresh
Alliances, be reconciled and taken away. So that it is evident, That the Reason
of this Virtue of Chastity, or Continence, can no way be truly explained, or
understood, without a true knowledge of the End for which it was ordained, viz.
the Common Peace, Happiness, and Preservation of Mankind.

. 19. I shall only add somewhat more concerning that other sort of Temperance,
relating to our seeking after, and acquiring those outward Goods often
conducing, though not absolutely necessary, to our Well being, ( viz.) Riches
and Honor; and therefore the same general Law which limits our Love toward
our selves, in order to the Common Good, ought also, from the same
Consideration, to limit and regulate our Desires, both in acquiring and keeping
these Advantages; and therefore they are to be sought for to no other End, than
as they may render us more capable of promoting the great End abovementioned,
and to which they ought always to be subordinate. The former of these Virtues
relating to Riches, is called Moderation, which is a limited Care in acquiring
and keeping Riches; of which I need speak no farther, having sufficiently shown
the Measure and Reason of it, when I defined Liberality and Frugality, with
their opposite Vices: The other sort of Temperance relating to Honors, is
called Modesty, and may be defined a Justice toward our selves, in a
reasonable Desire of Honors, in order to the Common Good; and therefore
consists in a due Mediocrity, as well in desiring Honors, as avoiding Infamy;
and this Virtue, as it curbs the Desire from seeking higher Things than the
Person really deserves, or may well pretend to, in order to this great End, is
called Humility; which is a low or true esteem of a Man's self, or personal
Merits. But as this Desire of the Common Good, often elevates the Mind to the
performing of great and noble Actions, whereby he may acquire the highest
Honors, it is then called Magnanimity; and therefore the Magnanimous is still
supposed to be endued with perfect Virtue, and a most large Desire of the
Common Good of Mankind, as believing he has reason to judge himself worthy of
any Honor that he can justly pretend to: And I suppose every Man is sensible,
That it is a part of the same Virtue, not only to seek for true Honor, but
also to take care to preserve it, when it is obtained: And from the
Consideration of these Virtues, the contrary Vices are more easily understood;
for Pride is directly opposite both to Magnanimity, and Humility showing it
self in a preposterous Ambition, foolish Arrogance, or Vainglory; and so
Pusillanimity, or meanness of Spirit, is directly contrary to Magnanimity.

. 20. Thus we have run through almost all the particular Virtues, and do still
find in each of them a constant Respect, or Tendency, to the Common Good of
Mankind: So that whether they regard our selves or others, the same great End
is still intended by God, the most Wife Legislator: And this Law being thus
established, there is therein contained the largest and most diffusive Society
between diverse Nations, or Commonweals, and the truest Love and Benevolence
between all the Members of the same Commonweal, as also between particular
Families: So that there may be hence demonstrated and determined the certain
Rules and Measures of true Piety toward God, as distinguished from Impiety and
Superstition; and also of all other Virtues toward Men, which must be first
truly known, and applied to their right Objects, that the Names of these
Virtues, when falsely imposed on Actions contrary to the Laws of God and Nature,
may not deceive us: For it is hence evident, That all the parts of universal
Justice and Benevolence, ( viz.) all the particular Virtues contained under
them, are only commanded in order to this Common Good; because it is manifest
by Experience, That such Just and Benevolent Actions, are always endued with a
natural Power of procuring and promoting the Common Peace and Happiness of
diverse Nations and Commonweals, as also of lesser Societies and particular
Persons; of all which, considered in their due order and subordination to each
other, this Common Good of Mankind is made up, and consists.

. 21. And, farther, it may be hence clearly shown what is that Right Reason, by
which every prudent Man ought to prescribe to himself a just Mediocrity in all
his moral Actions; for it only consists in practical Propositions, proposing or
declaring to us this great End; and also showing us all the means in our Power
whereby we may attain it; which are those that, in the first place, prescribe
the Rules of Piety, and Divine Worship, both private and public. (2.) Those
that concern the Society and Commerce of diverse Nations and Commonweals. (3.)
All positive Laws, whether Civil or Domestic, tending to the Good of the Civil
Society wherein we live. (4.) True and rational Conclusions, drawn from
Knowledge, or Experience, either of our selves, or others, concerning the
natural Efficacy of Things and Actions, all which are at last resolved into the
natural Power of such Humane Actions, as may either benefit, or hurt Mankind,
considered apart, or in an aggregate Body, as in a Family, or Nation; since
Experience does not with less certainty teach us, what kind of Actions are
beneficial, or hurtful to Mankind; then it shows what sort of Diet will either
nourish, or destroy us: Nor is it more difficult to understand the Truth of
this Proposition, That a right, or equal Distribution of all Things necessary
for Life, is requisite to the Common Good and Happiness of Mankind, than it is
to know in Physic, That it is necessary for the Life and Health of an Animal,
that a due proportion of Nourishment be equally distributed to all its Parts,
or Members; both which Truths, are grounded on the same natural Principles,
(viz.) That the same Things which preserve the whole, do also preserve all its
parts; and, vice versa, the same Things which preserve all the Parts, or
Members, do likewise serve to the Conservation of the whole; which being
evident from true Principles, is a Science taught by Experience, drawn from the
Nature of Things.

. 22. And th^^ from the immutable Efficacy of Corporeal Causes of this sort;
for the production of their Effects on all Humane Bodies* depends all the
Certainty and Knowledge of Natural Philosophy and Physic: So likewise from
their immutable Influence, or Powers on Humane Actions, for the Conservation of
particular Persons, Families, and Commonweals, proceeds all the Certainty of
those practical Propositions, called Natural Laws, which constitute Moral
Philosophy, showing and determining the Nature of all Virtues and Vices: Nor is
that variety of Actions, which may be prescribed to Persons in distinct
Families, or Commonweals, and under various Circumstances of Life, more
repugnant to the constant Care of preserving all the Parts, or Members, which
contribute to this great End, than the diversity of Diety, and ways of living
peculiar to diverse, Climates, Ages, or Constitutions of Men's Bodies, are to
the constant Care that all Men have of preserving their own Lives and Healths,
according to the several Necessities of their Natures: For as in these we
cannot, by doing whatever we will, promote this End; but Nature has put some
limits thereunto, although our weak Understandings cannot attain to a nice, or
mathematical exactness in assigning them, as we may live long and healthfully
enough, without weighing our Meat and Drink, like Lessius; so we may likewise
procure the Common Good, as far as lies in our Power, although we do not always
perform that which is absolutely or simply best in all Cases; it is as much as
God the Legislator requires, if we truly endeavor it, and contribute as far as
we are able unto this great End.

. 23. In the last place, I shall here repeat what I have before laid down, That
this Common Good of Rationals, as it is a Collection of all natural Goods (and
the greatest of all others) so it is the true Standard of all other Goods,
either natural, or moral: So that by our comparing them with this, we may truly
determine whether they are greater, or less than each other; and so whether
they are principally to be desired and sought after, or to be postponed to
other greater Goods. Likewise the same measure where the proportion of these
Goods is taken, gives us a true estimate of all the contrary Evils, and so
shows us what is more, or less to be avoided, or repented of.

. 24. We may also hence learn what degrees of Passions, or Affections are
lawful; for it is certain, That only such a proportion of Affections are
required, as are congruous to our Rational Nature, and exactly answering the
true Estimate of those good, or evil Things by which they are excited; but
since the Government of our Appetites and Passions, is a thing of so great
moment, as that on which all our Virtue and Happiness (as far as it is in our
Power) depends; which Government proceeds from our knowledge of a true measure
of all Goods, and Evils, according to which they are to be judged; therefore I
shall be the larger in explaining what I have a little before laid down, (
viz.) That the Common Good ought to be the Standard of all our Affections and
Passions, as being so ordained by God, and determined by the Nature of Things;
which is evident, in that we have demonstrated this Common Good, to be that
great End, to whose prosecution all Men are naturally obliged, by the Will of
God, as a Legislator, who must have given us the knowledge of any thing as
Good, or Evil, to little purpose, unless he had also given us a Rule by which
we might judge of the several measures, or degrees of this Goodness: So that
this Common Good being once established as a certain Measure, or Standard for
this End, the Good of each particular Person will bear such a proportion to
that of the whole Body of Rationals, as the Soundness of any one Member, does
to the Health of the whole Body. So from the knowledge of this Order of diverse
subordinate Goods, and the proportion which any one of them bears to the
Common, or Greatest Good, may easily be deduced how much the Well-being, or
Happiness of every single Person, may contribute to that of the whole Family;
the Felicity of a Family, to that of a Commonwealth; that of a Commonweal, to
the Happiness of all Nations; and of all these considered together, what
proportion they may bear to the Common Felicity of Mankind. So that hence you
may be easily satisfied how much the knowledge of this one Truth, conduces to
our right prosecution of this great End, and, indeed, Sum of all the Laws of
Nature.

. 25. Lastly, (which yet ought rather to have been put in the first place of
all) let us consider the chief and principal of all the moral Virtues, Love, or
Piety toward God, expressed in all the Acts of Divine Worship, as Prayer,
Praise, Thanksgiving, etc. This must needs be a Virtue, since it does that
which is highly grateful and pleasing to God the Head of all Rational Beings,
and speaking after the manner of us Men, performing somewhat Good, and
agreeable to his Divine Nature; and which also in respect of our selves, makes
us most happy, not only by rendering the Deity propitious to us, but also by a
nearer spiritual approach and conversation with it, in those holy Exercises, it
puts us in the happiest state we can be capable of in this mortal Life, and so
makes us more able to perform the great End of our Creation, (viz.) Our
contributing to the Common Good of Rational Beings.

. 26. I have been the larger in laying down, and explaining this Law, as a
Measure, or Standard of all good Actions, to the end that we should esteem all
Good, or Evil, not as it more or less profits or hurts our own particular
Bodies alone, but as it may more or less add to, or detract from this Common
Good: So that in comparing of all Goods together, whether Natural or Moral, we
ought still to look upon that as the greatest Good which conferrs most; and
that to be the least, which contributes least to this great End, which is
therefore to be desired, or prosecuted by us with proportionable Affections and
Endeavors: From whence also may be drawn a general and powerful Remedy,
against all those inordinate Passions proceeding from excessive Self-Love, by
which Men are most commonly drawn to hurt or injure others: For a Man who thus
governs himself, will not extravagantly desire any of these outward Things, nor
suffer his Soul to be disturbed by the consciousness of any Crime, who judges
nothing truly Good, but what really conduces to the common Good of Rationals.

. 27. Thus I hope I have demonstrated the true Reasons and Grounds of Moral
Good and Evil, or of Virtue and Vice; and have endeavored to render Moral
Philosophy (or the true Knowledge of the Laws of Nature) a practical Science,
and not merely Speculative, or Notional, like that of the Stoics; who whilst
they allowed nothing to be really good, but Virtue; or Evil; except Vice; and
kept such a pother to extol the real Good of the former, and declaim against
the certain Evil of the latter; yet by not giving us the true Reasons, or
Grounds, why Virtue should be embraced, and Vice avoided, they rendered their
Philosophy merely speculative, and only fit for those idle Porches in which
they declaimed, scarce having any farther influence upon the Actions of Life,
when either their own Affections, or any powerful outward Temptation, did at
any time prompt them to act contrary thereunto: For Virtue is only to be
esteemed as the highest or most perfect Good; not as it is a well-sounding
Word, or that fills our Minds with some vain empty Notions, but as it
determines our Actions to their utmost influeence upon the Common Good of
Rational Beings, which is the only true Piety, as consisting in the Performance
of the Commands and Will of God, by the imitation of his Divine Goodness and
Beneficence.

. 28. So that I shall conclude this Chapter with Dr. Parker's excellent
Consideration on this Subject; and which being better than any thing that I can
now think of, I shall make bold to give it you almost in his own Words,
Demonstration of the Law, etc. page 23.
with a little alteration. So that it is now demonstratively certain by
induction of Particulars (according to the method we have now taken) that every
Virtue has some natural Efficacy to promote the Common Good of Rationals; and
is no otherwise a Virtue, but as it contributes to this great End, and that
each Man's true private Interest and Happiness, is therein contained, and
inseparably connected with it, by the necessary order of Nature, i. e by the
Contrivance and Wisdom of Divine Providence: So that nothing can be more
evident, than that its Author commands all his Rational Creatures, that are
capable of any knowledge of his Will, and sense of their Duty, to act suitably
to that Order of Things which he has established in the World, and to that
Declaration of his Will, which he has made by that Establishment, in order to
the bringing about this great End of the Common Good of Rational Beings.

CHAP. V.
Containing an Answer to such Objections as may be made against the Law of
Nature, thus explained and reduced into this Proposition, Of Endeavoring the
Common Good of Rational Beings; with a Conclusion, proving this to be the sum
of all Laws, whether Natural or Revealed.

. 1. SInce there are two sorts of men, who according to their several
Principles, and Inclinations, may make different Objections against this our
Method of proving, and deducing the Law of Nature, and contracting it into this
sing'e easy Proposition, of our endeavoring the common good of Rational
Beings; I shall therefore divide them into Platonists, or Epicureans. Those who
put the whole stress of their belief of the Laws of Nature upon innate Ideas,
or Principles of Moral Good and Evil impressed by God upon men's Souls; and who, I
doubt not, may have a true zeal (though without knowledge) for this Common
Good; which is more than I can promise for those, who fal^ing into the other
extreme, will not acknowledge that we can have any true or certain notion, or
idea, of this Common Good, so as to make it the main end of all our Actions. I
shall therefore in the first place consider those Objections that may be made
by the former sort of Men; whose first Objection may be this, That it is most
suitable to the goodness of God to imprint upon the minds of men certain
Characters and Notions of himself, and also of those Moral Duties which he
requires of them; and not to leave them in the dark, and in doubt about things
of so great a Concernment to them; since by that means he would not only have
secured himself of that Worship and Veneration which is due from so Intelligent
a Creature as Man, but would also with great ease and certainty have taught him
his duty toward himself, and others, without putting him to the trouble and
pains of discovering his Existence, and all those Moral Duties that depend upon
it, by so tedious a Method as I have here proposed; which every man has not
time to inquire into, nor perhaps Faculties strong enough to make such rational
Conclusions or Deductions from the Nature of God, and other things, for the
understanding of the Laws of Nature, as we have here laid down: and therefore,
that God (who does all things by the best and easiest means) has impressed all
the Notions or Ideas of Good and Evil upon men's Souls.

. 2. To which Objection I need return no other Answer than what is already made
by the Author of the Essay concerning Human Understanding (so often cited by
me); I shall therefore give it to you in his own words, Book I. chap. 4.. 12.
This Argument, if it be of any force, will prove much more than those who use
it in this case expect from it; for if we may conclude, That God has done for
men, all that men shall judge is best for them, because it is suitable for his
Goodness so to do; it will prove not only, that God has imprinted on the minds
of men an Idea of himself; but that he has plainly stamped there, in fair
Characters, all that men ought to know or believe of him, and all that they
ought to do in obedience to his Will; and that he has given them a Will and
Affections conformable to it. This no doubt every one will think is better for
men, than that they should in the dark grope after Knowledge, as St. Paul tell
us, all Nations did after God, Acts VIII. 27, or than that their Wills should
clash with their Understandings, and their Appetites cross their Duty. The
Romanists say, It Is best for men, and so suitable to the Goodness of God, that
there should be an Infallible Judge of Controversies on Earth, and therefore
there is one: And I by the same reason say, It Is better for men that every man
himself should be infallible. I leave them to consider, whether by the force of
this Argument they shall think that every man is so. I think it a very good
Argument to say, the infinitely Wise God has made it so, and therefore it is
best. But it seems to me a little too much confidence of our Wisdom, to say, I
think it best, and therefore God has made it so; and in the matter in hand, it
will be in vain to argue from such a Topic, that God has done so, when
certain Experience shows us that he has not. But the Goodness of God has not
been wanting to men, without such original impressions of Knowledge, or Ideas
stamped on the mind, since he has furnished man with those Faculties which
will serve for the sufficient discovery of all things requisite to the end of
such a Being: And I doubt not but to show, that a man by the right use of his
natual Abilities may, without any innate Principles, attain to the knowledge of
a God, and other things that concern him: God having endued man with those
faculties of Knowledge which he has, was no more obliged by his Goodness to
implant these innate Notions in his Mind, than that having given him Reason,
Hands and Materials, he should also build him Bridges, or Houses; which some
People in the World, however of good natural parts, do either totally want, or
are but ill provided of as well as others are, (perhaps) wholly without Ideas
of God, and Principles of Morality, or at least have but very ill ones. The
reason in both Cases being this, That they never employed their Parts,
Faculties and Powers industriously that way, but contented themselves with the
Opinions, Fashions, and things of their Country, as they found them, without
looking any farther. So far this Learned Author.

. 3. And as for what is farther urged, the difficulties of the coming to the
knowledge of the Being of a God, by the method we propose, if this were not
plainly to be read from the great Book of the World, St. Paul had in vain
accused the general corruption of the Gentiles, and their loss of the knowledge
of the true God, as he does in the 1st of the Romans, v. 19, 20. Because that
which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto
them: For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power, and Godhead: so that they are without exaus. Where you may observe, the
Apostle here appeals to the common Reason of Mankind, guided by things without
us, for the proof of the Existence of a Delty, that they may be left without
all excuse for this their wilful ignorance and neglect.

. 4. And as for the other part of the Objection, concerning the difficulty and
laboriousness of the Method we have here proposed, for the discovery of the Law
of Nature, and the weakness of men's Faculties, for the making such rational
Conclusions from the Nature of Things; I think that will signify much less
than the former, if those that make this Objection will please to consider how
obvious such Conclusions are, and how easily made out, in the Third Chapter of
this Discourse; where I particularly treat of the Natural Power of men's Minds,
in making Observations from the Nature of Things, and reducing them into
certain practical Propositions, in order to their own future happiness, in
conjunction with that of others: So that I think I may safely affirm, that
those who are not of Natural Parts sufficient to discover the Being of a God,
and a Providence; as also to understand the Laws of Nature, which depend upon
that Knowledge: If they did but duly apply their Minds to think upon their own
Original, and that of the World, by true Principles of Reason, must be either
Fools or Madmen, and so not capable Subjects of the Laws of Nature, as not
being to be reckoned amongst rational Creatures; or else, which is worse, are
downright Atheists; who, to indulge their own unreasonable Lusts and Passions,
do absolutely deny all those clear Demonstrations from Natural Things, which
are brought for the proof of a Deity, and of their Duty toward it.

. 5. And tho I grant that all men do not ordinarily reduce all the Laws of
Nature into this one single Proposition, of endeavoring this common good of
Rational Beings, or may not have an explicit Notion of it; Yet this will not
hinder, but that they may for all that really pursue it, though they may not have
so large and perfect a knowledge of the grounds of their Duty, as they would
have if they were sensible of this Idea: For if a man be but thoroughly
convinced that he is not made for himself alone, but that he ought to mind the
good and preservation of others besides himself; and that he does truly observe
the Laws of Nature, toward himself, by a temperate and a rational Life: As
also, toward his Neighbor, by observing that great Rule, of doing as he would
be done by, in all cases toward others. I say, such a man, though never so
simple and ignorant in other things, does really contribute his share of
endeavor toward procuring the common good: And though he may not distinctly
know all the true reasons and grounds of his own Actions; yet if he thus lead
his Life, and observe all these Rules tending to this End, I doubt not but that
he will meet with all those Rewards intended by God for Virtuous Actions;
provided he have never heard of, or at least wilfully refused the more perfect
Law of the Gospel, delivered by our Savior Jesus Christ, when duly proposed to
him. Thus a Country Carpenter may deserve sufficient Wages, and Commendation,
if he can build a House, and honestly perform his Work, according to those few
practical Rules he has learnt, though he does not understand all the Principles
of Geometry, or Architecture, according to which, all that he has wrought may
easily be demonstrated to him, if he will but take the pains to understand them.

. 6. There is another Objection which this sort of men may make against our
Method of finding out, and demonstrating this great Law of Nature, in that I
make every man's obligation to endeavor it, to arise from its being good or
evil to himself alone; whereby it may seem, as if we supposed the honor of
God, and the common good of mankind were to be postponed* and made subservient
to the happiness of any particular person. To satisfy which Scruple, I do in
the first place affirm, that we do not intend any such thing, since we have all
along endeavored to establish the quite contrary Doctrine; For I assert, that
no man has any Right, properly so called, to his own Life or Being, but in
order, and as it conduces to the honor and service of God, and the common good
of mankind. I shall therefore now more distinctly declare how these (though some
may think them contrary to each other) do very well consist. In the first place
therefore I desire you to take notice, that our Natural Obligation to this Law
is not discovered by us in the same order and method, as it is constituted by
God in the nature of Things; for our weak finite Understandings, when acting
without the assistance of Divine Revelation, do slowly enough at first, attain
to the knowledge of Individual, or Single Things; and thence taking rise from
such common effects as are most obvious to our Senses, proceed to their more
obstruse Causes, until at length discovering one Infinite Being, called God, to
be the first Cause and Creator of all things. We from thence collect not only
what is his Nature, but also what is his Will; whereby we do not only find that
he is the best, and most perfect Being; But that as such, he wills and
procures the good and preservation, not of some few Singulars alone, but of the
whole Species of Mankind. And lastly, that he would have us men cooperate, as
subordinate, (tho free Agents) to this End, as the greatest and worthiest we
can undertake: Which though it be the last thing we come to the knowledge of, yet
is that which is first and chiefly intended by God, as the principal object of
our Knowledge, and the main End of all our Moral Actions. So that it seems
evident, this knowledge of our selves, and of things thus learnt from
experience and observation, was intended by God, only to serve as steps to
raise us to that larger knowledge, and nobler desire of pursuing the common
good of Rationals, as the sum of all our Moral Duties. And that our Wills and
Affections toward this end, are not to be regulated or directed in the same
order, by which this common good comes to be discovered; i. e. (with a respect
to our selves alone); but from a true judgment concerning the measures of that
natural good and perfection therein contained. So that though we are at first
indeed excited to the procuring our own happiness, as the prime and most
natural motive of all our Actions; yet we come at last upon better
consideration to discover, that this happiness of ours is contained in our
endeavors of the Common good of Rational Beings, and is inseparable from it,
as the conservation of any of our particular Members is contained in the health
and preservation of the whole Body.

. 7. And this Proposition, that every single man's good is contained in the
common-good, proves indeed, that the sanction of this general Law, is by
rewards and punishments to Every single man: But that Every is not to be
restrained to my self, or any one man alone, but extends alike to each other
man, or all men: Since it is evident, that these words ( Every man)
collectively taken, amount to all men; as every part collectively taken
signifies the whole. And though the main end intended by God, the Legislator,
from such Rewards and Punishments, are obedience to his Laws, and the
preservation of Mankind, as his Subjects (which are indeed of much greater
value to him, than the happiness of any one single person); Yet will it not
detract from the perfection or sincerity of this obedience, if from the
consideration of a man's own particular happiness or misery, he thereby comes
to consider and understand, that God has commanded him to pursue an higher and
nobler end than that alone; yet to which his own happiness or misery are
inseparably connected.

. 8. I come in the last place to these objections, that may be made by men of
quite contrary Principles; and who will not acknowledge, that we either can, or
ought to propose this common good, as the Sum of all the Laws of Nature, and
the main end of all our Moral Actions. Their first objection may be this; That
it seems not suitable to God's Infinite Goodness, and Power, and Wisdom, in the
Government of Mankind, if he did really intend its good and happiness (as we
here suppose) to permit so great a Design to be so often disturbed, if not
quite frustrated, in diverse parts of the World, by the various Passions, and
unreasonable Appetites, of so many violent, wicked and unjust men; which, if
Mankind is well considered, do make up the greatest part of this Aggregate Body.

In answer to this objection, I might tell those that make it, that the true
original of that depraved State of Mankind, and from which all that Disorder,
which we now find in Humane Nature is derived, was the Fall of Adam, the first
Father of Mankind; who thereby conveyed a weakness of Reason, and that
prevailing Power which we feel in our sensual Appetites and Passions to all his
Posterity, whereby man is become very prone to Evil, and too apt to transgress
the Laws of Nature. But I shall not insist upon this, because the Gentlemen
with whom I have to do, may laugh at all Divine Revelation, not accept of any
Proofs as sufficient, but what can be brought from mere Natural Reason, I shall
therefore answer them in their own way; and shall first of all grant; That God
might, if he had thought fit, have created Man without any possibility of
sinning, and have determined him only to that which is morally good. But then
God has not created a Man, but quite another Creature: For he having made Man
to consist of two different Principles, a Body and a Soul; the one to be driven
on by Sensual Appetites and Passions; the other to be governed by Reason: It
was necessary that he should be carried toward Good or Evil, as one or other
of these should prevail. So that considering what sort of Creature God has
made us, he has done all he needed to do toward the good and happiness of
Mankind; Supposing that he has created us, and deals with us as free,
voluntary Agents, endued with a freedom of choice, either to deliberate upon
the consequence and nature of all our Moral Actions before we do them; and
either to act according to the Rules of Right Reason, or else clean contrary
thereunto, that is, wholly at random, or by chance, which is unworthy our
Rational Nature.

. 9. So that God having thus left the greatest part of man's happiness in his
own power, either to be obtained by endeavoring this common good; or else
missed of, or lost by his own neglect of it. It is not to be wondered, if men's
unreasonable Appetites and Passions, looking no farther than their present
Pleasures, or outward Advantages, do often carry them away without any
consideration of those future, but as certain and greater evils which may
follow them in the whole course of their lives. By which abuse of men's natural
Freedom, I grant the good and happiness of Mankind is very much disturbed and
diminished: Therefore it is no wonder, that (though God's will be sufficiently
declared against such Actions,) it is not more often observed and followed; nor
could God have ordered things better or otherwise than they are; unless he
should have made man with out all freedom of choice, and have determined his
Will only to one sort of Actions; which had rendered him quite another
Creature, and incapable of those rewards and punishments, which are absolutely
necessary for the government of man, as he is made by God, a free, voluntary
Agent. Secondly, Though God has thus made us free Agents, but that by the ill
use of our Faculties, we become more prone to evil Actions than good ones; Yet
it must still be acknowledged, God's Infinite Power and Providence has set
such limits to the unruly Appetites and Passions of wicked men, that though it
must be confessed, that by private Violence, Wars and Persecutions for
Religion, they do more mischief to Mankind than all the Savage Beasts,
Earthquakes or Plagues in the World ever did: Yet this is but in some few
particular Places or Countries at a time; and God has so restrained these
Passions and Lusts, not only by Natural, Divine and Civil Laws; but also by
necessary ill consequences that follow such Actions; that it is not often that
such men can accomplish their wicked designs with that success and pleasure
they propose to themselves. And in those Countries where these Violences are
acted, the Scene often alters: And in those Countries where Civil-Wars and
Persecution for Religion, have not only very much disturbed the Common Peace
and Happiness, but also diminished the number of the Inhabitants, God does
often think fit, either through men's weariness of Wars, or by the sudden death
of a Cruel and Ambitious Prince (who was the chief cause of it) again to
restore peace and happiness to these Kingdoms or Countries where Civil-Wars and
Persecutions had before so cruelly raged, and so long prevailed. So that
notwithstanding all that can be objected, against God's intending the good and
happiness of Mankind; it is certain, that from the beginning of the World to
this day, he has preserved it in the same State; as he has also done all
other Species of Creatures. So that we may boldly affirm, the number of men in
the world rather increases than diminishes; though it may please God, for the
correction or extirpation of some extremely wicked, and incorrigible Nations,
to permit them to be oppressed, diminished, or quite destoyed by Foreign
Force, Civil Wars, or Domestic Tyranny.

. 10. A Second Objection that may be brought by those of Epicurean Principles,
is, That if the Being of a God, and the certainty of the Laws of Nature be so
easy to be found out, and discovered by men's Natural Reasons and Observations;
how it comes to pass that there are some whole Nations in the World, who have
(as we know of) no Notions at all of a God, or a Moral Good or Evil; as
Travelers report of those Negroes, who inhabit near the Bay of Soldania, not
far from the Cape of Good-Hope; who also fell their Children for Slaves, to
those that will give most for them: As also others in the West and East Indies;
that make War upon, and devour all Strangers they can take Prisoners Others, as
in the Isle of Formosa, rendering abortive all Children that the Mothers
conceive, before they are thirty years old. Others in the West Indies, and in
Africa, stealing from Strangers whatsoever they can lay their hands on. It were
tedious to relate all the particular Instances of this kind. Whosoever desires
to see more of them. may consult the Learned Author of the abovementioned
Essay of Human Understanding, Book the I. Chap. III.. 9. besides what he may
himself collect from his own reading, or observation. So that it may be urged,
that if these People are part of Mankind, and therefore Rational Creatures, how
it comes to pass that they should not be able, as well as we, to come to the
knowledge of a God, and of those Natural Laws, which we suppose to be given to
Mankind?

. 11. To all which I shall reply, not by denying, as some do, the matters of
Fact themselves, which is an easy, but too positive a way of confutation; but
shall take them at present for granted, since they are delivered to us by many
Authors of sufficient credit. And therefore, first of all, I think I may safely
affirm, That though these Instances may be of considerable weight, against those
who found all our Knowledge of the Laws of Nature upon certain Innate
Principles, or the common consent of Mankind: Yet they will prove nothing
against us, who have, I hope, made out the certainty and obligation of this
Law, from more evident Principles: So that the contrary belief or practice of
diverse Nations in the World, is no more an Argument against the Being of a God,
or of the Laws of Nature, than their ignorance in Arithmetic and Geometry, is
against the certainty or usefulness of those Sciences; these people, being most
of them not able to reckon beyond their ten Fingers. Now setting aside Innate
Ideas, and Consent of Nations, as proofs of the Laws of Nature; what other
means do there remain; but the uncertain Tradition of a God, and these Moral
Laws from their Parents, or Ancestors; or else to discover them by Reason, and
taking observation from the Nature of things, according to the method here laid
down. The former of these (if they had ever any such thing) it is certain that
they have now quite lost so that no Footsteps of it now remains among them. And
as for the latter, these ignorant and barbarous Nations, being wholly taken up,
through the whole course of their lives, either in procuring for themselves the
common necessaries for life, or else in brutish and sensual Lusts and
Pleasures; it is no wonder that they give themselves no time or opportunity to
think of these things, nor yet employ their thoughts, in considering the cause
of their Being, or for what end they came into the World. So that it is not
strange that they should be so little sensible of the Being of a God, and what
Worship or Duties he requires of them: Nor can I give a better account of this
ignorance, than what you may find in the Author last mentioned, who thus
concludes his Paragraph against the necessity of Innate Principles (already
cited in the beginning of this Chapter.) Had you or I been born (says he) at
the Bay of Soldania, possibly our Thoughts and Notions had not exceeded these
brutish ones of the Hoteutots that inhabit there: And had the Virginian King,
Apochancana, been educated in England, he had perhaps, been as knowing a
Divine, and as good a Mathematician as any in it. The difference between him,
and a more improved Englishman, lying barely in this, That the exercise of his
Faculties was bounded within the Ways, Modes and Notions of his own Country,
and was never directed to any other, or farther Enquiries: And if he had not
any Idea of a God, as we have, it was only because he pursued not those
Thoughts that would certainly have led him to it.

. 12. Which account, though it were sufficient alone to take off this difficulty,
yet I shall farther add; That although it is true the Existence of a God, and the
Laws of Nature are to be discovered by Natural Reason; yet this must be
exerted, and made use of according to a right Method, and is like the Talent in
the Gospel, either to be infinitely increased, or else may be buried, without
ever being made use of as it ought. So that men's not making use of their
Reason, and those Faculties which God has given them, is no more an Argument
against God's not having given men sufficient Means and Faculties to attain to
the knowledge of these things, than if a man, who by perpetual sitting still,
should have lost the use of his Legs, had reason to find fault with God, for
not giving him sufficient means of going, and helping himself. So that it seems
evident to me, that it is left in most men's power, whether they will by a due
use of their Reason, raise themselves to the highest perfection and happiness
that they human nature is capable of; or else by employing their minds about
mere sensual objects and carnal enjoyments, debase themselves into the state of
Brutes: For I am satisfied, that it is not reasoning about common and outward
things, that constitutes the only difference between us and them; since they
reason right about those things that are the objects of their Senses; but that
it rather consists in the more excellent Faculties of framing Universal Ideas,
and by a due enquiry into the causes and nature of things, of coming to the
knowledge of God, and of his Will, either naturally declared, according to the
method here laid down; or else supernaturally revealed in the Holy Scripture.
And indeed, I think, a Dog or a Horse, to be a much better Creature than a Man,
who has never had, or else has totally extinguished the belief of a God, and
of his Duty toward him; for the one lives according to its nature, and those
Faculties God has given it: But a Man, who wants the knowledge of God, and of
his duty toward him, by neglecting the chief end of his Creation, and by
giving himself wholly up to the government of his Passions, and unreasonable
Appetites, debases his nature, and so becomes, by his own fault, like a Brute.

. 13. The last Objection that I can think of, and which may be also made by Mr.
Hobs's Disciples, is; That they look upon this endeavor of the Common Good of
Mankind, as a mere Platonic Idea, or Term of Art, without any reality in
nature to support it. Of which opinion Mr. Hobs seems to be, when he tells us,
in his Leviath. Book I. chap. 4. That of Names, some are proper and singular to
ore only thing, as Peter, John, This Man, this Tree; and some are common to
many things, as Man, Horse, Tree, every of which, though but one name, is
nevertheless the name of diverse particular things, in respect of all which
together it is called an universal, there being nothing in the World universal,
but Names. For the things named are every one of them individual and singular.
So that on these Principles we can have no knowledge of any common good out of
a Commonwealth, where it arises merely from Compacts; every man being naturally
determined to seek his own particular preservation and satisfaction, without
the least consideration of any thing else.

. 14. In answer to which Objection, I desire you to take notice, That if in our
Description of the Law of Nature, or Explication of it, we had any where
supposed, that in this endeavor of the common Good, a Man either could, or
ought to neglect his own preservation, and true happiness, there might have
been some reason for this Objection; But since I have proved, that the true
good and happiness of every particular person is included in the Common Good of
Rationals, and depends inseparably upon it; though I grant every man's own
happiness and misery is a main motive of his acting to this end, and also
consists in a right endeavor of it; which if it be so, this part of the
Objection falls of it self, unless they will affirm, That a Man's
self-preservation and happiness only consists in the present satisfaction of
his own sensual Appetites and Passions, let what will be the consequence; which
how false and unreasonable a thing it is, any rational Man may judge. 2dly, We
have also sufficiently made out, that there is an unalterable Common Good and
Evil established by God in the nature of things, necessary for the
preservation, or tending to the destruction, not only of this, or that
particular man, but for all the men in the World, conceived under the
collective Idea of Mankind, and that in the state of Nature, and out of a Civil
State or Commonwealth: Since by comparing our own particular Natures with those
of all other men, and finding them to agree in the same Wants, general
Properties, and desires of like things necessary for life, and an aversion to
others destructive to it, we can thereby certainly determine what Things or
Actions will conduce not only to our own happiness and preservation, but to all
others of our own Kind. From whence there arises a clear Idea of the Common
Good of Mankind, since (as I have already proved) one peculiar Faculty of human
Nature different from that of Beasts, is, to abstract universal Ideas from
particular things, and then to give general Names to those Ideas, which though
they are but Creatures of our own understanding, and not existing out of our
own Brains; yet are for all that true Ideas of the general Natures of those
things from whence they are taken; and as for the general Names of them, if
there were not real notions in our minds, agreeable to the nature of those
things from whence they were taken, and that before any Names imposed upon
them, they would indeed be nonsense, or mere empty Sounds, without any Ideas to
support them: But the before-cited Author of the Essay of Humane Understanding,
Book II. Chap. 24. grants, That the Mind has a power to make complex,
collective Ideas of Substances, which he so calls, because such Ideas are made
up of many particular Substances, considered together as united into one Idea,
and which so joined, are looked on as one; v. g. the Idea of such a collection
of men as make an Army, though consisting of a great number of distinct
Substances, is as much one Idea as the Idea of a Man. And the great collective
Idea of all Bodies whatsoever, signified by the name World, is as much one
Idea, as the Idea of any the least particle of matter in it; it sufficing to
the unity of any Idea, that it be considered as one Representation, or Picture,
tho made up of never so many particulars. And he likewise farther grants, That
it is not harder to conceive how an Army of Ten thousand men should make one
Idea, than how a Man should make one Idea; it being as easy to the mind to
unite into one the Idea of a great number of men, to consider it as one, as it
is to unite into one particular all the distinct Ideas that make up the
composition of a Man, and consider them altogether as one.

Therefore I can see no reason, why any man by considering the nature of all
the Men in the World, may not only have a true Idea of all Mankind, but also of
the things or means that may produce their common good, or happiness, as well
as a General of an Army of 100000 men can have a true Idea of that collective
Body of Men, and order all things necessary for their common safety and
preservation; And if Mr. Hobs's Assertion be true, That there is nothing
universal but Names, his beloved Sciences of Arithmetic and Geometry would
also be false and uncertain; since they only considering Numbers, Lines and
Figures in general, and collecting universal Ideas from thence, do raise true
Rules or Axioms in those Sciences from those universal Ideas, though there be
nothing really existing in Nature out of our own Brains, but Units and single
bodies. And therefore Mr. H. is mistaken, when he will have nothing to have any
real Existence in nature but single things, as if our abstract Idea's of
Universals were Nothing, because they are not Bodies: But if these general
Idea's are true, as agreeing with the things from whence they are taken, it
will also follow, that they have a real existence, and consequently may have
Names given them, whereby to signify and represent them to our own minds, and
those of others we converse with. So that whatsoever we find to contribute to
the Preservation, Happiness and Perfection of all the men we know, or have
heard of, we may as certainly conclude to be naturally good for all Mankind,
and so a much greater good than that of any one particular Person; which Mr. H.
himself acknowledges in his Treatise De homine, Chap. 11.. 14. where treating
of the Degrees of Good, which of them are greater or less he plainly declares,
that to be a greater good (coeteris paribus) which is so to more men, than that
which is so to fewer.

So that if the Rational and free use of a man's Will consists in its consent
with that true judgment the Understanding makes, concerning those things that
agree in one Common Nature; and if we can thereby truly judge or determine what
things are necessary, or beneficial for the Natures of all other men, as well
as our own; I see no reason why we may not desire, that they should also enjoy
the like good things with our selves, and likewise endeavor (as far as lies in
our power) to procure it for them; since it is also a Duty imposed upon us by
God; and that we lie under sufficient obligations to do it, we have already
proved.

In short, This Common Good of Rationals, being thus made known to us, may very
well be proposed as the end of all our Moral Actions, and being the greatest we
can desire or imagine, the Understanding judging aright, cannot but determine,
that this Knowledge and Desire will more conduce to the Happiness and
Perfection of our Human Nature, than that of any lesser Good: So that if this
be greater than any other Good we can come to the knowledge of, it will
likewise prove to be the greatest and noblest end men can propose to
themselves. And Mr. H. himself is also sometimes sensible of this Common Good,
when in the 31 Chap. of his Leviathan, in the last Page, he has made in his
Latin Translation, this Addition.

That he does not despair that this Doctrine of his being become more
acceptable by custom, will at length be received bono publico, for the Common
Good.

So that it seems he presages his Doctrine will come one day to be beneficial
not only to one particular State, or Commonwealth, but for the Common Good of
all men, who are with him yet in the State of Nature: And if Mr. H. has so
perfect a Notion of the Common Good of all Nations, I think there will be no
great difference but in Words, between that and the Common Good which we
maintain.

. 15. But to come to a conclusion; I hope, notwithstanding all that has been
objected to the contrary, it has been sufficiently made out, that not only all
the Moral Virtues are contained in, and may be reduced to this one Principle,
Of endeavoring the Common Good of Rational Beings; But that likewise all the
Laws of Nature, (which are but the Exercise or Practice of these particular
Virtues upon their due Objects, may be also reduced into this single
Proposition; since they all of them respect either a man's Duty toward God, by
a due worship of him, or else toward himself, in the exercise of Temperance,
etc. or else by the due observation of Justice and Charity, or the most
diffusive Benevolence toward others of our own Kind; according to the Order we
have already laid down in the former Chapter. All which is but our endeavoring
to procure (as far as we are able) this Common Good of Rational Agents.

It Is true Mr. H. in his Lev. Chap. 13. contracts all the Laws of Nature into
this short and easy Rule which he says is intelligible even by the meanest
capacities ( viz.) Do not that to another, thou would not have done to thy
self. Which Rule, though very true, and the same in effect, which was given by
our Blessed Savior himself; yet without the consideration of the Common Good
of Mankind, would too often fail. For if this Rule were strictly and literally
to be understood, no Prince, Judge, or other Magistrate, could condemn a
Malefactor to death; for in so doing, he did that to another, which he would
not have done to himself, in the like State: Since he himself, as well as the
Criminal he condemns, would then desire to be pardoned if he could. But indeed
the reason why all Judges, and other inferior Officers of Justice, are excused
from the observation of this Rule, in their public Capacities, is, Because
they do not then act as private persons, but as public Representatives, or
Trustees, with whom the Common Good and Peace of the whole Kingdom or
Commonwealth is entrusted; which (as I have already shown) makes but a small
part of the Common Good of all Rational Agents.

. 16. There are likewise others who reduce the Laws of Nature into this single
Rule or Precept, Preserve or do good to thy self, and any other innocent
persons as to thy self: Which though I grant to be a true Rule, as containing our
Savior's Epitome of the Commandments of the Second Table, Love thy Neighbor
as thy self: Yet does it not express the Reason or Principle on which it is
founded; for we have no reason to love our Neighbor, but as they partake of
the same Common Rational Nature with our selves; and that our doing them good,
does conduce to the preservation and happiness of the whole Body of Mankind; of
which that person, as well as our selves, are but small parts, or Members: Nor
have we any particular obligation to endeavor our own particular Good, but as
it conduces to, and is part of the Common Good of Mankind.

. 17. And as the whole Law of Nature, so likewise the Revealed Law, given from
God by Moses to the Jews, and intended in due time to be made known to all
Mankind; tends to no other end, than this great Law of endeavoring the Common
Good of Rational Agents. For all the Precepts of the First Table of the
Decalogue, which prescribe our Duty toward God, and which our Savior has so
excellently well contracted into this single Precept, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength,
etc. contain nothing more than this great Rule. For as God, before he thought
fit to create the World, and whilst there was yet no Creature to worship or
serve him, was not then less happy or perfect; so neither now he has created
them is he the happier, if we worship him, or the more unhappy, if we omit it.
For man being created as an Object for the Divine Goodness to exert it self
upon, it must necessarily follow, that all the Precepts of the First Table, as
well as of the Second, are in some sort intended for Man's Good and Happiness,
as well as God's Honor and Service. So that even that Great Commandment of
keeping holy the Seventh day, which most chiefly respects God's own Glory and
Service, did also promote the Good and Happiness not only of the Jews, God's
particular Subjects, but also of all Mankind, whenever this Law should be
discovered to them. So that though it commands the dedicating of that day to the
Worship and Service of God, and is observed in obedience to his Commands; Yet
even in this, he does not design his own Glory and Honor alone; (nay,
according to Saint Austin, Our Good only) but also our Good and Happiness; --
Credendum est totum quoth; colitur Deus, homini prodesse, non Deo. De Civit. Dei
Lib. X. Cap. 5.
which is then most perfect and complete, when we bestow our time in the
contemplation of his Infinite Perfections and Goodness toward us, and in
rendering him thanks for his unspeakable Benefits. So that though I grant he
has made and ordained us for his Service; yet he has so constituted our
Nature, as to make our highest happiness inseparably connected with all the
particular Acts of his Worship. And therefore our Savior reproves the Jews,
when they found fault with him, for suffering his Disciples to pluck the Ears
of Corn on the Sabbath day, expressly telling them, That if they h^d known what
this means, Matt. 12.7, 8.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, they would not have condemned the
guiltless; for the Son of Man [ i. e. not Christ alone, but every Christian] is
Lord even of the Sabbath Day: And in St. Mark, Mark 2.27.
That the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. Thereby
teaching us, that the Sabbath it self was also instituted for Man's sake; and
that in cases of necessity, he is Master of it. And so likewise our Savior
himself, by choosing to do his greatest Miracles of healing on the Sabbath Day,
has taught us, that the performance of acts of Charity and Mercy on that Day,
is a great and necessary part of God's Service.

. 18. But as for the Precepts of the Second Table, I need not insist upon them;
because our Savior himself has contracted them all, (even that of honoring
our Parents) into this short Precept, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self: Which is no more than to bid us endeavor the common good of Mankind, to
the utmost of our power. So that as this Law of the most diffusive Benevolence
of Rational Agents, contains the Sum of all the Laws of Nature, as also of the
Moral Law, contained in the Ten Commandments; so likewise is it the Sum of the
whole Gospel delivered by our Savior Christ, and his Apostles. For as one
great design of our Savior's coming into the World, was by his most excellent
Precepts and Examples, to exalt the Law of Nature to a higher perfection, than
what Men, by the common use of Reason, could generally attain to; so likewise
was it one of the main designs of his coming, to restore the Law of Moses to
its Primitive Purity and Perfection; and to free it from those false
Interpretations and Traditions, with which the Pharisees had corrupted it. For
whereas they had confined the observation of that Command of loving our
Neighbors, only to outward Acts, or at least, restrained it only to those of
their own Nation or Religion; our Savior Christ commands a greater perfection,
and forbids even so much as the thoughts or desires of Murder, Adultery, etc.
And whereas the Jews did suppose, that they were not obliged to show Acts of
Charity or Mercy, to those of a different Religion from themselves, Luke 10.30.
our Savior teaches them by that excellent Parable of the Traveller that fell
amongst Thieves, and was taken up and cured by the merciful Samaritan, when the
ill-natured Priest and Levite had passed him by, saying to the Lawyer who had
asked, Who is my Neighbor, Go thy ways, and do thou likewise. By which he
plainly intimates; That we ought to do all Acts of Charity and Benevolence, to
all persons that stand in need of them, let their Nation or Religion be never
so different from our own. So that whosoever will but seriously consider the
great end of our Savior Christ's coming into the World, and also the whole
scope and design of his Doctrine; will find, that it was only to procure, as
well by his Example as Precepts, the good and happiness of all Mankind. For to
what end else did he take upon him the Form of a Servant, and endured a poor
and miserable life, with an ignominious Death, but to procure everlasting
happiness for all those that should truly believe in him? Or to what other end
were all those excellent Precepts, so often given by Christ and his Apostles,
of loving one another? And therefore St. Paul tells the Romans, Chap. 13. v. 8.
that he that loves another, has fulfilled the Law: And more fully in the last
Chapter to the Galatians, v. 14. For the Law is fulfilled in this one word,
even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And in his First
Epistle to the Corinthians, Cap. 13. he is very large and particular in setting
forth the necessity, and exalting the excellency of Charity, above all the
other Spiritual Graces; without which, he tells them, If he had Faith so as to
remove Mountains; yet, if he had not Charity, he were nothing. Now what is this
Charity, but an unfeigned love and good will to all Mankind? Chapter 2.17. And St.
James tells us, That Faith without Works is dead, being alone. And St. John in
his First Epistle, makes the love of our Brethren, (that is of all men) the
great sign and demonstration of our love to God, when he tells them, that if a
man says, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar; for he that loves
not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen.
And this Commandment we have from him, That he who loves God, love his Brother
also. So that whoever will but consider what has here been said, cannot but
acknowledge, that this excellent Doctrine of the Gospel, concerning the most
intense love toward God, and the most diffusive Charity toward Men, does not
only far exceed all the Precepts of Philosophers, but also the Revealed Law of
Moses it self. Now what can be the design of all these excellent Precepts? but
by all the Commands and Persuasions imaginable, and by all the Promises of the
most glorious Rewards and Threatenings of the most terrible and lasting
Punishments, to advance the Glory of God, and to procure the Welfare and
Happiness of the whole Race of Mankind.

. 19. To conclude; Though I suppose the Law of Nature, if duly observed, where
it has pleased God to give men no other knowledge or discovery of his Will,
may yet give them a rational share of happiness, not only in this Life, but in
that to come; yet I hope no indifferent or rational Man, but upon due
consideration of the lapsed and depraved state of Humane Nature, and how prone
it is to be carried away by exorbitant Lusts and Passions, contrary to the
Dictates of right Reason, and his own Conscience, but must also acknowledge,
that it was a great demonstration of God's Goodness and Mercy, to give us the
most Glorious Light of his Gospel; and to send his Blessed Son, not only to
instruct us, but also to die for us. Which great Mystery, that in God's due
time, and according to his Promise, may be speedily revealed to all Mankind, we
ought daily to make it our hearty Prayers to his Divine Majesty, That every
Heart may know, and every Tongue confess, That Jesus is both Lord and Christ;
who has brought Life and Immortality to light, through the Gospel.

The End of the First Part.
THE HEADS OF THE SECOND PART. BEING A Confutation of Mr. H's Principles.
THE Introduction Containing the Reasons why we have put these Answers to Mr.
H's Principles into this Method. Sect. 1.

The Heads of the First Principle.
That Man is not a Creature born apt for Society.

His Reasons for it; That a Man is not a Sociable Creature by Nature, but
Accident; for otherwise we should love all men alike. All Society proceeds from
Self-interest; this resolved into mutual Fear, or else desire of Glory and
Dominion over others. Sect. 2.

1. Answer, That these words, born unapt for Society, are equivocal; since who
does not know how unapt Children and Fools are to understand the force of
Compacts. Mr. H. takes his whole measure of Humane Nature from those Passions
that precede the use of Reason and Experience, which are also natural, as he
himself confesses in another place. Sect. 3.

That is natural which every man, when of years of Discretion, either does, or
may attain to. Sect. 4.

Answer to his 2d Argument concerning Interest; Society, though desired for a
man's own good, or Interest, does not make it for all that less natural. Sect.
5.

Answer to his Argument from Fear; not the cause of Natural, but of Civil
Society, which we are not now treating of. Sect. 6.

Answer to his Instances from the Company he had kept; which being some witty,
ill-natured men, no standard can be taken from thence of the nature of all men.
Sect. 7.

Answer to his Argument concerning Dominion: No Man able by his own single
Power to force all the rest of Mankind to submit to his Will. Sect. 8.

Mr. H. himself does not deny, but that men cannot subsist or live without
Society, though to evade this, he consounds Natural with Civil Society; the
absurdity of which is exposed by showing it to be besides the Question. Sect. 9.

The Heads of the Second Principle.
That all men are by nature equal.

His Argument proved from Men's mutual will and power of hurting each other; and
chiefly from the power which all men, even the most weak, have of taking away
each others lives. Sect. 1.

Answer. This equality, though granted, does not prove that all men are by
nature equal as to all things. Sect. 2.

The Heads of the Third Principle.
That there is a mutual will or desire in all men of hurting each other.

His Argument proposed, That tho some men according to a natural Equality will
allow to other men the same things as to themselves; yet that the major part of
men are not so modest, but will arrogate to themselves honor above others, or
else will assault other men's Goods, or Persons, out of a false esteem of their
own Power; from thence arises a necessity of others defending their Persons and
Goods against them. This proved also from the great Contention arising among
men from strife of wit; And lastly from many desiring the same thing at once.
Sect. 1.

Answer. None but Fools and wicked Men can have a desire to hurt those that
have done them no injury; so that this does not reach all men, nor yet that
even these have a will to hurt all men alike, but only those that stand in
their way, or whose Goods they desire. Self-defence argues no desire of hurting
others. Sect. 2.

Answer to his 2d Argument, from men's contention of wit; difference of Opinion,
no real ground of men's destroying each other. Sect. 3.

Answer to his Argument, from men's desire to think well of themselves, and to
contemn others; viz. That this Observation does not reach all men, but only
those foolish and unreasonable men he describes. Sect. 4.

Answer to his Argument, from many men desiring the same thing at once. This,
tho true, among Brutes and wicked, and unreasonable Men, yet does not reach all
Mankind, since Reason dictates the contrary; God has bestowed enough of the
necessaries of life among Mankind in the state of Nature, so that they need not
fight for them. Sect. 5.

Heads of the Fourth Principle.
That Nature has given to all men a right to all things.

Mr. H's Argument proposed, That all men having a Right to preserve themselves,
have also a Right to judge of the means of their own preservation; therefore
whatever they think conduces thereunto, they have a Right to, let it be what it
will; Profit being here the only measure of Right. Sect. 1.

Answer. Mr. H's Argument reduced into a Syllogism, shows, That all men have
not a right to all things, but only so many of them as they shall think
necessary for their own preservation: Yet even here that men's false Judgment
concerning the means, cannot give them a right to all things whatever, tho
judging never so unreasonably. Sect. 2.

Farther proved from Mr. H's own Definition of right Reason; Right never used
properly, but with respect to some Law acknowledged by Mr. H. himself, in his
Treatise De Cive. Mr. H's Errors and Contradictions of himself about the use of
the word Right Reason. Sect. 3.

Not true, that in a Commonwealth the public Reason, or Law thereof, is always
to be taken for Right, or that no man can distinguish true Reason from false,
but by comparing it with his own. Mr. H's Argument reduced into a Syllogism;
whereby it appears, That the major is false. Men's false Judgments, or Reasons,
cannot alter the nature of things, nor can give them a right to all things.
Sect. 4.

Mr. H's Error in this matter; whence it proceeds. Sect. 5.

No Rule of deciding any doubt, or difference in the state of Nature, but the
nature of things, or consent of the Parties concerned. Sect. 6.

Humane Nature will ever acknowledge a difference between Right and False
Reason, and that according to Mr. H's own definition of it. Sect. 7.

But to evade this Difficulty, M. H. supposes all men to be necessarily evil,
or to be so by Nature. The Argument of the Author of Tractatus Theologico
politicus, to the same effect; That whatever Action, though never so wicked or
unreasonable any man does, he has a right to do it, because he could act no
otherwise at that time. Sect. 8.

Those Arguments refuted: Necessity never called a Right, that word being never
used, but with respect to Men capable of Reason, and Deliberation; Men of sound
Minds, and mature Age, can never plead Ignorance, nor be excused if they
voluntarily give themselves up to be governed wholly by their own Appetites and
Passions. Sect. 9, 10.

Mr. H's Excuse; That in the state of Nature, and where there is no Legislator,
Men's Passions are no sins. Answered, Since there is no State either Natural, or
Civil, wherein God ceases to be a Legislator, or that the Laws of Nature are
not properly Laws. Sect. 10.

Mr. H's Artifice in taking away all Freedom from Mankind, and making all
Actions necessary, whereby he destroys all the grounds of Moral Good and Evil;
his contradicting himself, when he acknowledges this Right of all men to all
things to be unprofitable, since himself before makes Utility to be the measure
of all Right.

The Heads of the Fifth Principle.
That in the state of Nature, whatsoever any one does to another is no injury.

Mr. H's Arguments for this; That in the state of Nature there are no Laws;
where there is no Law, there is no Injustice; where there is no Injustice,
there is no Injury; Justice and Injustice, no Faculties either of the Body, or
Mind; for Injustice supposes some Propriety or Dominion, which cannot be
supposed in this State. The same Opinion held by Epicurus long ago, Sect. 1.

Answer. The Dictates of Right Reason, or the Laws of Nature, are the Laws of
God, and therefore give every man a right to his Life, and all means necessary
thereunto. So that whatever a man enjoys by the Right of Nature, it must be
Injury and Injustice to take it away. And Mr. H. himself agrees, that to be
injurious, which is repugnant to Right Reason; that is, to any known Truth,
that may be collected from thence. He likewise acknowledges the Dictates of
Right Reason to be the Laws of Nature, and therefore must confer a right to
every man to their Lives, and all the Necessaries thereof. Sect. 2.

Yet Mr. H. when he is hard pressed, cannot deny, but that there may be injury
done to another, in the state of Nature; as when a Son kills his Father, but
has this Subterfuge, that a Son cannot be understood in the State of Nature to
his Father. This Opinion confuted: That every man owes the like gratitude to
any other who should maintain and educate him, as to his Father; and it would
be as much injury to hurt the one, as the other. Sect. 3.

This Argument in his Lev. false and precacarious. For if God, in the State of
Nature, is truly a Legislator, then the Laws of Nature are truly Laws; but this
is already proved. Sect. 4.

The Heads of the Sixth Principle.
That nothing is Good or Evil in the State of Nature.

Mr. H's Reason for it: That every Man in the State of Nature, makes his own
Judgment or Appetite the Rule of Good and Evil; which are ever understood with
respect to the Party that uses them; and that in the State of Nature, is either
every man's own self; or in a Civil, of the Persons that represent the
Commonwealth. Sect. 1.

This he explains Physically in his Human Nature, from the different Motions
which those Objects produce in the Brain, proceeding from men's different
Temperaments. Sect. 2.

Answer. Mr. H's uncertainty and looseness in his Notions of Good or Evil
observed. Sect. 3.

That notwithstanding the variety of Tempers or Humors, or the different
Genius of particular Nations in some Customs, etc. yet they for the most part
agree in certain Notions necessary for the Common Good and Preservation; and
consequently that of all Mankind. Sect. 4.

A more certain Account of Good and Evil, as well Natural as Moral, than what
Mr. H. has given us. Sect. 5.

Mr. H. notwithstanding all he has said to the contrary, acknowledges a Common
Good in the state of Nature. Sect. 6.

The difference between a Natural and a Moral Good, and wherein it consists.
The confounding of these, the great cause of Mr. H's. Errors in this Matter.
Sect. 7.

Mr. H. sometimes blames this narrow Humor in some men, that desire nothing
but their own private advantage; and likewise confesses that that is a greater
good which benefits more persons, than what does good but to a few. Sect. 8.

That notwithstanding all what Mr. H. has said to the contrary, all rational
and good men must acknowledge, that to be good, which tends to the happiness
and preservation of Mankind, and which likewise may any ways contribute to
effect it: That if we do not make the Common Good of Rational Agents, the End
of all our Actions; all our Notions about Moral, as well as Natural Good, will
be various and uncertain. Sect. 9.

The Heads of the Seventh Principle.
That the State of Nature is a State of War.

That all Mr. H's precedent Principles, tend only to prove this darling one: If
therefore, those are well answered, this Principle must fall. His New Reasons
in his Leviathan proposed: He deduces this state of War from Three Causes in
the Nature of Man.

1st, Competition. 2dly, Diffidence. 3ly, Glory. Each of which do in their
turns make men fall together by the ears. A state of War, not only that of
actual fighting, but all that time wherein men's Inclination to it may be
certainly known; illustrated by a Simile of rainy Weather. Sect. 1.

Answer to this Argument: It Is first observed, that Mr. H. differs in his
manner of proving the necessity of this state of War; differs in his Leviathan,
from that in his De Cive: Since he here only supposes such a War to be lawful,
without any other proof. Sect. 2.

2 d. Observation, That this Author in his Argument here proposed, does still
take the Natural state of Man only from his Passions, without any consideration
of Reason or Experience; which is contrary to what he had before laid down,
when he made Experience any of the Faculties of the Mind. Yet that none of
these Passions do necessarily and uninevitably hurry men into a State of War.
Sect. 3.

That none of these Persons, if governed by Reason, ought to incite men to War;
and that Reason can never persuade men to fall together by the ears, out of
Competition. Sect. 4.

That Diffidence of others, can never, if duly considered, be any Motive to
make War with all men; since such a War is not only destructive in its own
nature, but also impracticable. Sect. 5.

Mr. H. appeals to experience of what men do for their own security, answered;
as also his Simile from the Weather. Sect. 6

He himself grants that there was never actually throughout the World, such a
state of War, as he describes. His instances from the Savage People of America
make rather against, than for him; proved by Authorities of Travelers. Sect. 7.

His Instance from the practice of Sovereign Powers, proved to be of no force.
Sect. 8.

Answer to his Argument from the Passion of Glory, which does not inevitably
hurry men to War, since it is more often mastered by other greater Passions; as
Fear of Death, Desire of things necessary, etc. Observation; That the same
Passions which excite men to War, do also, with him, at other times persuade
them to Peace; and that those Passions are really the more strong, that do so.
Sect 9.

Mr. H's Argument from certain Peculiarities in Humane Nature; why men cannot
live as sociably with each other as Brutes? The 1st. Competition for Honors,
etc. Answer, No Argument to be drawn from this, in the state of Nature. Sect.
10.

His 2d Reason answered; That the Common Good, among Brutes, differs not from
the Private, as it does among Men. Sect 11.

Answer to his 3d. Instance; That Creatures not having the use of Reason, do
not find fault with the Administration of the Commonwealth; That this can be no
Argument in the state of Nature, before Commonwealths are instituted, etc.
Sect. 12.

Answer to his 4th Reason; That Brutes have not the use of Speech, and so
cannot make Good seem Evil, and Evil Good: Men not in a worse condition than
Brutes, by reason of Speech, but rather in a better. Sect. 13.

Answer to his 5th Reason; That Brutes do not distinguish between Injury and
Damage, whereas it is otherwise in men. Sect. 14.

Answer to his last Reason; That the agreement of Brutes is natural; but in Men
artificial. Sect. 15.

So much granted Mr. H. That men are tormented with diverse Passions, which
Beasts are not: And so on the other side, men are endued with other Passions,
which move them more strongly to Concord. Sect. 16.

A farther Consideration of the absurdity and Inconsistency of this Hypothesis,
of a Natural state of War. Sect. 17.

The Heads of the Eighth Principle.
That mutual Compacts of Fidelity are void in the state of Nature; but not so
in a Commonwealth.

His Reason for it: Because where Covenants are made upon a mutual trust of
future Performances, either Party may choose whether he will perform, or not;
because he is not sure that the other will perform his Part also: And of this
he is the sole judge: But that it is otherwise in a Civil State, where there is
a Common Power to compel either of them that refuse. Sect. 1.

The reason apparent why he supposes Civil Sovereigns always in a state of War.
Sect. 2.

Upon these Principles it is altogether in vain for Princes or States, to make
any Leagues or Treaties of Peace with each other. This Notion gives them also a
Right of putting to death, or making Slaves of Ambassadors, and all others that
come into their Dominions. Sect. 3.

That upon this Principle of Mr. H's. if Compacts do not bind in the state of
Nature; neither will they be of any force in a Civil State, if either all, or
the major part of the Contractors, should have all at once a mind to break
them; upon pretense, that either others do not perform their Parts, or that
they fear they will not do it. Sect. 4.

Mr. H. far exceeds his Master Epicurus in this Evil Principle. Sect. 5.

The Heads of the Ninth Principle.
The Law of Nature is not truly a Law, unless as it is delivered in the Holy
Scripture.

His Reasons for it: That though they are Dictates of Reason, yet that for want
of a Legislator, and of sufficient security for those that shall observe them;
they are not Laws, but as delivered in Scripture. Sect. 1.

That it has been already proved, that this Law of endeavoring the Common
Good, is the sum of all the Laws of Nature, and that proceeding from God, and
established by sufficient Rewards and Punishments; it has all the Conditions
required to a Law. That the defect of other Writers, in not taking the like
Method, has been the cause of Mr. H's* and others falling into this Error.
This Law not being given in any S^t form of Words, no Objection against its
certainty, or plainness. Sect. 2.

This Law of Nature being to be collected from our own Natures, and that of
things, is capable of being known even by persons born deaf and dumb. Mr. H.
acknowledges* these Laws to be properly so, as proceeding from God. His
allowing that those Laws oblige only to a desire or endeavor of the Mind, that
they should be observed, a mere Evasion. Answer to his Objection, of the want
of Rewards and Punishments, he himself having obviated this, by confessing in
his Lev. that they are established by natural Rewards and Punishments: If the
Law of Nature is not properly a Law, then there are no natural Rights properly
so called. Sect. 3.

Answer to his main Reason; That we are not obliged to external Acts, for want
of sufficient security; That if this were a sufficient Objection; then neither
Civil Laws would oblige. Divine Punishments, as certain as Humane. Sect. 4.

That men's greatest Security consists in a strict observation of all the Laws
of Nature* Mr. H. in some places acknowledges, That if we do not observe the
Laws of Nature, we shall fall into other Evils, besides those that proceed from
the violence of Men. Sect. 5.

Two Reasons proposed; showing the falseness of this Argument of Mr. H. The
one, the Declaration of all Civil Sovereigns concerning men's Innocence till
accused; The other from Mr. H's own Concession of a much greater Insecurity
that will follow from their non-observation; (viz.) a War of all men against
all, which is the most miserable State of all others. Sect. 6, 7.

The Heads of the Tenth Principle.
That the Laws of Nature are alterable at the will of the Civil Sovereign.

That this is but a consequence of his former Principle, That nothing is good
or evil in the state of Nature; his Arguments for this Principle, Because it
proceeds from Civil Laws, that every man should have distinct Rights to
himself, as also should not invade those of others; it follows that these
Precepts, Thou shall honor thy Parents; Thou shall not kill, etc. are Civil
Laws, and that the Laws of Nature prescribe the same things, yet implicitly;
for the same Law commands all Compacts to be observed; and that to yield
obedience, when obedience is due, was covenanted at the Institution of the
Commonwealth; and therefore whatever Civil Sovereigns command concerning these
things, must be obeyed, since they alone can appoint what shall be yours, or
another, or what shall be Murder, Theft, etc. Sect. 1.

Nothing written by Mr. H. more wickedly or loosely, nor wherein he more
contradicts himself, than in this Principle. The main foundations of which are
already destroyed. No Compacts made at the Institution of any Commonwealth,
which can be of greater force than the Law of Nature. The dreadful Consequences
that will follow from the contrary Principle; Mr. H. allowing even Idolatry it
self to be lawful, if commanded by the Supreme Powers.

That the Secondary Laws of Nature can never contradict, or alter those that
are prior to them, as more conducing to the Common Good; though Civil Laws may
restrain, or enlarge several particular Instances. His Example of the
Lacedemonian Boys answered. Sect. 2.

A Concluding Instance in answer to this, from that Law of ours, against
relieving wandering Beggars. Sect. 3.

Uncertain, whether Mr. H. broached this dangerous Doctrine out of ignorance,
or design of flattering Civil Sovereigns; yet that by this he endeavors to
destroy all Virtue and Goodness in Princes, and all obligation of Obedience in
Subjects, whenever they are strong enough to rebel. Sect. 4.

The Conclusion; containing an Apology for the length of these Confutations.
Sect. 5.

The Second Part:
Wherein the Moral Principles of Mr. Hobbs's De Cive and Leviathan, are fully
Considered, and Confuted.

INTRODUCTION.
. 1 THough perhaps it may not seem unnecessary, after so much as has been
said, to prove the certainty, and constant obligation of the Law of Nature, of
endeavoring the Common Good of all Rational Bei^gs; more particularly to
confute the Principles of Epicurus, and his Follower Mr. H. it being a true
Maxim in other Sciences, as well as Geometry, Rectum est Index sui, and
obliqui: Yet since those Authors have not only poisoned the World with their
pernicious Tenets, but have also endeavored to support them with the specious
appearances of Reason and Argument; it may be expected, that we should say
somewhat in answer to these Reasons and Arguments Mr. H. the Reviver of those
Principles in this Age, has brought in his Book De Cive and Leviathan, to
maintain and support them. And therefore I have thought fit to add some
Considerations, and Confutations of them, as far as they contradict the
Principles we have here laid down; and rather to put them here all together at
the end, than in the Body of our Treatise of the Law of Nature; since there
they would not only have interrupted the Coherence of the Discourse it self,
but would have also disturbed, and taken off the minds of the ordinary Readers
(for whom I chiefly intend it) from a due consideration of the truth and
connection of the things therein contained. And therefore I have thought fit
rather to cast them all together into a distinct part by themselves; since if
you are Master of that former Part of this Discourse, you will easily perceive,
not only the Falsehood and Absurdity of Mr. H's Principles, but that it was from
his Ignorance, or Inconsideration of this great Principle of the Common Good of
Rational Beings, that he first fell into those Errors, and made private
Self-preservation not only the first motive (which had been true enough) but
also the sole end of all Moral Actions, which is altogether false, and below
the dignity, not only of a Philosopher, but a Man. I have therefore gone
through all his Moral Principles in order; and as for his Politic ones, if
these are false, they will need no other Confutation; and I have reduced them
into certain Heads, or Propositions, and have truly given you this Sum of
Arguments, that no man may find fault with me for misrepresenting his Opinions.

PRINCIPLE I.
Man is not a Creature born apt for Society.

. 1. MR. H. in his Philosophical Elements, or Treatise De Cive, Chap. 1.. 2.
lays down, and maintains this Principle, and gives certain specious Reasons for
it; which because they are somewhat tedious, and diverse of them very trivial, I
shall rather choose to contract them, than be at the trouble of transcribing all
that he has loosely enough laid down for the maintenance of this Assertion;
referring you, if you doubt whether I rightly represent his meaning, to the
Author himself in the place above cited.

He there in the first place supposes, that Man is not a Sociable Creature,
because it could not be otherwise in Nature, but only by accident; for if Man
loved Man naturally, there could be no reason given why every one should not
love every one alike, as being alike Man; or why he should rather frequent
those in whose Society Honor and Profit is conferred, rather on himself, than
others. Therefore we do not by nature seek Companions, but to be either
honored, or profited by them. These in the first place; but those in the
second; And this he thinks he has sufficiently proved, by showing us for what
end men herd together, and what they do when they are met; for if they come
together for Commerce-sake, every one minds not his Companion's, but his own
Interest. If for Public Affairs, there arises a certain Court-friendship,
having more of mutual fear than love; from whence often Faction, but never
Good Will is produced. If for the sake of Mirth and Pleasure, every one is wont
to please himself in those things which raise laughter; from whence he may (as
it is the nature of what is ridiculous) by the comparison of another's weakness
or infirmity, become more acceptable to himself: And he there proceeds to show
from several Observations he had made in the Companies he had kept, That all
men that converse together either for the sake, or the instruction of others,
do only seek Company for their own profit, or glory, and not the good of
others; that is, for the love of himself, not of his Companions: And therefore
since Man can never seek Civil Society, only out of a desire of glory; and
although the Profits and Conveniences of life may be increased by men's mutual
assistance, yet since that may be much better procured by a dominion over
others, than by their Society, no body can doubt, but that men are more
vehemently carried by their Nature, when fear is removed, to dominion, than
Society; therefore it is to be laid down for a Principle, That the original of
all great and lasting Societies did not proceed from the mutual Benevolence of
Men, but their mutual Fear; And by Fear, as he tells us in the Annotation to
this Paragraph, he does not mean only to be frightened, but under that word
Fear, he comprehends any prospect of a future Evil, as to distrust, suspect,
beware, and to provide that they may not fear, to be also the part of those who
are afraid.

. 2. Having given you the Author's Sense, and in great part his own words; I
shall now proceed to make some Observations upon them; and in the first place
must observe, That the main strength of his Arguments consists in the ill, or
false use of these words, unapt for Society. For if he only understands by
them, that Men are born actually unapt for Civil Society, because they are
Infants, or else unexperienced of the Evils proceeding from the Wants thereof;
this is indeed a great discovery, and worthy a Philosopher, that Children, or
People without experience, are not able to understand the meaning or force of
Compacts; or are unable immediately to enter into a Civil State. Nor is his
Reason any better; That though Infants and persons of full Age, though
unexperienced, partake of Human Nature; yet being thus unapt for Society, Man
is not made fit for it by Nature, but Discipline.

. 3. From whence I observe, That he only takes the measure of Humane Nature,
from those Passions which precede the use of Reason, Experience, and
Discipline. And as they first and chiefly show themselves in Children and
Fools; or persons unexperienced. Whereas, according to the Opinion of the best
Philosophers, we suppose the truer nature of Man, ought rather to be taken from
his utmost Perfection, viz. his Reason, or the power of deducing Effects from
their Causes; by which alone, he is distinguished from Brutes: And so the Will
may incline us to those things, which Reason shall judge most fit and
convenient for our Natures. And therefore Mr. H. does very absurdly, to oppose
Experience, and Discipline, to Nature; since whatever men learn by either of
these, they must still attain to it by the force of their Rational Natures, and
those Faculties of Reason and Speech, which Brutes are not capable of: And
therefore the nature of a Creature is best judged of from the utmost Perfection
it attains to: As the Nature of a Plant is not to be taken from its first
appearance, or as soon as ever it peeps out of the Earth, but from its utmost
state of perfection, when it comes to bear Flowers, Seed, or Fruit. And even
that Experience, to which Mr. H. attributes all our Reason, he himself grants
to be a natural, and not acquired Power: See his Leviathan, Chap. 8. where
treating of Intellectual Virtues, he has these Words; The Intellectual Virtues
are of two sorts, Natural, and acquired. By Natural, I mean not that which a
man has from his Birth, for that is nothing else but sense, wherein men differ
so little from one another, and from brute Beasts, as it is not to be reckoned
amongst the Virtues. But I mean that Wit, which is gotten by use only, and
experience, without method, culture, or Instruction.

. 4. To conclude this Head, I desire those Gentlemen of his Opinion, to take
notice, That all Philosophers, and Writers of Politics, as well as Mr. H. were
not ignorant how unfit Infants, and Grown Persons, without experience, or
laboring under any unruly Passion, were to enter into Leagues, or Compacts; or
to perform any of the Duties of a Civil Society: But yet for all that, they
supposed man to be born for those ends; which by the force of his Rational
Nature, he may at last attain to, unless something preternatural (such as are
those disorderly Passions, or Diseases of the Mind) intervene: And Iuvenal's
Saying is as old as true; Non aliud Natura, aliud Sapientia dictat. And sure it
is a childish Inference, and favors more of Sophistry, than true Philosophy,
to say, Men are born Infants, and therefore unapt for Civil Society. Since any
Country Fellow could have taught him better, who thinks his Son born apt to be
a Plough-man, or a Grasier, though he knows he will not be able to hold the
Plough, until he is twelve or thirteen years of age* Nor yet to understand
Grazing, until he is able to ride and go to Market.

. 5. But let us now more particularly examine the Reasons this Author there
gives us, why Man is a Creature naturally unapt for Society, which he will have
to be only by accident; Because if one man loved another naturally as man,
there could be no reason why every man should not love every man alike; or
wherefore he should rather frequent those in whose company he is most likely to
get Honor and Profit. Therefore we do not naturally seek Companions, i. e. for
their own sakes; but either to gain Honor or Prosit by them: These in the
first place; but those in the Second, etc.

In answer to which, I grant indeed, that particular persons, when they join
with others, in any Society or Company, do usually consider some peculiar end,
either of Profit or Pleasure; which may thence redound to themselves. Yet does
it not therefore follow that Man is not a Creature designed by God for Society;
or that he is not obliged by the Laws of Nature, or right Reason to be friendly
and sociable even to those from whom no present advantage can be expected. For
though it be granted, that men either from a peculiar agreement of dispositions,
or that they suppose they can sooner obtain some particular end or advantage,
in some men's Conversation than others; and do therefore prefer such men's
Company before others; yet does not this prove, That man is not naturally a
Sociable Creature: Since he himself grants, That men can neither live
comfortably, nor be so much as bred up, or preserved, without the help and
society of others.

Therefore if he is determined to the end, viz. happiness, and
self-preservation, he is likewise as necessarily determined to the means, (
viz.) Society. And his inclination to this or that man's company more than
others, is no more an Argument against our Natures requiring Society, than if I
should argue* That because I love Mutton better than Veal* therefore it is not
from my nature, but only by accident, that I am ordained to preserve my life by
eating. And as for the instances which he gives, to let us see with what intent
men meet together, from what men do when they are met. It is plain that Mr. H.
here confounds that natural Society, which is absolutely necessary for man's
preservation, with these particular Clubs or Companies, which men keep for
their greater pleasure or advantage* And though I have already granted, that
some men's particular profit or pleasure may be promoted or increased, by
frequenting some men's Companies, rather than others; as suppose there be a
greater agreement of Dispositions; or that we have been more used to this or
that man's Company by Education, or long acquaintance, etc. And though it be
likewise granted, that a man does more frequent their Company, among whom he
finds most honor and profit. Since every man may lawfully pursue his own
pleasures and advantages (if he knows rightly how to judge of it.) Yet this
does not at all contradict man's sociable nature, provided the Common Bonds of
Society be not broken and disturbed, by any man's more particular Interests or
Inclinations; and God has not so designed us to good for others, as that we
should neglect all care of our selves; but that this sociableness is therefore
to be observed by mankind, that by a mutual communication of humane
assistances, and other natural goods, between diverse persons, we may more
conveniently promote our own pleasure or advantage jointly with that of others;
Since a mutual love and benevolence, is to be observed among men, though not
otherwise related to each other, than by the common relation of Humanity, and
with whom we may preserve a sufficient concord, by doing them good, rather than
hurt, whenever it lies in our power. And though a man, when he joins himself
with some particular Company, will in the first place consider his own pleasure
or profit, before that of his Companions: Yet ought he not so to consult his
private advantage, as that the good of the Civil Society, or of Mankind in
general, be thereby prejudiced, by injuring any of its particular Members: And
a man as well in Natural, as Moral and Civil Actions, may propose his own
pleasure or profit, in the first place, though he may also intend some higher
or nobler end of his thus acting. Thus a man who intends to marry, may lawfully
propose to himself his own pleasure and satisfaction; though the great end of
Marriage, (and which he may also chiefly intend) be the propagation of Mankind.
So likewise a Master or Tutor that instructs others, may lawfully propose to
himself his own profit or advantage thereby; though he may also ultimately
intend the instruction of his Scholars, or Pupils (that is, the Common Good of
Mankind) as the great end of his taking that Profession. So likewise in Civil
Societies or Commonwealths, a man may propose to himself his own Security,
Profit, or Honor, as a reason why he bestows his time and labor, or ventures
his life in the service of the Public: And yet he may farther propose to
himself the love of his Country, or the good of the Commonwealth, as the great
End of his Actions.

. 6. So that it is to little purpose, which Mr. H. alleges, That the original
of the greatest and most lasting Societies, to wit, Commonwealths, did not
proceed from mutual Good Will, but mutual Fear; (the Word Fear being used for
any foresight, or precaution of a future Evil.) For we are not here
considering the original of Civil Societies, but of that natural sociableness
among men, which we look upon as most necessary and agreeable to the nature of
man; though some particular men being also sensible how obnoxious they were to
the Injuries of those who sought their own pleasure or profit, without any
consideration of the interest or good of others, did, to prevent them, unite
themselves together in that stricter League of Amity, called Civil Society. So
that this Common Amity or Benevolence, cannot be omitted to be first supposed,
even in the very constitution of Common wealths: Since those who founded them,
must have been before united, either by some natural relation; and a mutual
confidence in, or benevolence toward each other; although perhaps, others
might afterward, out of fear of their Power, or a liking of their Government,
be compelled or allured, to join or associate themseves with them.

. 7. But as for those Instances Mr. H. gives us of those that seek Society only
to censure the Lives and Actions of other men; thereby to gain Glory to
themselves, from the Follies or Infirmities of those they converse with; Such
sort of Conversation, consisting for the most part of some idle ill-natured
men, who count themselves Wits, and have little else to do, but to speak ill
of, and censure others, does not concern the major part of Mankind; who needing
each others Society, for more necessary occasions, have commonly other Business
to discourse of, when they meet.

. 8. As for the rest of those things he says, That the Necessaries of life may
be much better procured by dominion over, than by the Society of others, that
is altogether false, and precarious; since no man by his own single strength,
and without the voluntary help or society of others, could ever yet subdue, and
make Slaves of all other men he met with: And therefore if any man ever
increased his natural power or advantage over others, it was not by virtue of
his own sole power or strength, but by men's deference to his Valor, or Virtue,
when they chose him for their Head, or Leader; or else that they followed him,
and obeyed his Commands as their Father, or Grandfather, out of reverence to
his Wisdom, or Gratitude for his Benefits.

. 9. To conclude, He himself there objects, that men cannot grow up, or live
contentedly without the society and assistance of others: And therefore cannot
deny, but men desire the society of each other, their Nature compelling them
thereunto. But to come off from this Objection, he will have nothing called
Society, but Commonwealths; which, says he, are not mere Meetings, but Leagues,
for making of which Compacts are necessary. And therefore still argues, that
Infants, and those that are unexperienced, are incapable of them, etc. Upon
which I shall only observe, That Mr. H. imposes upon himself, and others, by
confounding that first, and most natural amity, and sociableness of Persons of
one and the same Family, as of Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, etc.
toward each other, with that artificial Society, which proceeding wholly from
Compacts, we call a Commonwealth: So likewise he imposes on his Readers in the
use of the words Nature, and Natural (as I have partly shown already) for by
these words is commonly understood, either something that is by Nature
inseparably proper to its subject, as to a Fish to swim; and other things are
natural and proper to a Creature, not as a mere Animal, but as of such a
Species, and at such an Age; as for a Man to go upon two Legs, and speak.
Lastly, It sometimes signifies an aptness in a Subject to receive some farther
perfection by culture and discipline, with which Nature intended it should be
endued. So the Earth is intended by Nature for the production of Vegetables;
yet it does not naturally bring forth all Plants in all places alike, without
Plowing, or Setting; yet are not these Plants so sown, or set, less natural for
all that: So likewise I have already proved, that whatever perfection we attain
to by the power of our Reason or Experience, it is not less natural
notwithstanding.

PRINCIPLE II.
All Men by Nature are equal.

. 1. WHich he thus undertakes to make out in the Chapter last cited,. 3. The
cause of mutual Fear consists partly in men's natural equality, partly in their
mutual Will of hurting; from whence it happens, that we are neither able to
expect security from others, nor yet afford it to our selves; For if we
consider Men grown up, and take notice how frail the Frame of a Man's Body is
(which failing, all his force, strength and wisdom fails together with it) and
how easy it is for any the most weak, to kill the strongest Man; there is no
reason, that any man trusting in his own strength, should suppose himself
superior by Nature to others. For those are equal, who are able to do the like
things against each other; but those who can do the greatest thing, that is,
take away life, are able to do like, or equal things to each other; therefore
all men are by nature equal, that unequality which now is, being introduced by
Civil Laws.

. 2. Before I answer which, I shall first make these Concessions and
Limitations: First, I grant, That all Civil unequality of ^^rsons is introduced
by Civil Laws. 2 dly, ^^at there is also such a natural equality among Men,
that there is nothing which one man can arrogate to himself as a Man, but by
the same reason which he judges it fit or necessary for himself, he must also
judge it alike fit and necessary for another man, who stands in like need of
it. Thus if Victuals, Clothes, and Liberty, are things necessary for his own
being, and preservation, they are likewise equally necessary for the well-being
and preservation of all other men, and consequently that they have a like right
to them; from which natural equality proceeds that great Rule of the Law of
Nature, To do to others, as we would have others do to us: And in this sense I
agree with him, that all men are equal; so that in this sense it is so far from
being a cause of war, or dissension among men, that it rather persuades to
amity and concord: Yet does not this equality hinder, but that there is
notwithstanding a natural unequality of strength or power amongst men, both in
body and mind; since any man, that does but observe the great difference there
is in both the strength and understanding of some persons above others, but
will grant, that there is as great, or greater difference between some men and
others, than there is between some Brutes (supposing Apes, or Elephants) and
men, in understanding: Yet does there not any natural equality follow from the
Reason Mr. H. here gives us, That those are equal, that are able to do the like
things to each other, to wit, take away their lives: For besides that, there
are some born maimed, and cripled, or else so void of understanding, as not to
have either the will or ability to hurt or kill others; and if a Coward and a
stout man are to fight, or a very weak man and a strong, will any man say that
they are an equal match? And this Mr. H. tells us, That it is easy for the
weakest to kill the strongest man; he grants it must either be by chance,
cunning, or surprise. I grant indeed it may happen by chance, and yet this will
not make the match to be equal; any more than it is in Cockfighting, where the
Gamesters will lay five to one on such a Cock's side against another set down
to fight with him; and though perhaps the weaker Cock may happen to kill the
stronger by a chance stroke, yet no man will therefore affirm, that both these
Cocks were equal by nature; the same may be said of Men. But it may be replied,
That there is a great difference between Men and Beasts, since though Brutes
cannot, yet a Man weaker in body or mind than another he would be revenged of,
may join, or combine with one as wise and strong as his Adversary, and then
they will be an equal Match in point of strength. If this were a good Argument,
it would prove more, or rather contrary to that for which it is designed; for
this weaker man may combine with one as strong and wise as the other, and then
the odds will be apparently on the weaker man's side: But if I should grant the
utmost that can be asked, that both these men's wit and strength taken together,
are still but an equal match to the other, may not this wiser and stronger man
as well also combine with others as wise and strong as himself, and then will
not the unequality be much greater than it was before? And as for cunning, or
surprise, it signifies as little, since the stronger man may be as cunning as
the other, and may have also as good luck in surprising him at unawares; but it
is indeed a very trivial Argument to prove this natural equality, because those
are equal that are able to do the like things to each other; since this were to
level Man with the most despicable Creatures; For there is scarce any Beast,
nay Insect, so weak, but may sometime or other destroy a man by force, or
surprise; and we read of a Pope who was choked by swallowing of a Fly in his
Drink, which if it could be supposed to be done by the Fly on purpose, would
make the Fly and the Pope to be equal by Nature.

PRINCIPLE III.
That there is a mutual will or desire in all men in the state of Nature, of
hurting each other.

. 1. WHich Mr. H. thus endeavors to prove in the same Chapter of his De Cive.

There is a will (says he) indeed in all men of doing hurt in the state of
Nature, but not from the same cause, nor alike culpable. For one man, according
to a natural equality, allows to others all the same things as to himself,
which is the part of a modest man, and of one that rightly measures his own
strength; another esteeming himself superior to others, will have all things to
be lawful for himself only, and arrogates an honor to himself above others,
which is the part of a proud disposition; therefore the will of hurting is in
this man from a vain glory; and a false esteem of his own power, as it is in
the other from a necessity of defending his own Goods and Liberty against the
other's violence. Besides, since the strife of wit is the greatest amongst men,
it is necessary that very great discord should arise from that Contention; for
it is not only odious to contradict, but also not to consent; for not to
consent to another in a thing, is tacitly to accuse him of error in that
matter; so likewise to dissent in very many things, is as much as to count him
a Fool; which may appear from hence, that no Wars are more sharply prosecuted,
than between different Sects of the same Religion, and the Factions of the same
Commonwealth, where there is a strife concerning Doctrine, or Civil Prudence.
But since all pleasure and satisfaction of mind consists in this, That a man
may have somewhat, by which, comparing himself with others, he may think highly
well of himself; it is impossible but that they should show their mutual hatred
and contempt sometimes, either by laughter, words or gestures, or by some
outward sign, than which there is indeed no greater vexation of, mind, neither
from which a greater desire of hurting can arise. But the most frequent cause
why men desire to hurt each other, arises from hence, that many desire the same
thing at once; yet (which very often happens) they neither may, nor can enjoy
it in common, nor will yet divide it; from whence it follows, that it must be
given to the stronger; but who is the stronger, can only be known by fighting.

. 2. From which, I shall first observe, That it is not true, that in the state
of Nature, there is in all men a like will of hurting each other: For in this
State, the first, and most natural condition to be considered is, when men have
not as yet at all provoked each other, nor done them either good or harm. And
in this condition, none but a Fool, a Wicked man, or a Madman can have any
desire to hurt another, who has given him no provocation for it: Though I
grant, that there are too many men (such as Mr. Hobbs describes) who will
arrogate more things to themselves, than they either deserve, or really need;
yet even in these men, there is not a will to hurt every man alike, but only
those who stand in their way; and whose Goods, or other things, they may think
may be useful for themselves. Nor yet are these all Mankind, since he grants
there are some, and perhaps as many, or more; who, according to natural
equality, will allow to others all the same things, as to themselves, which he
grants is the part of a modest man, and who makes a true estimate of his own
strength. And certainly, if this modest man judges according to right reason,
who allows to others the same things, as to himself; this violent or proud man
(he here describes) cannot acquire any right to the liberty or goods of others,
from his own unreasonable judgment, and false estimation of his own strength or
merit: Nor is this self-defence, of the modest or honest man, properly a desire
to hurt the other, but only a necessity to defend himself against his assaults,
since he had no intention to hurt him, before this violent man gave him a just
provocation.

. 3. As for that strife of Wit, which (as he says) is the greatest among men;
though there may be some difference in Opinions, and Contentions arise from
thence; Yet does it not therefore follow, that there must from thence
necessarily arise a desire in all men, of hurting or destroying others: For
there are many of so equal and reasonable a disposition, that they can find no
cause of hating, much less of hurting others; though they often differ from
them in opinion; or that they must take all others for fools, if they prefer
their own Judgment before another Man's.

And as for Mr. H's Instances, that there are no Wars more sharp than those
between the different Sects of the same Religion, or the Factions of the same
Commonwealth, these Examples will not make out that for which he produces them;
Since he grants, Wars about Religion do seldom happen, but amongst those of
different Sects in the same Religion; which shows it does not proceed from the
Natural State of Mankind, which ought to be governed by Reason, not
Superstition; much less from natural Religion, but from an unreasonable
Superstition, or blind Zeal, too often inflamed by the Priests of either Party;
making it not their own, but God's Cause, or Glory, (as they call it) for which
they would have them fight, persecute, and destroy each other. And as for the
Wars and Contentions between the different Factions of the same Commonwealth;
it is apparent they have no place in the mere state of Nature; since they are
produced by men's entering into Civil Society; and therefore they are not fairly
urged by Mr. H. as an Instance of their desire to hurt each other in the state
of Nature.

. 4. In answer to his Assertion, That all satisfaction of the mind is placed in
something, by which a man comparing himself with others, may thereby think
highly well of himself: And therefore it is impossible but they must declare
their hatred and contempt of each other, sometimes either by laughter, etc.
than which there can be no greater vexation, neither from which a greater
desire of revenge does usually arise.

I thus reply: First, Neither does this Observation reach, so that they must
needs take pleasure in putting a higher value upon themselves, than they
deserve; or that right Reason, or Prudence, should persuade them to affront
others, either by Words or Actions: Neither yet to take for Affronts, and
mortal Injuries, all those things, which any silly, ill-bred Fellow may happen
to do: Since such quarrels do not proceed either from Nature, or Reason, but
from foolish Customs, and bad Education; as appears in making, giving the lie,
an affront, which was not so, till about an Age agone; neither is among other
Nations, but us Europeans, any occasion of a Quarrel: Nor yet is there any
necessity, but that men may, and often do differ from each other, in opinion
and words too, without giving one another the lie, or any just occasion of
offense: And therefore these are no sufficient grounds to raise a general Rule
of the Natural state of all Mankind, from the indiscretion, or ill manners of
some, nay many men.

. 5. As for his last Reason, from the desire of diverse men at once to the same
thing, which cannot be decided without fighting.

In answer to this, I grant this may be true amongst Brutes; as also amongst
brutish and unreasonable men: But since God has endued men with Reason, either
to divide the thing, if it be capable of division; or else to use it by turns,
where it is not, where diverse have an equal right in it; or else to leave it
wholly to the first occupant; since every man has a natural right to what he
thus acquires, as is fully proved in the precedent discourse. Therefore
granting men's Lusts and Passions do often incline them to War and contention,
yet are not they therefore determined, or necessitated thereunto; seeing God
has given Man Reason to foresee, as also to prevent the evils of War; and has
likewise endued them with as strong Passions (as Mr. H. acknowledges) to
incline them to peace; as has been more fully made out, when we speak of the
Natural State of Mankind: Neither in the state of Nature, has God made so
niggardly a distribution of things, that no man can desire; or make use of any
thing necessary for life, but presently another must start up to be his
competitor for it: Since if men lived according to right Reason, and the
necessities of Nature, and still used the Fruits of the whole Earth in Common,
there would be yet left a sufficient stock to supply the Necessities of them
all, without coveting the Goods of others, or taking away that they are already
possessed of.

PRINCIPLE IV.
That Nature has given to every one a right to all things. De Cive. C. 1.. 10.

. 1. THAT is (as he explains it) in a mere natural state, or before men were
obliged to each other by any Compacts, it was lawful for every one to do all
things whatsoever, and against whomsoever it pleased him so to do; and to
possess, use, and enjoy all things, which he would or could; but Since
whatsoever things any one would have, they either seemed good for himself,
because he desires them, and do either conduce to his own preservation, or at
least may seem to conduce to it: But whether those things do really conduce to
this end, he supposes he has in the former Article proved the Person himself
to be sole judge. So that those must be counted as necessary means, which he
judges as such: And by the 7th Article aforegoing, those things are done and
enjoyed by the right of Nature, which do necessarily conduce to the
preservation of his own life and members: Whence it follows, to have and do all
things in the state of Nature, is lawful for all men; and this is what is
commonly said, That Nature has given all things to all men: From whence also
it is understood, that in the state of nature, Profit or utility, is the
measure of Right.

Which Argument in his Annotations to this Article, he thus explains and
contracts.

This is so to be understood, that that which anyone may do, in a mere natural
state, is injurious to no man: Not that in such a state it is impossible to sin
against God, or to violate the Laws of Nature; but injustice toward men
supposes Human Laws, which are not in the state of Nature* But the truth of the
proposition so understood, is demonstrated to the mindful Reader, in the
foregoing Paragraphs: But because in some cases, the hardness of the Conclusion
drives out the memory of the Premises, he contracts the Argument, and lays it
thus to be seen at once; By Art, the 7th it is proved, that every one has a
right of preserving himself; and by Art. the 8th. Therefore the same person
has a right to use all means necessary thereunto. But by Art. the 9th, Those
means are necessary, which he shall judge to be so. Therefore the same person
has a right to have, and possess all things which he shall judge necessary for
his own preservation: Therefore in the judgment of the doer, that which is
done, either by Right, or by Injury. Therefore it is done by Right, because in
the state of Nature nothing is injurious.

I have made bold to add this last Clause from what went before, because
otherwise the Argument is imperfect.

Therefore it is evidently true, That in a mere natural State, every man has a
right to all things.

. 2. For the destroying of which Principle, as also for the answering the
Arguments which he brings to support it, I shall in the first place observe,
That the Author's Conclusion* which he makes from his Premises in his
Annotations, viz. That every man has a right to do, and possess all things
which himself shall judge necessary for his own preservation, is not the same
which he draws from the same Premises in the Text, ( viz.) That every man has
a right to have, and do all things in the state of Nature. For indeed from his
own Principles no other Conclusion can follow, than what he has now drawn from
thence in his Annotation; for no man in his right Senses ever yet judged, that
to have, and do all things whatever, was absolutely necessary for his
preservation; only that he had a right indefinitely to as many of them as he
should judge necessary for this End. 2 dly, Neither ought a man in the state of
Nature to propose the bare preservation of his own Life, and Members, as the
only end of living, since that may be enjoyed by those who are really very
miserable, as may be observed in such as labor under tedious and constant
Infirmities, or are condemned to the Mines, or Galleys, or suffer themselves to
be carried away by any domineering, or irrational Appetite or Passion*And if
the preservation of a man's Life and Members, were the only ends of life; then
if another in the state of Nature should threaten to kill or maim him, unless
he would deny, or blaspheme God, or murder his Father, it were upon this
Principle lawful, nay necessary for him so to do; it being the only means by
which he could preserve his life and Limbs. 3 dly, Neither does any man's rash
or false judgment, that such a thing is necessary for his own preservation,
confer on him a right to that thing; for then God had given him a right to all
things they should in any passion, or rash and inconsiderate humor fancy
necessary for that end, tho it really tended to their destruction, or that of
other innocent men; So that if a man should think the blood of his dearest
Friend would cure him of some Distemper he lay under, he might lawfully upon
this Principle murder him (if he could do it safely); And then God should have
given men a right of destroying themselves and others, whenever they thought
(though falsely) that it conduced to their preservation, the satisfaction of
their unreasonable Appetites or Humors: since such an unlimited Right, or
rather License, can be so far from conducing to any man's preservation, that if
any men should ever have gone about to put it in practice, it would have long
since produced not only their own destruction, but that of all Mankind.

. 3. And if Mr. H. his own definition of right Reason be true, Art. 7th of this
Chapter, That it is a liberty of using a man's Faculties according to right
Reason; then certainly right Reason can never judge contradictory Propositions
to be true, as that I should in the state of Nature have a right to all things
my Neighbor was possessed of, and his life into the bargain, if I thought it
might conduce to my self-preservation; and that this should be likewise as
true, and rational a conclusion, that he should have the like right against me;
since the word right is never used by any Writers of this Subject, but with
respect to some Law, either Natural, or Civil, which Mr. H. acknowledges in the
next Chapter, Art. 1st, in these words. But since all do grant that to be done
by Right, which is not done contrary to right Reason, we ought to suppose that
done by Injury, which is repugnant to right reason; or which contradicts some
truth collected from true Principles by right Reason; but that is done by
Injury, which is done against some Law, therefore right Reason is a certain
Law, which is called natural, since it is not less a part of Humane Nature than
any other Faculty or Affection of the Mind: as Mr. H. himself confesses in this
2d Chapter of this Treatise De Cive,. 1. tho he strives to avoid the force of
it in his Annotations to this Article; where, by right Reason in the state of
Nature, he tells us, He does not thereby understand (as many do) any infallible
Faculty in men, but the Act of Ratiocination; that is, every man's own true
reason concerning his own Actions, as they may redound to the profit or hurt of
himself, or other men; and the reason why he calls it a man's own Reason, is,
that though in a Commonwealth the reason thereof, that is, the Civil Law, is to
be taken as right by all the Subjects; yet out of a Commonwealth, where no man
can distinguish right Reason from false, but by comparing it with his own,
every man's own Reason is not only to be taken for the Rule of his own Actions,
but also in his own Affairs, for the measure of all other men's Reason: But how
this will agree with what follows, I cannot tell; When he calls right Reason
that which concludes from true Principles; because that in false ratiocination,
or in the folly of men not observing those duties toward others which are
necessary to their own preservation, consists all the violation of natural Laws.

But how false ratiocination, or folly, should give them a right to all they
have a mind to act thus toward others, I cannot apprehend; but from these
words of Mr. H. I shall only observe, That though I do not suppose Reason to be
any infallible Faculty, any more than the casting up of an Account into a Sum
total, though false, to be right Arithmetic, or true Counting; yet by right
Reason, when it is not erroneous, is to be understood the true exercise of that
Faculty; not erroneous in its judgments, and therefore does not consist in the
bare act of Ratiocination, but in its true effects; that is, when true
Propositions, or Premises, being laid up in the memory, those Conclusions are
drawn from thence, which when they are practical, and contain true moral Rules
of life, are called Laws of Nature.

. 4. And therefore it is not true, that in a Commonwealth the public Reason,
or Law thereof, are to be always taken for Right; for then if the Laws of the
Commonwealth should enact Parricide, Ingratitude, and breach of Faith, to be
exercised as Virtues, and to conduce to the good and preservation of Mankind,
they would presently become so; which, I suppose, neither this Author, nor any
rational Man would affirm. Nor is his other Proposition any truer, that out of
a Commonwealth, no man can distinguish right Reason from false, but by
comparing it with his own; and therefore that must be the measure of all his
Actions, from whence he deduces the right of all men to all things; which
Argument I shall reduce into the form of a Syllogism, that you may the better
judge of its truth. It is lawful in the state of Nature for every one to
possess all things, and to do all things toward all men, which some Judge
shall judge necessary for the preservation of his own life and Members: But
those things that every man himself shall judge to be necessary to his
preservation, those the only Judge in this case judges to be necessary for this
end; (for he had proved before, that himself is the only Judge in the state of
Nature, what things are necessary for his preservation;) therefore to have, and
do all things, etc. is necessary for a man's own preservation. In which
Syllogism the major is certainly false, because though a man's self be the sole
Judge in the state of Nature, yet he may give a false Sentence, and suppose
those things to be necessary for his preservation which really are not; neither
is there any reason that in the state of Nature, any more than in a Civil
State, the bare Sentence of a Judge should confer a true and equitable Right on
any man to an Estate, if the Judge determines contrary to all the Rules of Law
and Equity. So likewise in the state of Nature, a man's own judgment can confer
no Right upon him, when he quits the only true Rules of his Judgment, which in
this State can only be the Laws of Nature, or right Reason, and the nature of
things, and Mankind, from whence only they are drawn. Nor can there be any
State supposed, either Natural, or Civil, in which there is no Rule of Humane
Judgment, or that whatsoever a man's mind shall rashly suppose things to be,
that they must presently become such as he has fancied them: Since the utility
of things necessary for the preservation of Humane Nature depend not upon men's
rash judgments, but upon the force of their natural Causes; and a man by thus
falsely judging, that he had a right to all things that he has a mind to, and
that they are absolutely necessary for his preservation, can no more make them
become so, than if he should judge that Ratsbane were Sugar Candy, it would be
thereby presently turned into wholesome Food: So likewise those general, and
universal Causes, which procure the preservation, or mischief of Mankind, do
depend upon such fixed Principles in Nature, as are not to be altered by the
judgment of any Judge, whether he be a single man in the state of Nature, or
the Supreme Powers in a Commonwealth.

. 5. But this Error of Mr. H. concerning the force of his Sentence, which thus
falsely pronounces an absolute Dominion over all men, and all things, to be
necessary for his preservation, and thereby to confer a Right thereunto; seems
to proceed from hence, That he having observed in a Civil State the Sentence of
the Supreme Magistrate, or Judge, had that force with the Subjects, that
whether his Sentence were according to the Rules of Law, or natural Equity, or
not, it was nevertheless to be obeyed, and submitted to: Whereas this
Submission proceeds wholly from their Consents who instituted the Commonwealth,
in order to the public Good, and for the putting some end to Controversies;
since all the Subjects must submit to the Judgment of the Supreme Power, or
Magistrate, whether it be right or wrong; because they are all satisfied, that
it conduces more to their common quiet and safety, that some few should
sometimes suffer through an unjust Judgment, than that Controversies should be
endless, or at least not without Civil Wars, or Disturbances. So that it is
evident, That it is only from a greater care of the Common Good, than of the
Lives or Estates of any particular person that lays a foundation for this
Prerogative, which though I grant belongs to all Supreme Powers, yet if this
once come to be generally and notoriously abused by constant course of wilful
Violence, Oppression and Injustice, so that the Subjects cannot longer bear it,
they will quickly make their appeal somewhere else, unless they are hindered by
some predominant Power, or Force over them.

. 6. But on the other side it is certain, That men in the state of Nature
cannot admit of any final Judgment, or determination of a doubt or difference,
besides an evidence either from the things themselves, or from that trust or
credit they place in some men's either Judgment or Testimony, whereby all manner
of doubt or scruple is clearly removed out of the minds of the Parties
concerned; and that it appears evident to them, that they are not imposed upon;
neither can there be any end of debates amongst diverse Pretenders, unless one
Party being convinced by the strength of the other's Reasons, come over to his,
or their Opinion; or else being satisfied of the Knowledge and Integrity of
some third Person, as an Arbitrator, do willingly submit to his Sentence.

. 7. For Humane Nature will ever acknowledge a difference between right Reason,
and false; and between a just, and an unjust Judgment; and it is only Truth and
right Reason that have this Prerogative, that they can confer a right on us of
doing those things which they prescribe. For even Mr. H. in his definition of
Right, acknowledges, that it is only a liberty of using our Faculties according
to right Reason; whereas all Error, or false Judgment, whether it be concerning
Necessaries for the preservation of Life, or in any other practical matter, can
give no man a right of doing that which he then falsely judges necessary for his
preservation. And therefore Mr. H's Conclusion, where he acknowledges at last,
That right Reason is that which concludes from true Principles; and likewise
that in the false reasoning, and folly of men, in not understanding their
Duties toward other men, consists all the violation of the Laws of Nature;
grants as much as I can desire; but how this will agree with that loose
definition of Reason, where he supposes every man's reason to be alike right, I
desire any of his Disciples to show me. Therefore to conclude, I can only allow
that to be practical right Reason, which gives us leave to undertake things
reasonable and possible, and that forbids a man to arrogate to himself alone a
dominion over all men, and all things, which is needless and impossible, indeed
wholly pernicious to his preservation.

. 8. But to avoid this difficulty, Mr. H. and his Followers fly to the
Subterfuge of a natural necessity in men, that so judge thus falsely, and act
contrary to the Laws of Nature, or Reason: And therefore in his Preface to this
Treatise, he supposes all men to be evil by Nature, and makes them necessarily
determined by their Appetites and Passions (before they are endued with Reason
and Discipline) to act mischievously, and unreasonably; and therefore tells us,
that Children, unless you give them every thing they desire, cry, and are
angry, and will strike their very Fathers and Mothers; and it is by nature they
do so, and yet are blameless; as well because they cannot hurt, as also that
wanting the use of Reason, they are yet free from all its Duties: But the same
persons, when grown up, and having got strength enough to hurt, if they hold on
to do the same things, they then begin both to be, and to be called evil. So
that a wicked man is almost the same thing, as an overgrown Child, or a man of
a childish disposition, because there is the same defect of Reason at that age,
in which by Nature, improved by Discipline, and experience of its
inconveniences, it commonly happens to be amended. So likewise the Author of
Tractatus Theologico Politicus, who more openly than Mr. H. (but upon the same
Principles) endeavors to destroy all Religion, both Natural, and Revealed;
argues to this purpose, in the 16th Chap. of the said Treatise. First, By the
Law of Nature, He understands nothing but the Nature of every Individual;
according to which, we conceive each of them naturally determined to exist
after a certain manner. Thus Fishes are ordained to swim, and the great ones to
devour the less: Therefore Fishes live in the Water, and devour each other by
the highest Right: For Nature considered simply, has a right to all things it
can do, or its right extends it self, as far as its power; Since the power of
Nature is but the power of God, who has the highest right to all things. But
because the power of Universal Nature, is nothing but the power of all the
Individual Creatures together, it follows that every Individual has the
highest right to all things it can do; that is, it extends it self as far as
its power. And since it is the first Law of Nature, that every thing should
endeavor, as far as it is able, to preserve it self in its Natural State: and
that, without any consideration of other Creatures, but only of it self:
Therefore it follows, that every Individual has the highest right to exist,
and operate, as it is thus naturally determined: Nor will he allow any
difference, by Nature, between men and other Creatures; neither between men
endued with Reason, and those that have not yet attained the use of it; neither
between Fools and Madmen, and others that are of sound Understanding; and his
Reason is this, For whatever any Creature does by the force of its Nature, it
does it by the highest Right, viz. because it acts as it is by Nature
determined, neither is it able to act otherwise: Therefore among men, whilst
considered as living under the mere Empire of Nature, as well he that does not
yet understand Reason, or has not acquired a habit of Virtue, lives by the
highest Right, according to the Laws of his own Appetite, as well as he that
directs his Life according to the Rules of Reason. So that as a Wiseman has a
Right to all things that Reason dictates, or of living according to its Rules:
So likewise the ignorant and foolish has a like right to all things which
their Appetites desire. So that every man's Natural Right, is not determined by
Right Reason, but by Power and Appetite. For all men are not naturally ordained
to operate according to the Laws of Reason, but on the contrary are born
ignorant of all things; and before they come to know the true Rules of life, or
acquire a habit of Virtue, a great part of their life slips away, though they are
never so well educated: And therefore he concludes, that whatever any one does
in order as he thinks to his own preservation, or the satisfaction of Sensual
Appetites, whilst he is in this mere state of Nature, it is lawful, because the
only Rule he has to act by.

. 9. Having given you all that can be said for this wicked, as well as foolish
Opinion, in their own words; I shall now endeavor to confute it. In the first
place therefore I observe, that this which they call the right of Nature, and
which Mr. H. defines to be a state of perfect Liberty, is in their sense no
other than that of absolute necessity: And therefore I shall leave it to the
Reader to judge how properly this word Right belongs to Brutes, Infants, and
Fools. For the Word Right is used by those that treat of Ethics, only in
respect of reasonable men, as capable of deliberation and judgment, and endued
with freedom of Action, and so subject to Laws. For to call that necessity, by
which Fishes devour each other, and Madmen beat their Keepers, a Right, were
as proper to talk of a Right of Stones to fall downwards: no Philosophers but
these, ever using the word Right for necessity, but a liberty left by the Law
of Nature, of acting according to Reason: 2ly, The last Author confounds the
nature of Beasts, Fools and Madmen, who have no knowledge of a God, or sense
of a Moral Good and Evil, with that of rational Creatures, who are ordained for
greater ends, and to be governed by a higher Law, than that of mere Appetite or
Passion: And I desire these Gentlemen to show us, that such unreasonable
Appetites and Passions do necessarily and unevitably carry men to act
constantly according to them; so that the men had then no power left, to
oppose, resist or restrain them: and though we grant that Children are not yet
sensible; and Fools and Madmen are never perhaps capable of the Laws of Reason
or Nature, and so cannot be subject to them, nor are to be esteemed amongst
voluntary Agents: Yet does it not follow, that those that are of Mature Age,
and sound Minds, and so cannot plead invincible ignorance of the Laws of
Nature, but out of their own wilful humor, or unreasonable Appetites, neglect
to know or learn, or through wilful ignorance transgress it, should claim the
like exemption. For though we are not angry with Children, or natural Fools, if
they cry for, or take away any thing they see, and pity mad people, even while
they are outrageous with those that tend them: Yet have we not the same
forbearance and pity for men of sound Minds, and mature Age, if they do the
like unreasonable things, and govern themselves by no other Law, but their own
unreasonable Appetites and Passions; Since it was in their power both to have
known and acted otherwise; and to have deliberated and judged, whether it were
not better for them to forbear such evil Acts, than to do them.

. 10. Neither can invincible ignorance be any excuse as to them; for though
perhaps they may not have Brains fit for the Mathematics, or are not able to
deduce all the Laws of Nature from their true Principles; yet by the Precepts
of others, as well as their own Reason, and the observation of their own
Natures, as well as other men's, they might easily have learnt all the Duties of
an honest man; that is, their Duty toward their Neighbor, by that Golden
Rule, of doing as they would be done by: And their Duty toward themselves, by
endeavoring their own true happiness and preservation, by the only means
tending thereunto, viz. Without injuring others; and doing their Duty toward
God, in reverencing him, and obeying his Will, when discovered to them; also in
endeavoring, to the utmost of their power, the Common Good of Mankind; and all
which Principles have been ever so natural to men, that they have in all Ages
acknowledged them to have still remained the same. Therefore Mr. H. as also the
Author of the Treatise last mentioned, are very much mistaken, so directly to
oppose our knowledge of the Laws of Nature, to the Rational Nature of Man; as
if he were so much beholden to Art for them, that he could never have acquired
them himself, without teaching; which were all one as to say, That because most
men learn Arithmetic., therefore it is so absolutely besides, or above Nature,
that no man ever attained it of himself, which is contrary both to Reason and
Experience, since both Arithmetic and Geometry, as also Ethics, must have
been natural to those that first taught them.

But I have already sufficiently proved by Mr. H's own Concession, That Reason
and Experience are as natural to Humane Nature, as Hunting is to Dog's, tho in
both of them there is required both Exercise and Experience to learn it.

. 11. Nor does Mr. H's Excuse, which he gives us in the 13th Chapter of his
Leviathan, signify any thing; ( viz.) That men's Passions in the state of Nature
are no Sins, nor the Actions which proceed from them, as long as they see no
Power which can prohibit them; For neither can a Law be known before it be
made, neither can it be made, till they have agreed upon a Legislator. To which
may be easily answered, that Mr. H. all along proceeds upon this False
Supposition, That God is not a Legislator without Divine Revelation; nor that
the Laws of Nature are properly his Laws; both which Assertions, if they have
been proved false in the preceding Discourse, it will certainly follow, that
the Laws of Nature or Reason proceeding from God himself* are truly Laws; and
the Actions prohibited by them are Sins, although men will not through wilful
Ignorance discover this Legislator, nor will consent to his Laws. And Mr. H.
himself acknowledges in his Chapter of Laws, that the Subjects lie under an
obligation to obey them, if it can be made appear to them that the Legislator
is endued with a Supreme Power over them, and has both sufficiently
established, and promulgated his Laws; both which may be truly affirmed of the
Laws of Nature.

. 12. But indeed Mr. H. and his Followers have done very cunningly in taking
away all freedom from Mankind, and to suppose an absolute necessity of all
moral Actions; since they could not otherwise destroy the Laws of Nature, and
equal Men with Brutes, but by pulling up all the Foundations of moral Good and
Evil.

But I need say no more on this Subject to show the folly and unreasonableness
of this Opinion, than to put down Mr. H's words on this Subject in Art. 11. of
this Chapter, Where he confesses that this Right of all men to all things, is
absolutely unprofitable for Mankind, because the effect of this Right is all
one, as if there were no such Right at all. For although any man might say of
every thing, This is mine; yet could he not use it, because of his Neighbor,
who might by an equal Right pretend that it was his. Which is as good as to
own, that this right is none at all: For he himself in the Article
before-going, makes Utility to be the measure of all Right; but here is a Right
without any Utility at all; therefore these words Right and Unprofitable, are
contradictory; for Right refers in this definition to some use or profit that a
man may make of his natural Liberty; but to be unprofitable, owns that there is
no use or need of this natural Liberty in that matter.

PRINCIPLE V.
That in the state of Nature, whatsoever any one does to another, cannot be
injurious to any Person.

. 1. BEcause, says he, Injustice toward men supposes Humane Laws, none of
which are yet in being in the mere state of Nature, De Cive, Cap. 1. Annot. ad.
10. which he thus likewise endeavors to prove in his Leviathan, Chap. 13.
Where there is no common Power, there is no Law; where there is no Law, no
Injustice; Force and Fraud are in War the two Cardinal Virtues; Justice and
Injustice are none of the Faculties either of the Body or Mind; If they were,
they might be in a man that were alone in the World, as well as his Senses and
Passions: They are all Qualities that relate to men in Society, not in
Solitude. It is consequent also to the same condition that there be no
Propriety, no Dominion, no Mine and Thine distinct, but only that to be every
man's that he can get, and for so long as he can keep it: All which is no more
than what Epicurus long ago asserted, as Diogenes Laertius has told us in the
Account he gives of his Life and Opinions; To this effect, That between those
Animals which cannot be joined by any Compact or Bargain, that they should not
hurt each other; there is no Right, or Injury: So it is likewise amongst
Nations, which either will not, or cannot enter into Compact; that they do
neither hurt, nor are hurt; For Injustice is nothing in it self; although in
some places such a Bargain is made by mutual Compacts that they should not hurt
each other. So that Injury is no evil in it self, but only consists in a fear,
or suspicion, lest it should not be concealed from those who are appointed
Revengers of such Injuries.

. 2. In answer to all which, I doubt not to prove, that these Principles of
Epicurus, as well as of Mr. H. and his Disciples, are taken up without any just
or solid grounds; for by the dictates of right Reason, considered as (they are)
the natural Laws of God, a perfect Right is given to every man to his Life, and
all those necessary means thereunto, without which he cannot subsist. For
whatever a man enjoys by the right of Nature, it must needs be injury and
injustice to take it away: for every invasion or violation of another's Right
or Property, is Injury, by whatever Law he enjoys it: And much more if that
Right be conferred upon him by the Law of Nature, given by God as a Legislator,
than if it proceeded from mere Humane Compacts. And though Mr. H. here asserts,
That no injury can be done to any man, with whom we have made no Compact; yet
Chap. 2. Art. 1. of his De Cive, he says, That since all men will grant that to
be done by Right, which is not contrary to right Reason; we ought to believe
that to be done by Injury, which is repugnant to right Reason; that is, which
contradicts any Truth collected by right Reason from true Principles: But what
is done by Injury, we acknowledge to be done contrary to some Law. So that here
he grants, that an Injury may be done contrary to the Laws of Nature, before
any Compact, or translation of our Right to another; and since he there
acknowledges those Dictates of Reason to be Laws, I would fain see how those
can give any man such a right to invade, or violate the Rights of another: For
Right (as he himself well defines it) being a Liberty granted by right Reason,
requires that men, who pretend to act or speak according to its Dictates,
cannot act contradictorily to its other Principles, or Conclusions. And 'twere
to no purpose for him to say, that the Injury is done to God alone, when his
Laws are broken, unless he can show that those Laws of God do not confer a
right on men to their Lives, and all the necessaries thereof; and do not
likewise prohibit others from violating this Right so granted.

. 3. But yet this Author, when he is pressed hard, does acknowledge, that there
may be injury done to another out of Civil Government: For it being objected,
whether if a Son should kill his Father in the state of Nature, he should not
do him an injury; he answers, That a Son cannot be understood to be in a
natural State in respect of his Parents, he being as soon as ever he is born*
under their power and command, to whom he owes his being and preservation.

Yet sure a man's Parents, by begetting and breeding him up, do not thereby
acquire a property or dominion over him as long as he lives; though I grant
Children, when they either marry, or otherwise, become lawfully discharged from
the government of their Parents, still owe a filial piety and gratitude to
them; and that it is a great impiety and injury in Children toward them, to
hurt or destroy them, though they are no longer under their power and command.
So likewise the same Law of Nature, which prescribes gratitude to these our
natural Benefactors, does make it injurious for any man to hurt or kill any
other Person, who had educated, or maintained him, or otherwise highly obliged
him; since the same Laws of Gratitude that make it injurious to hurt, or
murder his Father in the state of Nature, do also command the like duty
toward any other Benefactor.

. 4. But his Argument in his Leviathan is much more false and precarious; when
he argues, That where there is no common Power, there is no Law; and where
there is no Law, there is no Injustice. All which he brings to prove the
necessity of his natural state of War. For, first, though I grant, where there
is no Common Power, (that is, no Legislator) there is no Law, yet that is not
true of the Laws of Nature; since if they proceed from God as a Legislator (as
I hope we have proved in the precedent Discourse) they are truly Laws, before
any Civil Power was instituted to make Laws, or to see them observed; and
consequently that it is the highest injury and injustice to take away any thing
from others being innocent, and doing us no hurt, that is necessary for their
Life, or preservation, which they are already possessed of; and though it is
true, that Justice and Injustice are no natural Faculties of the Mind, yet
right Reason is; from whence all Justice is deduced, and which a man is always
bound to exercise as soon as he becomes capable of being a Member of Humane
Society: (I do not mean a Civil one) and if there be a natural Equity (as this
Author acknowledges, De Cive, cap. 14.. 14.) there is likewise a natural
Justice, and Injustice too: but I shall say more of this in the next Principle.

PRINCIPLE VI.
That in the state of Nature there is nothing Good, or Evil.

. 1. I Shall here give you Mr. H's Opinion, and his Reasons for it, in his own
words, as they are in his Leviathan, cap. 6. Whatsoever is the object of any
man's Appetite, or Desire, that is it which he for his part calls Good; and the
object of his Hate, and Aversion, Evil: and of his Contempt, Vile and
Inconsiderable. For these words of Good, Evil, and Contemptible, are ever used
with relation to the Person that uses them, there being nothing simply and
absolutely so; Nor any common Rule of Good and Evil to be taken from the nature
of the Objects themselves, but from the person of the Man (where there is no
Commonwealth) or, (in a Commonwealth) from the Person that represents it; or
from an Arbitrator, or Judge, whom men by disagreeing shall by consent set up,
and make his Sentence the Rule thereof. He speaks to the same effect in all his
other Works; as in De Cive, cap. 4.. 17. in his De Homine, cap. 11. which it
were tedious here to repeat; and therefore I refer you to the places I have
here cited.

. 2. But this he endeavors Physically to explain in his little Treatise of
Humane Nature, cap. 7. 1. compared with Chap. 3. where he supposes, That the
motion, in which consists the conception of things without any intervention of
the Judgment, passes from the Brain to the Heart; and as it there hinders, or
helps its vital motion, it is said to please or displease; But that which so
pleases any one, he calls Good: And that which displeases him, Evil: and hence
from the diversity of Constitutions, or Temperaments, there are diverse Opinions
of Good that is naturally and necessarily so. And in the state of Nature
unblameably, from his Opinion that judges it.

. 3. There is nothing that Mr. H. has written more loosely, and unlike a
Philosopher, than these unstable Opinions both of natural and moral Good and
Evil. And therefore it is a matter of great moment to have a fixed and constant
notion of Good; because as long as this is fluctuating and uncertain, all
knowledge of our true Felicity (which is the greatest Good of every man) as
also of the Laws of Nature, and of all particular Virtues, (which are nothing
but the means and causes of obtaining this Good) will be likewise various,
wandering and uncertain.

. 4. Therefore, although it must be confessed, that because of some peculiarity
in the diverse Temperaments of men, it sometimes happens that one sort of Diet,
or Medicines, may be hurtful to one, which may not prove so to another; yea,
which Experience has approved, not only to be innocent, but wholesome for
others: Something like which may be observed in the Genius and Manners of
Nations quite different from others, in some particular Customs and
Constitutions; yet this does not any more take away the common Consent of
Mankind concerning the nature of Good, and its constituent parts and degrees,
than the small difference of men's Faces takes away the agreement between them
in their common Natures as Men, or that general likeness that is between them,
in the conformation and use of their principal Parts. For sure there is no
Nation so barbauros which will not own, that there are greater hopes and
satisfaction in loving, and obeying God, than in blaspheming and disobeying of
him. There is scarce any Nation that is not sensible, that filial duty toward
Parents, gratitude to their Benefactors, love and kindness to their Friends and
Neighbors, fidelity in their Promises and Agreements, are good and necessary
for their own welfare and preservation, and consequently of Mankind. No
difference of Temper makes any man in his Senses not perceive it to be good for
all men, that the Lives, Liberties Estates and Members of all innocent Persons,
should be preserved; And therefore that the killing, or robbing of them should
be everywhere prohibited under the most severe Penalties. Or lastly, What
peculiar humor in men can make them not think it good and beneficial for
particular Families and Nations, that the Conjugal Fidelity of the
Marriage Bed, the Chastity should be preserved inviolated. The same may be said
concerning the right of using and enjoying all those outward things, that are
necessary for life, or conduce to our health, fame, honor, the education of
our Children, and the preservation of Friendship, since in their Judgment
concerning the goodness of these things about which the whole business of the
Laws of Nature, and of most Civil Laws is taken up, all rational men do as
equally agree in their Opinions as concerning the whiteness of Snow, or the
brightness of the Sun; Though I do not lay the main stress of their obligation
to these Actions on this general Agreement, since I have laid down contrary
Principles in the foregoing Discourse.

. 5. But I shall now proceed to give you a more true and settled Notion of Good
and Evil, both natural and moral: I therefore define Good in general to be,
that which preserves, increases, or perfects the Faculties and Powers of one or
more things; for by these effects that peculiar agreeableness of one thing with
another declares it self to us, and which is requisite to make any thing to be
truly called good for the nature of this Being before others. Which effects
likewise discover to us the hidden powers, and intrinsic natures of things.
These strike upon our Senses, and beget a knowledge in us of those things from
whence they flow; which Goods I grant may be different, according to the diverse
natures of those Beings which they respect. Thus a suitable Soil, Air, and
Moisture are naturally good for Plants, because they are agreeable to their
nature, and are necessary for their preservation, growth and perfection: So
likewise convenient Food, Health and Liberty, are naturally good for an Animal;
since they serve for their preservation and happiness as long as they continue
to live. So likewise, That is also good for man, which preserves and increases
the powers of his Mind and Body, without doing hurt to, or prejudicing any
others of his own kind; nor does the mind of Man make these Rules concerning
the nature of one, or a few Creatures of a sort, but is able from the knowledge
it has of singulars, to make certain general Propositions, or Conclusions,
concerning what is good, or evil, for the whole Species, or Kind, whose nature
he has enquired into; because, since there is the same general nature in every
one of the Individuals of this or that Kind, the true happiness of one or more
of them being once known, it is easy likewise to know what share and kind of
happiness is to be desired by all of them: For it is apparent, That the
improvement of the Understanding in knowledge, and the government of the Will
by sedate and regular Affections; as also the health and vigor of the Body, in
which the true happiness of any particular man does chiefly consist, do also
comprehend (if universally considered) the common happiness of all men, that
ever have been, or shall be born, which also may be affirmed concerning the
means to these natural Goods, and which are required as necessary to all
Mankind; such as Food, Exercise, Sleep, and the like; And this, because of the
identity between the parts and the whole; that is, between the nature of any
one, or more men, with that whole Systeme of Rational Agents, comprehended
under the general Name and Idea of Mankind. From whence it also follows, that
whatsoever does good to one member, or part of this aggregate Body, all the
rest being unhurt, or unprejudiced, thereby may be truly said to do good to the
whole aggregate Body of Mankind; which Consideration may excite us to a due
care of our selves, provided it be not prejudicial to others from a
consideration of the common Good of Mankind. Analogically unto this we may also
judge, that to promote the efficacy of God's Natural Right to rule our selves,
and all other rational Creatures, is to perform a thing good, or grateful to
God, as Supreme Governor of the World; and this we do by a due care to promote
obedience to his own Laws, either in our selves, or others.

And therefore, though we so far agree with Mr. H. that that may be called good
which is agreeable to any other Being, and so must be meant relatively; yet
does not this always refer to the Appetite of him that desires it, nor yet to
the irrational Opinions of any one or more men, if they judge contrary to the
Rules and Principles of Nature or Reason. And therefore, though a Wench that
has the Green Sickness, by reason of her depraved Appetite, may fancy
Tobacco-pipes, or Charcoal to have an excellent relish, and so to be good for
her; yet will not her thinking so, make them become a wholesome nourishment. The
like may be said of any Actions, or Vices, which a Vicious or unreasonable man
may take pleasure in; such as Drunkenness, Whoredom, etc. which howsoever they
may please him at the present, yet will certainly in time destroy him in this
life, or in that to come. And therefore it is not true, which Mr. H. here lays
down, That all Good and Evil is only to be taken in respect of him whom at that
time it pleases or displeases: Whereas every rational Man ought first rightly
to judge what things are good, and then to desire them, because they are really
so; that is, because their natural powers or effects are really helpful, or
agreeable to our Nature: And to consider a private Good, as that which profits
one person; and a common Good, as it profits many. And that not because it is
at that instant desired, and approved of out of a depraved Appetite, or wanton
humor: it being only the part of Brutes, Madmen and Fools, to measure the
goodness of Things, or Actions, by their present Lusts, without any government
of Reason, or thoughts of the future.

. 6. But Mr. H. himself does sometimes talk more soberly; and though he does
here, as also elsewhere, inculcate, That every thing is either good, or evil,
according to the opinion of the Person that so judges it (in the state of
Nature) or else (in a Civil State) of the Person that represents the
Commonwealth; yet in his Leviathan, Chap. 30. when he reckons up the Offices of
the Civil Sovereign, he makes one of the chiefest to be the making of good
Laws. Now he there tells us, A good Law is that which is needful for the good
of the People, and withal perspicuous; and a little farther he thus goes on;
And therefore a Law that is not needful, having not the true end of a Law, is
not good. A Law may be conceived to be good, when it is for the benefit of the
Sovereign, though it be not necessary for the People; but it is not so: where
you see, the good of the People (which is certainly that which is common to
many) is here acknowledged by him, and proposed as the main end of the
Legislator's Duty: But this end being thus proposed, the true nature of it is
first to be known, and determined, before the Law can prescribe what is good or
evil for the People. So likewise Chap. 14.. 4. of his De Cive, speaking
concerning the Rules of right Judgment in a Civil State, he tells us; That
since it is impossible to prescribe any Universal Rules whereby all
Controversies (which will be infinite, may be judged) it is still understood in
every case pretermitted by the written Laws, that the Law of natural Equity is
to be followed. Where you see he grants that the Laws of natural Equity may be
known, and followed; And that diverse more Cases may be determined from thence,
than can be by the Civil Laws themselves: but we do only so far contend with
him, that some Rules of Equity may be so evidently and naturally known, that
all honest and sincere men cannot at all differ about them; though in the mean
time we freely grant, That there are diverse things so indifferent, that no
human Reason can universally determine, that it is more necessary for the
common Good, that a thing be done, or a Case judged this way, rather than the
other.

. 7. Having stated what we mean by a natural Good, and Evil; I shall now give a
right notion of a moral Good, and how it differs from the former. A moral Good
is those voluntary Actions and Habits which are conformable to the Law of
Nature, or Reason, considered as given by God, as a Lawgiver, for a Rule of
all our Humane, or voluntary Actions: For there are many natural Goods that
conduce to a man's happiness, which are not morally good, nor are commanded by
any Law. Such as are quickness of Wit, Learning, Strength of Mind and Body,
etc. On the other side, I suppose, that no Action of the Will can be commanded
by God, (and so morally good) which does not by is own nature, as well as from
the Will of God (the Legislator) conduce to the happiness of Mankind: The not
taking notice of which distinction, between natural and moral Goods, has been
the occasion of another great Error in Mr. H. when he makes that which seems
good to every man's own self, to be the only object of his desires, as he does
in his De Cive, Cap. 1. Art. 2. which he likewise more fully expresses in Cap.
3. Artic. 21. Every one is presumed to seek that which is good for himself; but
that which is just only by accident, and for peace sake; viz. That which is
just, he will only have to regard another's good; which he supposes no man will
seek, unless it were for fear of those Evils which proceed from a state of War:
But all he says only tends to prove, that men are so framed, that it is
repugnant to their Nature, and so absolutely impossible for them to mind, or
desire any thing, unless for their own particular worldly profit, and glory, as
he has laid down in those Principles we have already considered.

. 8. But I cannot but take notice, that Mr. H. himself in his Treatise De
Homine, (published after his De Cive) Cap. 12.. 1. seems not at all to approve
of this ill humor in men, by these words. We confess that it may so fall out
through the ill use of his free will, that a man of a narrow Soul may consider
nothing but himself, and so may desire nothing but what he judges for his own
private advantage. And in the same Treatise, Cap. 11.. 14. where he does
purposely consider which is the greater, or lesser amongst Goods; he plainly
confesses, That it is a greater good which benefits more persons, than that
which does good to fewer.

. 9. But giving him leave to contradict himself as much as he will, yet
notwithstanding all that he has said to the contrary, I doubt not but all
rational and good men are of a more generous Spirit; who do not only esteem
that to be good, which is good for themselves alone, but also whatsoever tends
to the conservation, happiness and perfection of Mankind. And whatsover they
thus esteem to be good, that they will also desire, wish for, and contribute
their utmost endeavor to procure for others, as well as themselves: Nor do I
see any reason to hinder, but that whatsoever I find agreeable to any man's
Nature, I may do my endeavor, as far as lies in my power, that he may obtain
it; But this much I must freely confess, That if men do not propose to
themselves one common End, or Effect, viz. the common good of Rational Agents,
whose Causes (whether efficient, or perfective) should be beforehand agreed on
to be Good; and those that hinder its production, Evil; the words Good and Evil
will always be equivocal, various, and uncertain; being still to be taken in as
many different Senses, as there are particular Men. So that whatsoever Action,
or thing, is called good by any one man, because it serves his turn; that other
men, if it crosses their desires, will be sure to call evil, which is
incongruous to Reason, and to the Communication of knowledge among men, which
is the main end of Speech; Whereas, if the words Good and Evil are applied to
those things which concern the nature of Rational Beings in general, they will
have a certain and determinate sense and signification, which will not only be
constantly true, and intelligible, but prove most useful and profitable to all
Mankind; and that we are not only capable of understanding, but also of
contributing our Endeavors for the procuring of this Common Good, and are also
under a sufficient obligation thereunto, is, I hope, fully made out in the
Fourth Chapter of the precedent Discourse, where we expressly treat of the Law
of Nature, and its obligation.

PRINCIPLE VII.
That the State of Nature is a State of War.

. 1. ALL the Principles that Mr. H. has hitherto laid down, have been only in
order to the establishing this Darling Principle of the natural state of War.
But since we have already in our Answer to his former Principles, shown their
falsehood and absurdity; If those Foundations be ill laid, the Superstructure
must needs be infirm, and therefore I shall omit all that he has in his De
Cive inferred from those false Principles; and shall only apply my self to what
he has in his 13th Chapter of his Leviathan, given us anew for the proof of
this Principle, and which does not depend upon the former; For here he derives
this natural State of War from Three Principal Causes in the nature of Man.
First, Competition. Secondly, Diffidence. Thirdly, Glory. The first makes man
invade for Gain. The second for Safety, and the third for Reputation. The first
use Violence to make themselves Masters of other Men's persons, Wives, Children
and Cattle. The second to defend them. The third for Trifles; as a word, a
smile, a different Opinion, and any other sign of undervaluing, either directly
in their persons, or by reflection on their Kindred, their Friends, their
Nation, their Profession, or their Name. Hereby it is manifest, That during the
time men live without a Common Power to keep them all in awe, they are in that
condition which is called War, as is of every man against every man. For War
consists not in Battle only, or the Act of Fighting; but in a tract of time
wherein the will to contend by Battle is sufficiently known. And therefore the
notion of time is to be considered in the nature of War, as it is in the nature
of Weather. For as the nature of Foul-weather lies not in a shower or two of
Rain, but in an inclination thereto of many days together. So the nature of War
consists not in actual fighting, but in the known disposition thereto during
all the time there is no assurance to the contrary. All other is Peace.

. 2. In answer to which, I must first take notice, That Mr. H. in his Leviathan
deduces this Right of War of all men against all, from other Principles than he
does in his De Cive, Chap. 1.. 12. where from the supposed right of all men to
all things, he deduces a war of all men against all, and which renders it both
lawful and necessary: But in his Leviathan, in the Chapter here cited, he first
asserts the state of Nature to be a state of War, and from thence argues all
things therein to be lawful; as you may see in the Conclusion of that Chapter,
where he tells us, That by the same right that one man invades, the other
resists; from whence arises a War on both sides just. So that being not at all
sollicitous about the Right of making War, he only supposes this War must needs
arise from the nature of men's Passions, and Desires; and this War being once
supposed, he positively asserts, That it must follow (though without any proof)
that there is in this State nothing just, or unjust: Indeed his way of arguing
in his Leviathan is more plausible, but less close than the former in his De
Cive; For all Persons of sense must agree, that a War ought first to be proved
just, before it can be thence deduced what things are lawful therein, even
toward Enemies: Neither does himself suppose that all things are lawful, even
in the justest War; for in his De Cive, Annot. ad Art. 37. cap. 3. he grants
that Drunkenness, and Cruelty, are not to be practiced even in War; and
therefore it is necessary that some natural Principles, or Laws, be first
acknowledged, by whose command or permission we may be able to judge of any
War, whether it be just, or not, or before we can thence infer those things to
be lawful which are acted therein; for otherwise even contradictory
Propositions may be alike true; and Titius, for example, might have a right to
the Life and Goods of Sempronius, if he thought them necessary for his own
Preservation; and so likewise Sempronius would have the same Right against
Titius: which would be contrary to all the Rules of right Reason, and Equity;
and this is so evident, that Mr. H. himself, although in the latter part of
this first Chapter, De Cive, he affirms, That in the state of Nature, there is
no difference between just and unjust; yet in the former part he endeavors to
prove, that this power of making War ought to be allowed to every man in that
state as necessary to his own preservation; which is all one, as if he had
affirmed this War to be just and lawful on both sides; which is contrary to
Reason. But whatsoever proves any thing to be just, and lawful in any State,
must likewise suppose, that there is a difference between lawful and unlawful
in the same State, and must suppose some Law in force, by whose command or
permission at least, that Act becomes lawful: which, as we endeavor to
establish, so does Mr. H. as plainly destroy it, whilst he asserts no
difference between just and unjust: but with what reason I shall leave it to
the indifferent Reader to judge.

. 3. But since I have already answered those Preliminary Principles which he
has laid down in his De Cive, to prove the necessity of this state of War,
there remains nothing else for us to do, but to examine those new Reasons Mr.
H. has here given us in this Chapter of his Leviathan to prove this state of
War to be both natural, and necessary; which he here deduces from three
Affections in the nature of man. 1. Competition for the same thing. 2.
Diffidence of each other. 3. Glory to himself. The first is manifest; That
during the time men live without out a Common Power to keep them in awe, they
are in that Condition which is called War.

Whence I cannot but again observe, That this Author takes the natural state of
Mankind only from their Passions, without any consideration of Reason, or
Experience; although he has already supposed both of these to be natural
Faculties of the Mind: and the true nature of a thing is to be taken not from
its imperfections, or weaknesses, but from the utmost perfection that it is by
its nature capable of; and therefore this Author has dealt very preposterously
to treat of the natural State of Man, as of a mere Animal, only governed by the
force of his Passions; whereas, the principal part of Man, and which ought to
have the government over all the other Faculties, is Reason; or that Faculty of
the rational Soul, whose due use and exercise ought not to be excluded, but
rather conjoined with the operations of all the other natural Faculties, by any
Writer who will truly describe the Nature of Man; nor yet are men necessarily
impelled by these Passions, as mere Machines are driven or moved by the Wind,
or Weights; but that they may be governed, and restrained by Reason, or fear of
future evil: so that they do not hurry men into War by any natural, or
inevitable necessity. Indeed those Ideas of the Mind, which are necessarily
generated therein from the impulse of outward Objects, are not prohibited by
the Law of Nature, because we are designed by God to govern those Actions only
which are in our powers: Whereas these Passions and Ideas, from whence Mr. H.
collects this state of War to be necessary, are of this sort, since being
concerning things future, and at a distance, and depending upon men's reason,
and foresight, they may be also governed thereby; and Mr. H. himself
acknowledges in his De Cive, Chap. 3.. 31. That though men, because of their
different Appetites, cannot agree of the present, yet they may of the future,
and from thence acknowledges, that Peace is to be sought as the foundation of
all natural Law.

. 4. And therefore I think I shall be able easily to show, that every one of
these three Master-Passions, which he has here described as the Causes of War,
ought (if governed by Reason) to persuade the contrary. And in the first place,
for his Passion of Competition, That when two men desire the same thing, which
they cannot both enjoy, they become Enemies; and in the way to their end,
endeavor to destroy, or subdue one another. Now certainly Reason in this Case
will never incite a rational man to enter into a state of War with another, for
the obtaining of that which he has a mind to as well as he. For if it be a
thing the other is already possessed of, he ought by the Rules of Reason, and
Equity, to let him enjoy it by right of Occupancy or Possession; it being then
necessary for his preservation, or happiness; and he himself, if possessed of
the like thing, would think it reasonable that he should be likewise permitted
quietly to enjoy it: So that if he act by one Rule in relation to himself, and
by another in respect of all other men, in the same Case, or Circumstances,
this must be altogether unreasonable: And Mr. H. himself does sufficiently show
the grievous mischeifs of such an unreasonable way of proceeding, when he tells
us, That from hence it comes to pass; That where an Invader has no more to
fear than another man's single Power, If one plant, sow, build or possess a
convenient Seat, others may probably be expected to come prepared with Forces
united to dispossess and deprive him, not only of the Fruit of his Labor, but
also of his Life, or Liberty; and the Invader again is in the like danger of
another. To which I may also add, and he again of a third; till at last all the
Owners of it being successively destroyed, the House or Seat will become void,
and no man left to inhabit it; which Condition Mr. H. himself confesses to be
so sad, and deplorable, that he will have Mankind from the Dictates of Reason
to do all they can to get out of it, by entering into a Civil Society. But I
suppose that right Reason will rather hinder all rational men from ever falling
into this State at all, if they can by any means avoid, or prevent it; since
Peace is to be valued from its own Conveniences without trying, or comparing it
with the Evils of War, as Health is valuable for its own agreeableness to our
Natures, without trying by woeful experience* what sickness is.

. 5. And as for his next Passion, Diffidence of each other; That there is no
way for any man to secure himself, so reasonable as Anticipation; that is, by
force, or wiles, to master the persons of all men he can, so long, till he see
no other Power great enough to endanger him. And that this is no more than his
own conservation requires, and is generally allowed. Now can all this
reasonably persuade a man to put himself in so hazardous a condition, as by
force, or fraud, as to go about to master and subdue all those he will be
afraid of; or to think he is able to do this by his own single strength till he
sees no other Power great enough to endanger him? Since for any man to be able
to do this, he must have more cunning, natural Strength and Courage and
Cunning, than ever Homer supposed Ulysses, or Achilles, to have been masters
of; or our Modern Romance-makers can feign in their Heroes; Since upon these
Terms of Self-preservation, a man (like a Game-Cock) would be forced to fight a
Battle, or two, every day whilst he lived, and how long this would last,
supposing other men of equal strength, and as well prepared as himself, I refer
him to the experiment of fighting-Cocks, who seldom survive the twelfth or
thirteenth Battle; and though it is true, that there are some that taking
pleasure in contemplating their own Power in Acts of Conquests, which they may
pursue farther than their own Security requires; yet this was never known to be
performed by any man's single strength, but by a Combination with diverse
others, who through the esteem they had of his Integrity, or Courage, chose
such a man to be their Leader, or Prince, before another: And this Account,
both the Ancient Historians, and Poets, give us of the Original of the first
Monarchs, and Ancient Kings, in the Heroical Times; and admitting the first
Kingdoms to have begun by Fathers, or Patriarchs of Families, as some Divines
suppose, yet they could never have raised a sufficient Force to have conquered
others, without the Combination of the Heads or Fathers of other Families: Nor
could Nimrod himself, (who is supposed the first Tyrant, or Conqueror,) ever
have enlarged the Bounds of his Empire by his own single strength, or that of
his particular Family, without such a Combination which requires Compacts
between the Persons that make it; and when they once do this, they are then no
longer in the mere state of Nature, having set up and acknowledged a common
Power over them to keep them in awe: from whence it appears, that it is
ridiculous, nay absolutely impossible, for any single man to take pleasure in
contemplating his own Power in Acts of Conquest by his own personal Valor, or
Cunning, as Mr. H. supposes a man may do in the state of Nature.

. 6. And as for his appeal to Experience, That when a man taking a Journey,
arms himself; when going to Bed, he locks his Doors; when even in his House, he
locks his Chests: And asks what opinion he has of his Fellow Subjects, when he
rides armed, and shuts his Doors; or of his Children and Servants, when he
locks his Chests; And whether he does not thereby accuse Mankind as much by his
Actions, as he does by his Words? To all which I answer, No, he does not. For
though I grant it is no fault to distrust, and secure himself as well as he can
against violent and unjust Persons, either upon the Road, or in his own House;
yet does not this Diffidence accuse all his Fellow Subjects, or all his
Children, and Servants, much less all Mankind, of a design to murder, or rob
him; or give him any Right to make War upon them by way of anticipation; for
when he goes armed, or locks his Doors, or Chests, it is true, he grants there
are some violent and wicked Persons, whom he would secure himself against: yet
does not this accuse all Mankind of this wicked Design, since a man will do all
this, if he be satisfied that there are but two or three Thieves between his
own House and London; or but one thievish Person in his Family, which is but a
small proportion to a whole Country, or Kingdom, or even to his own particular
Family* much less does he thereby pass a Censure upon all Mankind: though it is
true, he thereby acknowledges, that there is, and ever will be, amongst men,
diverse who are more governed by their present Appetites and Passions, than by
Reason, or the Laws of Nature. Much less does such a diffidence give a man a
right in the state of Nature of setting upon, mastering, and killing all
Persons whatsoever, that he fancies have power sufficient to endanger him in
his Life, or Goods, before they have given some sufficient signs that they
intend so to do; for then it might be lawful (were it not for the Laws) for a
man, when he is thus armed, to set upon, not only Thieves, but every man he
meets, for fear he should set upon him first; nay, might likewise kill, or
knock in the Head, (if he were in the mere state of Nature) any of his
Children, or Servants, or even his Wife her self, if he did but fancy they went
about to murder, or rob him; which how wicked and unreasonable a thing it
would be, I leave to any man's Reason and Conscience to judge. Nor does his
comparing the state of War to the nature of Foul-weather, at all help him,
which he says, does not lie in a shower or two of Rain, but in an inclination
thereto of many days together: So the nature of War consists not in actual
fighting, but in the known disposition thereto: all which I easily grant, but
he must likewise own that it is never called a Rainy, or foul Season, till it
has actually rained; till then we never say it is foul weather, though it be
never so cloudy; so neither is this bare inclination to hurt, an actual War,
till there has been some signs or tokens of hostility expressed.

. 7. Yet he grants there was never such a condition of War as this that he
describes generally all over the World: But that there are many places where
men live so now, and Instances in many savage People of America; where, except
the Government of small Families (the concord whereof depends on Natural Lust)
they have no Government at all, and live at this day in that brutish manner he
has before described: But were it so as he affirms that brutish way of living,
which is in too many Particulars practiced by these Savage People, both in
Africa, and America, where they have almost lost all knowledge of a God, or of
a Moral Good and Evil; Ought the Practice of such Barbarous People to be of
sufficient Authority to prove, that they live according to the true state of
Human Nature, or that they have a right to live and act thus in all things they
thus unreasonably practice? But had this Author read any true or exact
relations of those Places in America he mentions, he might have found that in
many of those Nations, V^ Jo. Lerius Hist. Brasil; as also the French History
of the Caribbe Islands.
even, where there is no Civil Power to keep them in awe, and though they have no
other Government in time of Peace, but that of the Fathers, or Heads of
Families: Yet does not their concord wholly depend upon Natural Lust: For
besides the Government of Husbands over their Wives, and those conjugal Duties
and Services which their Wives yield them in these Places; Parents are more
fond of their Children, and Children again are more dutiful and kind to their
Parents, and take more care of them when they are sick or old, than they
commonly do with us: And though there be no Common Power to keep them in awe,
yet having no Riches, but the mere necessary Utensils of Living, nor any
Honors, except Military, to contend for, and which are not obtained without
great hardships and sufferings; and having also few Words of contempt, or
disgrace among them; whole Towns, nay Nations, have lived together for many
Ages in sufficient Amity and Concord, without ever falling together by the
ears. And if there be any Murders and Adulteries committed among them, every
particular person injured, or else the Relations of the Party slain, are their
own Judges and Executioners; the mutual fear of which, joined with the Natural
Peaceable Temper of the People, causes fewer of those Crimes to be committed
among them, than with us, where there are Laws and Public Officers appointed
to punish all such Injuries: And for the Truth of this, I refer you to two
Authors of undoubted Credit, (viz.) Lerius in his History of his Navigation to
Brazil, Chap. 18. and the French Author of the Natural History of the Caribbe
Islands, Part. 2d. Chap. 11. and. 19. besides other Authors on this Subject,
whom you may consult in Purchas's Pilgrims, in his Volume of America. And
though these People have often Wars with their Neighbors, yet is it not with
all, but only some particular Nations, with whom they have constant Wars, and
eat them when they can take them Prisoners. Yet do they at the same time
maintain Peace with all others. So remote is it from Truth, that any Nation in
the World can live and subsist, by maintaining a constant War against all
others. Nor did I ever hear of any more than one People or Nation in the
West Indies, near Carolina, called the Westoes, that made this Fatal
Experiment, by making war upon all their Neighbors, one after another, till
they were in a short time reduced from 7000 Fighting Men, to 700, and were
afterward quite extirpated by those Nations they had injured: Which Relation I
received from a Gentleman of Quality, who has a considerable Interest in those
parts. So impossible a thing it is, for Mankind to subsist, or be preserved a
year together in Mr. H's imaginary State of War.

.8. Nor is his other Instance from the Actions of Kings, and Persons of a
Sovereign Authority, any better, whom he makes like Gladiators, Having their
Weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on each other; That is, their Forts,
Garrisons and Guns, upon the Frontieres of their Kingdoms, and continual Spies
upon their Neighbors, which is a posture of War. Where I may first observe,
that he does not directly affirm, That all Princes are in a State, but only in
a Posture of War, which I grant is both lawful and necessary: Since no Prince
or Commonwealth can be secure, that his Neighbors will constantly observe the
Laws of Nature, and not invade his Territories, without any just cause given.
Yet I think no Prince, or other Supreme Power (whom he makes the only Judges of
Good and Evil) will be so wicked or unreasonable to affirm, that they have a
natural right to invade the Territories, Lives and Estates of all Neighboring
Princes, and their Subjects; much less, when they have made Leagues or Compacts
of Peace with each other, that they are not obliged to observe them, only for
prevention that they may not do the like to them, and break their Compacts
first: For that he himself confesses to be absolutely contrary to the Laws of
Nature, and of Right Reason. But that upon Mr. H's Principles such Compacts
being made in the mere State of Nature, and without any Common Power to see
them observed, do not at all oblige, I shall show you more particularly by and
by.

. 9. I come now to his last Passion, ( viz.) Glory, for which he would have all
men to be naturally in a State of War. But admitting that diverse men look that
their Companions should value them at the same rate as they do themselves; and
upon the least signs of Contempt, or undervaluing, naturally endeavor as far
as they dare, to extort a greater value from their Contemners, which amongst
them that have no Common Power to keep them quiet, may be enough to make them
destroy each other. Yet does not this hold true in every man; for even among
those that labor under this Passion of Vainglory, there are many in whom fear
of others is a much more predominate passion, and such will rather take an
affront, than venture to beat or kill another to revenge it: Since the hazard
is certain, but the Victory (supposing the person every way his equal)
uncertain. And if this Vainglory may be so far mastered by another stronger
Passion; why may it not also be overpowered by Reason? For a rational man will
consider, that he cannot force men to have a better esteem of his Words or
Actions by fighting every one that shall declare their dislike of them, or else
knows that he is not at all the worse for the foolish censures of unreasonable
men; or that he is obliged to take for an affront, whatsoever every scurrilous
impertinent Fellow shall intend so: And he himself does here likewise suppose,
that there are other as strong Passions that incline men to Peace, as fear of
Death, desire of such things as are necessary; commodious living; and a hope by
their Industry to obtain them; from whence I observe, that the greatest part of
these Passions which now incline men to Peace, are but the same in other words,
which before inclined them to War: For what is this Diffidence of another, and
this Anticipation, which he makes so reasonable, but a fear of Death, or other
mischief, from those whom he thus goes about to prevent? And what is this
desire of things necessary for life, but a Branch of that Right which he
supposes all men have to all things? But granting that the same Passions may in
some men produce different effects; yet if these Passions that incline men to
peace are more strong and powerful than those that excite them to War, then
certainly Peace will be their more constant and Natural State: Since as
Mariners relate the violent blowing of two contrary winds, does often in the
Center of their Motion produce a Calm. And therefore Mr. H. proceeds very
rashly, to lay such a great stress on those Passions, which provoke men to War,
without also considering, and putting into the contrary Scale all those that
incline men to the contrary, which certainly are more prevalent in most men:
For what can more strongly influence men's Actions, than fear of Death, and all
those other miseries which he himself so lively describes to be the necessary
Consequences of the State of War: And whereas he tells us, that reason
suggesteth convenient Articles of peace; I think I have sufficiently proved,
that Reason is so far from needing Articles of peace, that it can never prompt
considering men to believe themselves naturally in so dangerous and miserable a
State, as this which Mr. H. supposes; much less to fall into it on purpose,
without any just cause given. But since this Author undertakes to give us many
Reasons why men's Passions will not permit them to live in peace as well as
diverse other Creatures, whom he confesses can do so without Laws; We will a
little examine those Reasons he brings, Why men's Nature will not naturally
permit them to live in peace, as well as those brute Creatures; and therefore I
shall put them down in his own Words, as you may find them in his Lev. Chap. 17.

. 10. It is true, that certain living Creatures, as Bees and Ants, live
sociably one with another ( which are therefore by Aristotle, numbered amongst
Political Creatures) and yet have no other Direction than their particular
Judgments, and Appetites, not Speech, whereby one of them can signify to
another, what he thinks expedient for the Common Benefit. And therefore some
men may perhaps desire to know why mankind cannot do the same? To which I
answer.

First, That men are continually in competition for Honor and Dignity, which
these Creatures are not; and consequently amongst men, there arises from that
ground, Envy and Hatred, and finally War; but amongst these not so.

To which I reply, That these Civil Honors, about which he supposes these
Contentions do so often arise amongst men, have no place in the State of
Nature, being not known amongst men, before the Institution of Commonwealths;
and therefore they cannot in this State, which he now treats of, contend for
them more than Brutes. So that the only true Glory and Honor which can be
found, out of a Civil Government, is as Cicero very well defines it in his
Tusc. Quest. the agreeing praise of good men, and the uncorrupted Suffrages of
those that rightly judge of excellent Virtue. But all the Virtues being
contained under the study of the Common Good of Rational Beings, from thence
alone can spring the praise of good men: And the desire of such Honor, is so
far from causing a War against all men, that as from a contrary Principle, men
may by this be excited to the exercise of all those Virtues, which Mr. H.
himself allows, Lev. Chap. 15. to be the necessary means of Common Peace and
Safety.

. 11. His Second Reason is, that amongst these Creatures, the Common Good
differs not from the Private; and being by nature inclined to their Private,
they procure thereby the Common Benefit. But Man, whose joy consists in
comparing himself with other men, can relish nothing, but what is eminent.

To which we may reply, that Mr. H. has done us a Courtesy, in acknowledging
before he is aware; that even out of Civil Government, there is some common and
public Good, which may be indeed procured even by Brutes themselves: And he
has elsewhere also told us (as in his Treatise De Homine, Chap. 10. the very
last Words) But we suppose the knowledge of the Common Good, to be a fit means
to bring men both to Peace, and Virtue; because it is both amiable in its own
Nature, and the surest defense of each man's private Good. And sure its
difference in some cases from the private good of some men, is no sufficient
Reason why men should rather fall out and fight among themselves, than Bees or
Ants, whose Common Good is likewise distinguished from the private. But as for
what he affirms, concerning the Nature of men, if it be universally understood
of all men (as his words seem to intend) it is false, and spoken without all
manner of proof, unless we must be sent back to his general Demonstration of
these things in his Introduction to his Lev. when he advises every man to this
Rule, Nosce teipsum; and therefore would teach us from the Similitude of the
thoughts any passions of one man to those of another, thereby to know what are
the thoughts of all other men, upon the like occasion. Perhaps Mr. Hobbs knew
himself very well, and was sensible there was nothing more pleasant to him,
than comparing himself with other men, and so could relish nothing in himself,
either as his own Natural Endowments, or acquired Improvements, but what was
more eminent, and greater than other men's; and from thence gathered the same
thoughts to be in all others: But he ought to have shown something in the
nature of man, from whence it is necessary that all men should so judge; for
certainly all that are truly rational, can know from the true use of things,
and from the necessity of their own Natures, how to judge concerning their own
things, whether they are pleasant or not, and to what degree they do delight
them, without comparing them with those of other men: So that indeed none but
the foolish or envious can only be pleased, as far as their own things exceed
those of others. But if he would have this censure, only to concern such men,
it will not then afford a sufficient cause of an Universal War of all men
against all; And though perhaps Strife and Contention may be begun amongst such
envious, foolish People, yet the strength or reason of the more prudent and
peaceable may easily restrain it, that it shall never hurt, or destroy all men,
by making them enter into a state of War against all.

. 12. His Third Reason is, That these Creatures having not (as man) the use of
Reason, do not see (or at least think they see) any fault in the administration
of their Common business: Whereas amongst men, there are very many that think
themselves. Wiser, and Abler to govern the Public, better than the rest; and
those strive to Reform, and Innovate, one this way, another that way, and
thereby bring it into Distraction, and Civil War.

To which we may thus Reply, That this Reason offers nothing whereby men may
live less peaceably among themselves, if they were in the state of Nature, and
Subjects to no Civil Government, than Brutes: But in this state, men's Natural
Propensions to universal Benevolence, and to the Laws of Nature, would have
some place, notwithstanding what he has here alleged to the contrary; as I
have sufficiently proved in the precedent Discourse. Nor does he here offer any
thing whereby men could less agree among themselves to institute a
Commonwealth, for this is the thing whose causes we are now seeking for. But he
only objects something, which will hinder them from preserving it, when it is
instituted; and therefore this will also shake all the foundations of Peace,
even in a Commonwealth, when it is made never so firm according to his own
model. But we do well to consider, whether men's Reason does not more powerfully
promote Peace and Concord, by detecting many errors of the Imaginations and
Passions, than it does Discord, by its fallibility about those things which are
necessary, being but few, and those plain enough. Besides, men do not presently
make War, as soon as they suppose they spy out somewhat they may blame in the
Administration of public Affairs; for the same reason which discovers the
fault, does also tell them, that many things are to be born with for Peace
sake, and sugggests diverse means whereby an emendation of that fault, or
miscarriage, may be peaceably procured.

So that I dare appeal to the Judgment of the indifferent Reader, whether the
condition of Mankind is worse than that of Brutes, because it is Rational; and
whether Mr. H. does not judge very hardly of all men, by making their Reason
guilty of all these miseries, which in other places he imputes only to the
Passions; and from this cause would prove that men must live less peaceably
with each other than Brute Creatures. In short, Mr. H's Answer is nothing to
the purpose, for our inquiry is concerning the obligation of the precepts of
Reason in the state of Nature; and his Answer is, That most men's Reason is so
false, as that it would dissolve all Commonwealths already constituted.

. 13. His fourth Reason is, That these Creatures, tho they have some use of
voice in making known to one another their desires, and other affections; yet
they want that art of words by which some men can represent to others, that
which is Good in the likeness of Evil, and Evil in the likeness of Good; and
augment or diminish the apparent greatness of Good and Evil, discontenting men,
and troubling their peace at their pleasure.

The force of which Answer is no more than this; That because it sometimes
falls out, that the common People are moved to Mutiny and Sedition by a
specious, or sophistical Sermon, or Oration, that therefore men, as having the
use of Speech, cannot maintain peace among themselves: which consequence is
certainly very loose; for he ought to prove, that all men do necessarily and
constantly make such Speeches, tending to Civil War, and Sedition; and also
that such Speeches, when heard, do constantly prevail on their Auditors, or the
most part of them, that they should presently take up Arms: For it may be, that
even the Vulgar may see through such false and specious Speeches, and may not
suffer themselves to be deluded by them. It may also happen, that they may
rather give credit to the peaceable Speeches of the more wise, and moderate, as
founded upon more solid Reasons: And it may be, that they will rather consider
the true weight of the Arguments, than the empty sound of the Words; and
certainly men's rational Nature leads them to do this; for they know they cannot
be fed, or defended by Words, but by Actions proceeding from mutual
Benevolence: What then does hinder, but that the Eloquence and Reason of the
Good and Peaceable may not often prevail, with which both the Reason of the
Speaker, the true interest of the Auditors, and the nature of things do all
agree; But I shall speak no more of this Subject now, having in the precedent
Discourse sufficiently proved, That men receive much greater Benefits from the
use of Speech (though it may sometimes be the cause of Civil Discords, and
Wars) than they do Evils and Mischiefs thereby. And I suppose Mr. H. himself
(were he alive) would confess that Mankind would not be rendered more
peaceable, or easy to be governed, had they been all created dumb, or else had
all their Tongues been cut out by the irresistible power of his great
Leviathan, the Civil Sovereign.

. 14. His fifth Reason is, That irrational Creatures cannot distinguish between
Injury, and Damage; and therefore as long as they be at ease, they are not
offended at their Fellows: Whereas man is then most troublesome, when he is
most at ease; for then it is that he loves to show his wisdom, and control the
Actions of them that govern the Commonwealth.

By which Antithesis, he would infer, That men live together less peaceably
than Brutes, because they distinguish between Injury and Damage: But we think
much otherwise; and that most men would more willingly suffer some damage, even
done by other men, so it be not done injuriously. And I acknowledge that all
the distinction between these two, is founded in the knowledge of Right, and
Law, which indeed is only proper to men. But that this Knowledge should make
them more prone to violate the public Peace, and to trample upon the Laws and
Rights of their Superiors, I can by no means admit; much less, that Subjects
that abound in peace, and riches, are more apt to envy their Superiors, and to
show their wisdom in finding fault with their Rulers; or that the Subjects of
England, for example, who (God be thanked enjoy both sufficient peace, and
plenty) are more apt to find fault with their Governors, than those in France
or Turkey, where they are poor and miserable by Taxes, and other Severities; or
that they can even there forbear repining at the cruel Treatment of their
Rulers, though perhaps their Spirits may be so debased, and their Powers so
weakened by this oppression, that they may not be so able to show it by public
discourse, much less by resistance; and so free themselves from this Tyranny,
as perhaps they would do if they had sufficient Riches and Courage. And that I
conceive is the true reason why this Author is such an Enemy in all his Books
to the happiness and wealth of the People, whom he would all along make Slaves
instead of Subjects.

But suppose that the lawful Rights of Princes are sometimes violated by the
unbridled Lusts of some evil men, yet I do not see how this knowledge of the
difference between those things which are done by right, and those which are
done by wrong, do render them more apt to do Injuries to others. But he tells
us, That man is then most troublesome, when he is at ease. But sure, it is not
without Injustice, that he imputes the Faults of some men to all Mankind, and
that without any proof; unless, perhaps, finding such Passions in himself, he
thence concluded that they must likewise be natural to all others, according to
the method he makes use of in his Introduction to this Book; which I have
before taken notice of, when he bids us examine this similitude of Passions,
and so whether they do not agree with his own Thoughts. But I must freely
confess they do not agree with mine; let me be but happy, and want nothing, and
though others may be richer, or happier, I shall not envy them, nor am I at all
the worse for it: But indeed Mr. H. does very preposterously to allege this
fault of men's love to show their wisdom, and control the Actions of them that
govern the Commonwealth, against all Mankind; whilst he yet supposes men in the
state of Nature, which sure (according to his own Hypothesis) precedes all
Civil Government.

But we are now come to Mr. H's last Reason; and let us see if he can thereby
prove any better, That Mankind is less prone to Peace than Brute Creatures.

. 15. Lastly, The agreement of these Creatures is natural, that of Men is by
Covenant only, which is artificial; and therefore it is no wonder if there be
somewhat else required, besides Covenants to make their Agreement constant, and
lasting; which is a Common Power to keep them in awe, and to direct their
Actions to the common benefit.

To which I reply, That the true natural Causes intrinsical to Men as they are
Animals, and which can bring them to consent to the exercise of Peace, and
mutual Benevolence amongst themselves, are alike with those that are found in
other Animals, even the fiercest, and cruellest, suppose Lions, or Bears, (if
you will) as I hope I have sufficiently proved in the former part of this
Treatise. Nor can Mr. H. show any thing which is wanting to man, but yet is
found in Brutes as a cause of their peaceable agreement; for that which he
urges, That the Agreement of these Creatures is natural, that of men is by
Covenant only, and therefore artificial, may perhaps impose upon the Vulgar,
but may easily be confuted by any one that will but consider to the next
Consequence: For those very Compacts or Covenants he mentions, are made by the
power, as well of men's Rational, as Animal Natures: And certainly if there had
been no Covenants made among men, and that they had not the use of Reason, yet
the common Nature of Animals of the same kind, would have had as much force
with them, as with other Creatures, that they should agree to maintain a mutual
benevolence, as well as Brutes of the same kind, without destroying each other,
whose agreement is by him acknowledged to be natural: What then hinders, but
after there is besides added to Mankind Reason, and the use of Speech, but that
the same natural agreement may still remain? Reason sure does not take away the
natural endeavors, and propensions to Concord in Man, more than other Animals;
neither is this agreement less natural, or constant, because it is expressed by
words: As our Appetite, and taking in of Food, do not cease to be natural
Actions in us, although we may express this Appetite by words, or signs; and
may also appoint the time, place, and what sort of Meat we will eat. And Mr. H.
himself (as well as others) does sometimes acknowledge Reason to be a natural
Faculty, as he does in his De Cive, in the place already quoted: From whence it
follows; That this stricter Society or Agreement which Reason dictates should
be established by Compacts, wholly proceeds from the rational Nature of
Mankind. But it will farther appear, That this Agreement proceeding from the
use of Speech, is therefore more fitly called natural, if we consider our
practical Reason to be altogether determined from the nature of the best End we
can foresee or propose; and the best means we can use thereunto. And farther,
there is nothing more can be effected by the utmost endeavors of our Reason,
than that those propensions to concord, with others of our own kind, (which are
so natural to all Animals) should be directed to their fit object ( viz.) all
other rational Creatures, and that all our particular actions should be thence
exerted according to their due place, time, and other circumstances. So that
the very taking in of Meat, and Drink, is most natural, and proceeds from the
natural constitution of an Animal. Yet this in all particular cases, is best
governed, and directed by a man's Reason, taking care of his own Health without
any irregularities in his Diet; whilst those precepts of thus regulating his
Diet, whose force and certainty he observes from the Nature of things, and his
own particular Constitution, may very well deserve in some cases, the name of
an Art.

Therefore Mr. H. has done very ill in making that agreement among men, which
is expressed by Compacts, to be so artificial, as it must be quite opposed to
what is natural.

I shall not indeed deny, those words by which Compacts are expressed, to have
proceeded from the Arbitrary agreements of men: Yet that consent of their
minds, concerning the mutual offices of Benevolence, of which words are only
the signs, is altogether Natural: For in that consent of minds concerning the
mutual commutation of Duties, consists the whole Nature of Compacts; as all its
obligation proceeds from thence: But the knowledge and will of constituting
some signs, either by words or Actions, whereby this sort of consent may be
declared, is so natural, and easy to men, without any Teaching, that it may be
observed in persons born Deaf and Dumb, as I have given some instances in the
foregoing Discourse. In short, this consent expressed by Compacts, concerning,
these most general acts of Benevolence, which may be considered in any
disquition concerning the Laws of Nature, is either not to be called
Artificial, or if it be so termed, that Term is so to be understood, as it
agrees with all men's natural Consents, and not as it may be opposed to them;
that so it may become thereby less firm and durable, as Mr. H. supposes it; for
the signification of a natural Consent, constituted by words, tho with some
kind of Art, does not at all diminish its firmness or duration; and therefore I
think it does sufficiently appear, that Mr. H. is very much mistaken, when he
supposes that the agreement of Brutes of the same kind is more constant and
natural than that among men; and that men's natural propensions to a Benevolence
toward others, are not so strong in men, as in other Animals: So that I shall
leave it to the impartial Reader, whether upon a due consideration of his
Answers, and our Replies, he will conclude, as this Author does in his Treatise
de homine, chap. 10. That men do exceed Wolves, Bears, and Serpents, in Cruelty
and Rapacity, who are not rapacious beyond hunger; which if he had affirmed of
some men who are degenerated from all sentiments of humanity, had not been much
amiss; but to affirm it of all mankind in general, is too severe and false a
censure to be let pass: Whereas it must be at the worst, acknowledged, That no
general Propositions can be made, concerning the particular Passions and
Humors of all men; since there is not only a greater difference of Wit, but
also a greater variety of Passions and Inclinations amongst men, than brutes;
and that not only among whole Nations, but particular persons: For all the
kinds of brutes have almost the like Inclinations, and are governed by the like
passions and appetites; so that if you know one of them, you almost know them
all; but in mankind, so many men, so many Minds, and so many almost several
Humors and Dispositions: And which is more, the same man does not only differ
from others, but also oftentimes from himself; and that which at one time he
mightily loves and approves of, at another he abhors and condemns.

. 16. Yet so much I shall grant Mr. H. That men are tormented with many
Passions unknown to Brutes, such as are Coveteousness, Ambition, Vainglory,
Envy, Emulation, or Strife of Wit, with the Sense of which Brutes are not at
all concerned; all which I confess, do extremely hinder men's natural Peace and
Concord: So on the other side, he has not only several other Passions, that as
strongly persuade him to seek and observe them, yet God has also endued him
with reason whereby from the consideration of his own Nature, and of other
things, he may attain a knowledge of his Deity, and be thereby led to discover,
that all the Laws of Nature are not only bare dictates of Reason, but are also
Laws truly established by the Will of God the Legislator, for his own Honor,
and the Happiness and Preservation of Mankind; but so far I shall agree with
Mr. H., that in any Country, where men live without any knowledge of a Law,
either natural or revealed, that in all those places they are in as bad or
worse state than Brutes can be imagined to be.

. 17. To conclude, I cannot but take notice, that Mr. H's Hypothesis labors
under these great Absurdities. First, He supposes that in the State of Nature a
man's Reason tells him, that his Self-preservation cannot be obtained without
this War against all men; but afterward finding by experience the fatal Evils
and Mischiefs proceeding from this kind of Life, to have also by his reason
found out, and then proposed those Conditions of Peace, called Laws of Nature,
in order to his own Happiness and Self-preservation; as if right Reason could
ever dictate contradictory or opposite means to this same end, such as are a
State of War, and a State of Peace; a neglect and violation of all the Laws of
Nature, as lawful and necessary for a man's safety in the State of Nature, and
a strict observation of them when once entered into a Civil State, for the same
design.

Secondly, This Hypothesis is highly derogatory to the Goodness and Providence
of God; for if he were the Author and Creator of Mankind (as certainly he was)
then whoever believes this Vid. Dr. Parker's Ecclesiastical Policy, Chap. 4. p.
126, 127.
Hypothesis, must also believe that God contrived things so ill, that unless
his Creatures had been more cunning and provident than himself, they must of
necessity (like the Earth-born Brethren in Ovid's Metamorphosis, have perished
by each others hands as soon as they were made. So that the preservation and
well-being of Mankind would be entirely attributed to their own Wit and
Cunning, and not to God's Goodness or Providence, who must have sent his
Creatures into the World in such an evil state as should oblige them first to
seek their own mutual Ruin and Destruction, as the way to their Preservation.
So that Mankind must owe all the happiness and comfort of their Lives, not to
their Creator, but themselves: since with him the Laws of Nature, whereby they
are preserved, were not given or established by God their Legislator, but are
only so many Rules of Art or humane Wit, like other Inventions of men's
contriving, and still suppose man to be departed from that natural state of War
in which God put him, into an Artificial one of Peace of his own making: But
certainly the Deity that made us (if we suppose him Good and Wise) made us not
to be miserable (as Mr. H. himself confesses we must have been) had we
continued in this state of War. So that to suppose God made us, and left us in
that condition, it is directly to deny our Creator's Goodness. And then if we
suppose him wise, we cannot imagine that he would frame a sort of Creatures
only to destroy themselves, unless we can believe his only design was to sport
himself in their folly and madness, in beholding them by all the ways and arts
of Force and Fraud contriving their own mutual Destruction. And therefore if
the Creation of Man were the product of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, his
Natural State must have been that of Peace, and not such a Condition as that
which this Author supposes.

Lastly, Mr. H. does himself ingeniously confess, that he believes there was
never actually such a state of War, as he supposes and describes: And
therefore, tho I grant it is both lawful and usual for natural Philosophers,
who not being able through the imbecility of our humane Faculties, to discover
the true nature and essences of Bodies, or other Substances, do therefore take
a liberty to seign or suppose such an Hypothesis, as they think will best suit
with the nature of the things themselves, of which they intend to treat; and
from thence to frame a body of natural Philosophy, or Physics, as Aristotle of
old, and Monsieur Des Carts, in our age have performed: Yet can we not allow
the same liberty in moral or practical Philosophy, as in speculative. And
therefore such a precarious Hypothesis, as this of a natural state of War, is
by no means to be admitted as the necessary consequence of that natural Right,
which every man has to preserve himself: For whether we consider Mankind to
have been together with the world, generated from all eternity, as Aristotle,
and the more modern Platonists did believe; or else to have sprung out of the
earth like Mushrooms, as Epicurus of old, and Mr. H. in his De Cive suppose; or
else as we (according to the Divine Revelation of the holy Scriptures) do
believe, That Mankind was at first propagated from one Man, and one Woman,
created for that purpose by God: Now let us at present suppose which of these
we please to be the true Original of Mankind, we cannot from thence with any
reason conclude, that it was at any time such a state of War of all men against
all; for if, according to the first Hypothesis, we suppose Mankind to be
Eternal, they were likewise from all Eternity propagated by distinct Families,
and divided into several Nations, and Commonwealths, as they are at this day:
But if it be objected, that those distinct Nations or Commonwealths, were
always such from all Eternity; Then it will likewise follow, that they were
also from all Eternity in the same state they now are; that is, not of War, but
Peace. But we shall further show the absurdity of that Supposition, before we
have concluded our Considerations upon this Head. So on the other side, if we
proceed upon the Epicurean Hypothesis, of Mankind's springing out of the Earth;
if we do not likewise suppose them to have been made like Game-Cocks, or those
Earth-born men I have already mentioned, who presently fell a fighting, and
destroying each other without any Cause; it will not do the business: And
therefore let us now with Mr. H. suppose these men, being all made of equal
strength, both of body and mind; it is plain, that they must be at first in a
state of Peace, before they could ever fall together by the Ears; so then the
state of Peace was Prior in Nature to that of War, and also more agreeable to
Human Nature.

2 dly, Supposing these Earth-born men to have been all rational Creatures, and
equal in strength and cunning, they would never have entered into a state of
War, and have fallen a cutting each others Throats without some just Cause, or
Provocation first given. For if they were all equal, every man would consider
each of his Fellows as of a like ability with himself; and that if he struck
him first without any cause, he would be as well able to resist, and make his
party good with him, as he could be to hurt him; the fear of which would have
rather caused Peace than War: Since whoever struck first, could not be sure of
the Victory; And if any two should have fallen to Cuffs, this could be no
reason for all the rest to have also fallen together by the Ears, since there
was no cause why they should suppose a Will or Inclination in each other to
War, till they had expressed it by some outward signs; so that this natural
Equality among men, and mutual fear of each other, which Mr. H. supposes to be
the chief causes of War, would certainly have rather inclined these men to
Peace.

But if we follow the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, it is then
certain, That all Mankind being derived from one Man, and one Woman, their
Children could never be in this state of war toward their Parents, by Mr. H's
own confession; much less could the Parents ever be so unnatural toward their
Children, who were made out of their own Substance; nor yet could the Brothers,
or Sisters, who partake of the same Human Nature derived from their Common
Parents, and who were bred up together from their Infancy in a state of Peace
and Amity, be rationally supposed presently to have fallen together by the ears
without any other cause, or provocation given, than Mr. Hs Passions of mutual
distrust, and desire of glory: Therefore when after the Fall of Adam, man's
Nature was degenerated into that state we now find it, wherein men's Passions, I
own, do too often domineer over their Reason; and that Cain, through Malice and
Envy, slew his Brother, as we read in Genesis. Of this state of War, as it is
the first Example of man's Degeneracy, so it is also of God's dislike, and
punishment of this cruel Sin of Murder, which is indeed but the effect of this
Author's state of War.

But I beg the Reader's pardon if I have been too prolix in the confutation of
this Principle; this being the main foundation of all those Evil and False
Opinions contained in this Author's Moral and Political Works: if therefore
this is thoroughly destroyed, all that is built upon it will fall of it self.
But since Mr. H. has by his Supposition of certain Compacts, or Covenants,
undertaken to show a Method how men got out of this wretched state of War; in
which let us see whether his next Principle answers the Designs he proposes.

PRINCIPLE VIII.
. 1. That mutual Compacts of Fidelity in the State of Nature, are void, but not
so in a Commonwealth.

WHich Principle he expresses and proves at large, in his de Cive, cap. in
these words: But those Covenants that are made by Contract, where there is a
mutual Trust, neither party performing any thing presently in the state of
Nature, if any just Fear shall arise on either side, are void. For he who first
performs, because of the evil disposition of the greatest part of men, only
studying their own profit, no matter whether by right or wrong, betrays himself
to the lust of him with whom he contracts: For there is no reason that any man
should perform first, if it is not likely that the other will perform
afterward; which whether it be likely or not, he who fears, must judge, as it
is shown in the former Chapter, Art. 9. I say things are thus in the state of
nature; but in a Civil state, where there is one who can compel them both, he
who by Contract is first to perform, ought first to do it. For since the other
may be compelled, the reason ceases, for which he feared the other would not
perform.

Which Principle is somewhat otherwise expressed in his Lev. chap. 14. which
since it differs something from the other, in the manner of expression, I shall
likewise give in you his own words. If a Covenant be made wherein neither of
the Parties perform presently, but trust one another, in the condition of mere
nature (which is a condition of War of every man against every man) upon any
reasonable supposition, it is void; but if there be a common Power set over
them both, with right and force sufficient to compel performance, it is not
void; for he that performs first, has no assurance the other will perform
afterward, because the mere bonds of words are too weak to bridle men's
Ambition, Avarice, Anger, and other Passions, without the fear of some coercive
Power, (which in the condition of mere Nature, where all men are equal, and
judges of the justness of their own fears, cannot possibly be supposed); and he
which performs first, does but betray himself to his enemy, contrary to the
Right (he can never abandon) of defending his life, and means of living.

. 2. You may now more plainly see the reason why he supposes in the foregoing
Chapter, That all Kings and persons of Sovereign Authority, are always in a
posture, or state of War; which he more plainly expresses in his de Cive, chap.
10.. 17. in these words; But what are diverse Commonwealths, but so many
Garrisons fortified against each other with Arms and Ammunition? Whose State,
because they are kept in awe by no common Power, (although an uncertain Peace, or
short Truces may intervene) is yet to be accounted for the state of Nature,
that is, for a state of War. From all which it is easy to deduce the grievous
mischiefs that would thereby happen to mankind. For in the first place these
Civil Sovereigns he mentions, can never be obliged by any Covenants from making
War upon, and ruining each other, nor can be accused for breach of Faith, or
Infidelity, when they do so; for being still in the state of Nature, that will
necessarily follow, which he lays down at the end of his former Chapter, as the
consequences of this state: To this War of every man against every man, this
also is consequent, that nothing can be unjust. The notions of Right and Wrong,
Justice and Injustice, have there no place; where there is no common Power,
there is no Law; where no Law, no Injustice. Force and Fraud are in War the two
Cardinal Virtues.

. 3. So that you see upon these Principles it is altogether in vain for Princes
to make any Articles or Covenants of Peace with each other; no, not if they
swear to them never so solemnly; for in the last words of this Chapter he tells
us, That the Oath adds nothing to the obligation; for a Covenant, if lawful,
binds in the sight of God, without the Oath, as much as with it; if unlawful,
binds not at all, tho it be confirmed with an Oath: So that if the Covenant
could not oblige, the Oath will serve to as little purpose: What Princes will
thank him for this Doctrine, I know not; but I hope it is not an Apology for
the late actions of any Princes but the Ottoman Emperor, and our Christian
Grand Signior on the other side the water; but if the state of Princes toward
each other is so bad, that of the Subjects is much worse; for from these
Principles the safety of all Ambassadors, Merchants, and Travelers in the
Territories of any Prince or State with whom we are at Peace, is thereby
utterly taken away; nor can the Subjects be in a better condition than their
Masters; for by this Author's determination, they are presently Enemies as soon
as they come under a Foreign Power: For such Princes being always in the state
of Nature toward each other, it is a part of their Natural Right or
Prerogative, to force all those that are weaker to give a Caution of their
future Obedience (and good behavior) unless they will rather suffer Death. For
nothing can be imagined more absurd, than that he who being weak you have in
your power, by letting him go, you may render both strong, and your Enemy. All
which are his own words, in his De Cive, Cap. 1.. 14. Nor can I understand what
he means by a future Caution of Obedience, but the Submission of those who are
thus seized upon, and their coming into the same Commonwealth, and subjecting
themselves wholly to their Empire, who thus lay hold on them: For he tells us
presently after, That a certain and irresistible Power confers a Right of
Governing and Ruling those, who cannot resist it. So that if this Doctrine be
true, in what an ill condition are Ambassadors, and other Strangers in foreign
Countries now at League with us, any one may easily perceive. Well, but suppose
such Strangers could or would submit themselves absolutely to these Foreign
Powers, they may yet choose whether they will accept it, since no Law of Nature,
according to Mr. H's Principles, can oblige Foreigners to any outward Acts of
Kindness or Mercy toward others, who are not of the same Commonwealth, since
they may either accept of this their Submission, or else refuse it, and put
them to Death, tho otherwise never so innocent.

. 4. But if Compacts with those of different Commonwealths, whether Princes or
Subjects, are of so little force, let us see whether they will signify any more
among those, who having agreed to renounce this State of Nature, are willing to
transfer all their Power upon one, or more Persons, and so enter into his
Commonwealth. Where, first, I desire you to observe, that these Pacts or
Covenants, by which every Man renounces his Natural Right, are still made in
the State of Nature, in which State, it is lawful for any Man to doubt of
another's Fidelity; but whether a Man justly fears that another will not
perform his part, he that fears, is the only Judge; and therefore Mr. H.
concludes, that every man has cause to fear, whenever he is afraid. Which
reason, if it were of any force, would infer, that not only those Compacts are
invalid in which nothing is performed on either part; but also those in which
any thing of any moment remains yet to be done by either Party, for he who will
not keep Faith any longer, may when he pleases pretend to be afraid, lest the
other should break his Faith with him, and that very justly, whilst he himself
is the only Judge of it; and therefore his Reason (which is always supposed to
be right) may not only tell him, that he need not perform his part of the
Covenant, but also that it is absolutely void, if he thinks fit to make it so.
But if any one will say, that he himself has prevented this Objection by his
Annotation to this Article; as also in his Lev. in this Chap. That the Cause of
fear, which makes such a Covenant invalid, must be always something arising
after the Covenant made, as some new fact, or other sign of the Will not to
perform, else it cannot make the Covenant void. For that which could not hinder
a Man from promising, ought not to be admitted as an hindrance of performing.
All which, tho it be very true, yet if what he has already alleged in his
foregoing Section be also true, it will not signify any thing; because he there
tells us, that whether it is likely that he will perform, or not, he who is
afraid, is the only Judge, (right or wrong, it is all one) and therefore this
fear of another man's failing in his trust, may either arise from his calling to
mind the false and evil Disposition of all men, which before the Compact he had
not well considered, or else he may suppose any Act of the other Parties (tho
never so innocent) to be a sufficient sign of his Will not to perform his part.
Nor is there any thing in the State of Nature, which can make such a timorous
man secure of the Fidelity of others, for the performance of their Compact;
because as Mr. H. tells us in his De Cive, Cap. 5.. 1, 2. Cap. 7.. 27. All the
hope of security is placed, in that a man may prevent all others, either
openly, or by surprise. So, that although it appears that the Utility of observing
of Compacts be never so manifest, yet cannot it by this Principle lay any firm
Obligation upon men's minds, but that they may depart from them, whenever they
will neglect or oversee this Utility, or that they think they may better secure
their own interest by any other means; since the Will and Conscience of man can
never be so obliged by their naked Compacts, that they may not depart from, or
act contrary to them, whenever they think they may safely, and for their own
private advantage do it. For the Obligation will not only cease, if it shall
please all those who have so covenanted to depart from their Covenants at once,
as when men discharge themselves of them by mutual consent: But supposing also
this consent still to continue, the force of an Obligation will yet be wanting;
for since that dictate of Reason of keeping Compacts, has not as yet attained
the force of a Law, as being made (as I have already observed) in the mere
state of Nature; any single Person, according to his particular Humor, or
predominant Passion of Fear, or Suspicion, or Self-interest, may depart from
this dictate of Reason, tho the rest do not agree so to do; because no man
according to Mr. H. in the Law of Nature, can ever be tied by any Compact to
quit the doing of that which he judges necessary for his own Interest, or
Self-defence. For in the very beginning of this 14th Chapter in his Lev. he
defines a Law of Nature to be a Precept, or general Rule found out by Reason,
by which a man is forbidden to do that which is destructive of his Life, or
takes away the means of preserving the same, and to omit that by which he
thinks it may be best preserved. So that for the preservation of a man's
life, or whenever he thinks those Compacts may take away the means of
preserving it, he may without crime fail in keeping his Compacts either for
Public Peace, or the observation of Justice with his Fellow Subjects, or of
Fidelity, or of Obedience to his Civil Sovereign; who upon these Principles, is
in no better a condition, nor so good, as any of his Subjects: Because Mr. H.
does not allow in his Leviathan, Cap. 18. of any compacts to be made between
the Sovereign, and the Subjects; who only Covenant one with the other, and not
with him, to give up their right of governing themselves to this man, or
Assembly of men, and that they do thereby authorize all his Actions. So that
since this Compact is made in the state Nature, and that this Law of keeping of
Compacts, is only a dictate of Reason, and no Law; it can lay no higher
obligation upon men's Consciences in the state of Nature, than any other Law of
Nature, which Mr. H. plainly tells us Chap. 17. In the state of Nature do not
oblige, nor can the Common Power set over men, lay any obligation in Conscience
upon them, why they should not break these Compacts toward each other, when
ever they think it convenient: For since the Civil Sovereign can only oblige
them to its outward observation by those Punishments as he pleases to appoint
for such offenses as are destructive to the Public Peace, every man that will
venture the fear of discovery, or being taken, or whenever he thinks he can
make a Party strong enough to defend himself from those that would punish him
for the breach of them; may safely, nay lawfully, transgress them, whenever
the awe, or fear of the Civil Sovereign ceases. So that it is evident there
does still need some higher Law, or Principle than this of mere Fear of the
Civil Power to make men honest, or to keep their Compacts when they have made
them.

. 5. To Conclude, Mr. H. does far exceed his Master Epicurus in this rare
invention; for that old Fellow, one would think, had sufficiently shaken the
foundations of all common Peace, and Justice, when he laid down in his ratis
sententiis or established dictates, That there is no such thing as Justice
between those Nations who either could not, Vi. Diog. Laert. in vita Epicuri.
, or would not enter into mutual Covenants that they should not hurt, or be
hurt by each other; Yet however, he thought fit to leave the force of those
Compacts unviolated, although there was no common Power over them, which might
keep those Nations in awe. But Mr. H. that he might indulge as much as he could
to his darling passion of Fear, has also allowed men this Liberty, That in the
state of Nature, Compacts of mutual Fidelity may by right be violated, without
any other cause given than the fear or suspicion of the Party afraid.

PRINCIPLE IX.
The Law of Nature is not properly a Law, unless as it is delivered in the Holy
Scriptures.

. 1. WHich Principle he endeavors to prove in his De Cive Cap. 3. Art. the
last, in these words: But those that we call Laws of Nature, being nothing else
but certain conclusions understood by reason concerning the doing of things;
(whereas a Law properly and accurately speaking, is the word of him that
commands something to be done, or not done by others); they are not Laws,
properly speaking, as they proceed from Nature: Yet as far as they are given by
God in the Holy Scripture, they are properly called by the name of Laws; Which
likewise he has more briefly contracted in his Leviathan, Cap. 15. in these
words: These dictates of Reason, men use to call by the Name of Laws, but
improperly, for they are but Conclusions, or Theorems concerning what conduces
to the conservation and defense of themselves; whereas Law properly is the word
of him, that by right has a command over others. But yet if we consider the
same Theorems as delivered in the word of God, that by right commands all
things, then are they properly called Laws.

. 2. The Reason for which opinion he gives us in his De Cive Cap. 5. 1, 2, 3.
in these words; It is self-manifest, that the actions of men do proceed from
their Will, and their Will from Hope and Fear: So that as often as it seems,
that a greater Good, or lesser Evil is like to happen to them, from the
violation of Laws, men willingly violate them; therefore every man's hope of
security and preservation is placed in this, that he may be able to prevent his
Neighbor either by his own force or art, openly or at unawares. From whence it
is plain, that the Laws of Nature do not presently, as soon as they are known,
give sufficient security to every one of observing them; and therefore as long
as no caution can be obtained from the Invasion of others, that Primitive Right
must still remain to every one, of taking Care of himself by all the ways that
he will, or can; which is the Right of all men, to all things, or the Right of
War; and it suffices for the fulfilling of the Law of Nature, that any one
should be ready or willing to have Peace when it may be had with security.

. 3. So likewise in his Leviathan, Chap. 14. tho he grants that the Laws of
Nature ought to be observed, yet because they are contrary to our Natural
Passions, that carry us to Partiality, Pride, Revenge, and the like; and their
Covenants without the Sword, are but Words, and have no strength to secure a
man at all; therefore notwithstanding the Laws of Nature, if there be no Power
erected, or not great enough for our security, every man will, and may lawfully
rely on his Strength and Art, for caution against all other men. And in his
15th. Chap. of his Leviathan, he farther tells us, The Laws of Nature oblige in
foro interno, that is to say, they bind to a desire that they should take
place: But in foro externo, that is, to the putting them in Act, not always.
For he that should be modest and tractable, and perform all he promises in such
time, and place, where no man else would do so, should but make himself a Prey
to others, and procure his own certain Ruin, contrary to the ground of all the
Laws of Nature, which tend to Nature's Preservation.

. 4. I have been the larger in giving you his own words in this place, because
I could not well contract them without spoiling his sense; and also that you
may the better see whether he be clearly answered, or not. In the First place
therefore, if it be already made out in the precedent Discourse, that in this
Proposition of endeavoring the Common Good of Rational Beings, are contained
all the Laws of Nature, and that it does likewise appear to proceed from God,
from the Nature of things, and those Rewards and Punishments he has annexed to
its observation and transgression: Then notwithstanding what Mr. H. has here
said, this Law of Nature is properly a Law; as having all the conditions
necessary thereunto: But that which might lead Mr. H. into this Error, was,
That all Writers upon this Subject, thought it sufficient to define the Law of
Nature to be only a Dictate of right Reason, without deducing its Authority
from God, as a Legislator: Or if they have supposed God the Author of it, as
Suarez in his Book de Legibus; and Grotius in his de Iure Belli and pacis have
done: Yet they contented themselves with supposing, that God had impressed
these Idea's upon men's Souls, as so many innate Notions, which they call the
Light of Nature, without showing us by some more plain or certain means (as our
Author has done in the preceding Discourse) how we may attain to the knowledge
of this Law. The weakness, or precariousness of which Hypothesis being
discovered by Mr. H. gave him occasion to suppose that the Law of Nature was
not properly a Law, for want of a Legislator; and farther, they having defined
this Law of Nature to be a dictate of right reason, which seems only proper to
revealed or Civil Laws, delivered in some set form of words, Mr. H. has here
also defined a Law, To be the Word, or Speech of him who has a Right to
Command a thing to be done, or not to be done: And so the Laws of Nature not
being delivered in any set form of words, cannot be upon these grounds properly
Laws.

. 5. But I think we have already sufficiently proved, that the Law of Nature,
being to be collected from our own Natures, and that of other things without
us, does not consist in any set form of words, but in those true Notions or
Idea's taken from the things themselves: And we have already shown, that
Persons born deaf or dumb; are capable of understanding this Law, though they
have not the use of words. And Mr. H. himself before he is aware, does
sufficiently confess this Truth in more places than one of his de Cive. For
after he has in the last Art. of his Third Chap. denied the Laws of Nature to
be properly Laws, he begins his 4 th. Chap. with these Words.

That which is called the Natural, and Moral, the same is wont to be also
called the Divine Law, nor undeservedly; because Reason, which is the very Law
of Nature, is immediately given by God to every man, as the Rule of his
Actions, as also because the Precepts of Life which are thence derived, are the
same which are given by the Divine Majesty for the Laws of his Heavenly Kingdom
by our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Holy Apostles. Those things therefore which
may be before understood by Reason concerning the Law of Nature, the same we
shall endeavor to confirm from the Holy Scripture. So likewise in his 15 th.
Chap. Article 3. he tells us, That the Laws of God are declared after a
Threefold manner. The First of which is by the Tacit Dictates of Right Reason:
From both which places we may plainly collect, That if the Laws of Nature are
Dictates of right Reason, and if the Laws of God and Nature, or Reason, are all
one and the same, and that Right Reason is the very Law of Nature, and is
immediately given by God to every Man as a Rule of his Actions, it will
likewise as necessarily follow, that those Laws or Dictates of Reason are also
Divine, since they proceed from God as a Legislator. Nor will it serve his turn
to allege, as he does in his Leviathan 15. Chap. That the same Laws ( viz.) of
Nature, because they oblige only to a desire, and endeavor (I mean an
unfeigned and constant endeavor) are easy to be observed. For in that he
requires nothing but endeavor; he that endeavors their performance, as far
as he can fulfilleth them, and he that fulfilleth the Laws, is just.

. 6. This will prove a mere Evasion, if you please to consider, That unless the
Laws of Nature regard the outward Actions of men, they cannot partake of the
nature of Laws, nor do they carry any obligations along with them, because it
is impossible to seek Peace with others, or to depart from our natural Rights
by any internal Act of the Mind alone, without outward Actions, and most of
those Actions do in their own nature necessarily regard, and concern others
besides our selves. But if he should reply, that such Actions are improperly
called Laws, for want of Rewards and Punishments: To this we may likewise
return, That we have already fully proved in this Discourse, that they carry
with them the true force of Laws, as containing all the Conditions necessary
thereunto. And he himself in his Leviathan, chap. 21. does expressly
acknowledge, and set down diverse of those natural Punishments which are
appointed by God as natural effects of the Transgression or breach of the Law
of Nature. Which Passage, because I have already transcribed it in the
Discourse it self, Chap. 3. I shall therefore refer you thither. But in short,
If there be no Laws of Nature properly so called, in the state of Nature, it
will likewise necessarily follow, that there is no such thing as Natural Rights
properly so called; And so his Right of all men to all things, and to make war
upon all men, will be very improperly called a Right; for they cannot be
properly so, but as they are granted, or permitted us, by some Laws properly so
called, which in this state can only be those of God, or Nature.

. 7. But we are weary of such Contradictions, and therefore let us now farther
examine the only Reason he brings why he denies their obligation to external
Acts in the state of Nature, ( viz.) Because we cannot be secured that others
will observe them in those things which are necessary to our preservation; [and
therefore infers] that every man's hopes of his own Security are placed in
this, That by his own Force or Wiles he may prevent his Neighbor openly, or at
unawares. This is that invincible Argument which seems strong enough in his
Judgment to destroy all outward Obligations to the whole Law of Nature. Yet I
think for all that, it is easy enough to be answered. And therefore in the
first place, we reply, That there is no need of supposing such a perfect
Security to be afforded by the Laws of Nature concerning other men's observing
them, as must needs be free from all Fear, before we can be obliged to external
Actions conformable to them; for the Will of God, the first Cause, being known,
whereby he establishes these Laws, there will arise a certain obligation to the
performance of such external Actions; though some men may be so wicked, as to
break, or neglect them, and to practice evil and violent Actions toward those
that would observe them.

But I shall now farther prove (notwithstanding this Objection) that we are
under a greater obligation to the Laws of Nature, than we are to the Civil Laws
of our Country, to whose external obedience he will have all men whatsoever
obliged. For all Persons, although they are not under the same Commonwealth,
yet are all Members of the same more large Empire of God himself. Now it is
most notorious, that those that are Subjects to the same Civil Power, cannot be
perfectly secure, either that their Fellow Subjects will observe all the Civil
Laws, by abstaining from Murder, Robbery, or Rebellion, etc. or that the Civil
Sovereign can, or will always punish all the Transgressors of his Laws,
especially where Factions are potent, though he is never so watchful over the
Public Good. So that if to these cautious Men of Mr. H's Principles, it seems
a sufficient Reason for their outward obligation to the Civil Laws, if it
appears more probable that the Civil Sovereign both will, and can take care of
the Authority of his Laws, by protecting the Obedient, and punishing the
Refractory, than that he will forbear, or neglect so to do; it will likewise
follow, That to all men who exercise true Piety, and Obedience to God's Natural
Laws, their obligation to observe them will not prove the more infirm, though
God does not always presently, and immediately punish all the Transgressions
and Violations of his Natural Laws; it being a sufficient security to them of
his Goodness and Justice, since he will certainly inflict more severe
Punishments upon their Transgressors, either in this life, or in that to come,
than any Humane Power can do upon Offenders against their Civil Laws. So that
if Mr. H's Argument were valid, not only the outward obligation of all Natural,
but also of all Civil Laws, would be quite destroyed; since in neither State we
can be perfectly secure, that all others will observe them; and indeed he
demands that which is altogether impossible, when he requires an absolute and
perfect Security concerning future voluntary Actions, either in a Civil, or a
Natural State; which as such can be only contingent.

. 8. But if he will permit us to call that a State of security, which is the
most free of any from the fear of future Danger, or Misery, we assert, That God
has made it manifest to all men, by all those signs, (which we have already
shown to be sufficient to evince our Obligation) that even out of a Civil
Government, he shall be much more safe from all sorts of Evil, who shall most
strictly and constantly observe all the Laws of Nature in his outward Actions,
as well as internal Inclinations, than he who (according to Mr. H's Doctrine)
shall seek this Security by endeavoring to prevent, and assault all other men
by force or fraud.

But it is necessary when we compare the dangers, or security of the good or
just men, (which are only those who observe the Laws of Nature in their outward
Actions) as also of the wicked or unjust, who do otherwise, to make a true
Experiment, which of these will give most certain security; there is not only
to be reckoned into this account, those Evils which may happen to them from the
Violence of other men, but also those, which such wicked men bring upon
themselves by their inconstant and unreasonable way of living, as also by their
inordinate Passions, such as Envy, Anger, Intemperance, etc. and moreover, all
those Evils, or Punishments, which may with reason be feared from God, both in
this Life, and in that to come; which also are to be compared not in any one
particular case, or in a few circumstances only, but in all those that may
happen through the whole course of their Lives; for otherwise it is impossible,
that we should truly judge which course of Life, either that of constant
Justice or Injustice would be more secure. But we have, I hope already,
sufficiently made out, that their condition is much more happy and secure, who
observe the Laws of Nature in the whole course of their Actions, than those who
act otherwise.

To which I shall only add, That although Mr. H. himself, when he treats of the
security requisite to the outward Observation of the Laws of Nature, does
wholly insist upon a perfect security from the Invasion of other men, and
affirms, Because it is not to be had in the State of Nature, that therefore no
body is obliged in that State to outward acts of Justice, but has still a
right to all things, and of making War upon all Men; Yet in other places of his
Book, as if he had forgot himself, he does acknowledge (although but sparingly)
that he himself perceived that there was a sufficient Obligation to an external
Conformity to the Laws of Nature, even out of a Civil State, lest we should
fall into other Evils besides those which may be feared from the violence of
men. As for Example, when he endeavors to prove in his De Cive, Cap. 3.. 2, 3.
That Faith is to be kept with all men, he fetches his reason from hence, That
he who violates his Covenant, commits a Contradiction, which he acknowledges to
be an Absurdity in Humane Conversation. And therefore, if he can admit in this
case, that it is better to observe, than to violate our Covenants, lest we
should fall into a Contradiction; what reason is there, why we should not also
universally infer the same consequence from the breach of every Law of Nature,
and consequently an Obligation to all their outward Actions? So that it will be
better to observe than to transgress them in the State of Nature, because their
Violation does still imply a Contradiction or Absurdity in all Humane Society
or Conversation; for whosoever will seriously consider the Nature of rational
Agents, will acknowledge, that all the Felicity possible for them, does depend
upon the Common Good and Happiness of the whole System, as its necessary and
adequate Cause; and therefore every man ought to seek both of them together;
for whenever he transgresses any Law of Nature, he then separates his own
private Good or Advantage, from that of the public; which being contradictory
ways of acting, must needs raise a Civil War, or Contest in a man's own
Conscience, between his Reason, and his Passions, which must grievously disturb
its Tranquillity; which Evil, since it also takes away his Peace and Security,
is no contemptible Punishment naturally inflicted by God for such Offenses.

. 9. I shall now only propose two Reasons more, whereby I think we may
demonstrate the falseness of this Argument of Mr. H. The first is, That
Presumption of the Civil Laws, both in our own, and all other Kingdoms, which
sufficiently declares what Judgment Civil Sovereigns (whom this Author makes
the only Judges of right or wrong) have made of Humane Nature; to wit, that
every one is presumed to be good, until the contrary be proved by some outward
Action, and that made out by sufficient Proof or Testimony; and therefore, if
their Judgment be true, he must own all other men ought not to be esteemed as
Enemies, or so wicked as he is pleased to suppose; so that they may be set upon
and killed, tho never so innocent, for any private man's security. And this
Presumption is more strong against Mr. H. because he founds that Security,
which he acknowledges to be sufficient in Commonwealths, upon those Punishments
by which the Supreme Powers can restrain all Invaders of other men's Rights; but
it is certain, that no Punishments are inflicted in Civil States, unless
according to the Sentence of some Judges, who always give Sentence according to
this Presumption. This therefore is either a true Presumption, and so able to
direct our Actions in the State of Nature, or else even in Commonwealths there
is not to be found a sufficient security by the Laws made and Punishments
inflicted according to this Presumption; and so neither Civil Laws themselves
do oblige us to outward Acts, and thus every Commonwealth would soon be
dissolved. But since we are satisfied, that public Judgments given according
to this Presumption, do for the most part render men's Lives secure enough, and
certainly much more safe, than if all who are arraigned at the Bar were
presumed to be Enemies, and according to Mr. H's rule of prevention, should be
all forthwith condemned to suffer as guilty; therefore it also follows, that
the private Judgments of particular men concerning others, made according to
this Presumption, do more conduce to the security of all men, than this Authors
rash Presumption of the Universal Pravity of all men, and would thence persuade
us that all others in the State of Nature are to be prevented, and set upon by
force and fraud.

. 10. A second reason to prove, that the violation of the Laws of Nature, as to
outward acts, will procure us less security than their exact observation, may
be drawn from hence, That Mr. H. himself confesses, there will thence
necessarily follow a War of all men against all; which War being once supposed,
he rightly acknowledges, that all men would become miserable, and must
presently perish: From whence it appears, that all security is sought for in
vain, by this mad state; so that there can remain no more hopes of it; tho Mr.
H. teaches otherwise in his de Cive, cap. 5.. 1. and Lev. cap. 13. viz. That in
the mutual fear of men, no body has a better way of security, than by this
anticipation or prevention; that is, every one may endeavor so long to subject
all others by force or fraud, as he sees any man left, of whom he ought to
beware; that is, as long as there is one man left alive; and so the whole earth
would soon become a desert, and the common sepulcher of mankind; for no man can
provide any aid or assistance for himself from other men in this state, because
Covenants of mutual Faith, by which alone others can be joined in Society with
him, will not oblige to external acts in this state, as I have showed he
acknowledges; and therefore there remains no security by this way of
anticipation: So that if there be any security in Nature, I appeal to the
reasons and consciences of men, whether this is not more likely to be had by
the endeavor of the common Good of Mankind, by doing good and not evil to
those who have done us no harm, than by Mr. H.'s method of Anticipation which
can yield no security at all.

PRINCIPLE X.
That the Laws of Nature are alterable at the Will of the Civil Sovereign.

. 1. THis is a natural consequence from what he has already laid down, That
nothing is morally good or evil in the state of Nature, before the Institution
of a Commonwealth. Yet that you may see that I do not impose upon Mr. H. in
this Assertion, I will give you his own words, in his de Cive, cap. 14.. 9, 10.
But because it arises from Civil Laws, that as well every one should have a
proper Right to himself, distinct from that of another, as also that he may be
forbidden to invade other men's Properties, it follows that these Precepts,
Honor thy Parents, Thou shall not defraud any man in that which is appointed
by the Laws; Thou may not kill a man whom the Laws forbid thee to kill; Thou
shall avoid all Carnal Copulation forbidden by the Laws; Thou shall not take
away another man's Goods without his consent; Thou shall not frustrate Laws and
Judgments by false Witness, are all Civil Laws. It is true, the Laws of Nature
prescribe the same things, but immplicity; for the Law of Nature, as is said
before, Cap. 3.. 2. commands Compacts to be observed; and therefore, also to
yield Obedience when Obedience was covenanted; and to abstain from what is
another, when it is defined by the Civil Law, what it is; but all the Subjects
do Covenant from the Constitution oi the Commonwealth, to yield Obedience to
his Commands, who has the supreme Power, that is to the Civil Laws. For the
Law of Nature did oblige in the state of Nature, where first of all where
Nature gave all things to all men, nothing was another, and therefore
impossible to invade it; and in the next place, where all things were common;
therefore also all Carnal Copulations were lawful. Thirdly, Where there was a
state of War, it was then lawful to kill any man. Fourthly, Where all things
were determined by a man's own Judgment, therefore also were the Honors and
Duties due to Fathers. Lastly, Where there were no public Judgments, therefore
there was no need of giving Testimony either true or false; since therefore the
Obligation to observe those Laws, is prior to the Promulgation of them, as
being contained in the very constitution of the Commonwealth, by virtue of this
Law of Nature, which prohibits the violation of Compacts; the Law of Nature
commands all Civil Laws to be observed. For where we are under an Obligation to
Obedience, before we know what will be commanded, we are there universally, and
in all things obliged to obey; from whence it follows, That no Civil Law which
is not made in reproach to God, (in respect of whom, all Commonwealths are not
at their own Disposals, nor can be said to give Laws), cannot be against the
Law of Nature. For although the Law of Nature prohibits Theft, Adultery, etc. Yet
if the Civil Laws should command you to take away any thing from another, or to
lie with any Woman; that is not Theft, Adultery, etc. For the Lacedaemonians of
old, when by a certain Law, they permitted their Boys privately to take away
other people's Goods; they then commanded those Goods not to be the Owners, but
theirs who thus stole them. And therefore such a private taking, was no Theft.
In like manner, the promiscuous Copulation of Sexes amongst the Heathens,
according to their own Laws, were lawful Marriages.

. 2. There is nothing that Mr. H has written more rudely and wickedly, and
wherein he more contradicts himself, than in this Assertion, concerning the
mutability of the Laws of Nature, as to outward Actions; since he himself tells
us immediately after, That the Laws of Nature are immutable and eternal; and
that Injustice, Ingratitude, Arrogance, Pride, Iniquity, Acception of Persons,
and the like, can never be made lawful: for it can never be that War shall
preserve life, and Peace destroy it. But how the Laws of Nature can be
immutable, and yet alterable as to outward Actions, at the Will of the Civil
Sovereign, I cannot comprehend.

But since we have already destroyed those two main Principles introductive to
this, ( viz.) That no Action is good or evil in the state of Nature, till
either the revealed Law of God, or that of the Civil Sovereign has made it so;
and also that the Laws of Nature are not properly Laws in the state of Nature;
Let us now examine the only reason he here gives us for this Assertion, which
is this; That the Law of Nature which prohibits the violation of Compacts,
commands all Civil Laws to be observed; since our Obedience to the Supreme
Powers is one of the first Compacts that men made at the Institution of the
Commonwealth; granting all which to be true, yet was it not absolutely, or in
all things, that this Obedience was promised, but only in such as regard the
public good of the Commonwealth, or tend to the common Good or Preservation of
Mankind; for if the Civil Sovereign should make a Law, that every one might
knock his Father in the Head, when he came to such an Age, and marry his
Mother, or rob any other man, though his dearest Friend, of all the necessaries
of Life: All these wicked Actions will become lawful to be done, nay, every man
were obliged to do them, if the Law of Nature commanded all Civil Laws to be
observed without distinction; but he here tells us, That no Civil Laws can be
against the Law of Nature, which are not made in direct reproach to God. And
upon this Principle no Law can be so, but what directly denies his Existence;
since in his Leviathan, Chapter -- he makes even Idolatry lawful, if it be once
commanded by his infallible Leviathan, the Supreme Power: But if Mr. H. had but
read and considered any ordinary System of Ethics, he would have found, that
it was one of the first Principles in that Science, that the Laws of Nature
(like the moral Virtues) are so nearly linked, and have such an inseparable
dependence upon each other, that the first and prior Laws of Nature can never
be contradicted by the latter, or secondary. And therefore though it is true,
that Compacts are to be observed by the Law of Nature, and that Obedience to
the Commands of the Civil Sovereign, is one of those Compacts which men make
when they institute, and enter into a Commonwealth, or Civil State; yet were
those Promises of Obedience only made concerning such things, which the Laws of
Nature have commanded, or permitted to be done, in order to the common good of
rational Beings. I grant therefore, That the Civil Laws of every Commonwealth,
as they may appoint what outward Rewards or Punishments they please for the
Observation or Transgression of the Law of Nature; and also in order to this
end may ordain what outward Acts shall be called Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc.
yet does it not therefore follow, That they have a Power to alter the Nature of
all moral Actions, and so make a new Law of Nature; though I own they may enlarge
or restrain their exercise in some particular Actions or Instances. But since
this is best cleared by examples, I shall here give you some of each sort.
First, Therefore though our Laws give leave to men to converse alone with married
Women without any Crime, yet in diverse Countries it is not so, But whoever is
found alone in the Company of another man's Wife without his leave, it is
lawful for the Husband to kill them both; because such private Congresses being
esteemed as bad as downright Adultery, the Punishment of it is left as it was
in the state of Nature, to the discretion of the Husband: But does it therefore
follow, That the Supreme Power might make a Law, whereby it may be lawful for a
Husband to kill every man that should but happen to look upon his Wife, because
he may at the same time commit Adultery with her in his heart? So likewise by
our Law, the Husband is to be esteemed the Father of all Children which his
Wife shall bring forth, if he were within the English Dominions at the time
when the Child was Begot, though he were at that same time an Hundred Miles
off, and though the Mother should assure the Child, that not her Husband, but
another man were really his Father; Yet is not such a Child obliged to believe
her, or to pay any Duty or respect to that Person, though he be really his
Father: But will it therefore follow, that the King and Parliament may make a
Law, That no Child whatsoever should Honor and Obey his Parents. But to come
to the Author's last instance of the Lacedemonian Boys; I will not deny but it
might be lawful for the Spartans (as the Egyptians likewise did) to make a Law,
That private Thefts committed without discovery, or violence to men's Persons,
should not only alter the Property in the things stolen, bu also pass
unpunished; since this may very well consist with the Public Peace and safety
of the People, and may also tend to the Public good of the Commonwealth; since
it might not only make men more careful of their Goods, but might also serve to
make those Boys more crafty, secret, and undertaking in greater matters, when
they should come to be men; which as Plutarch tells us, was the main reason why
Licurgus made this Law: But does it therefore follow, that either the
Lacedaemonians or Egyptians might have made it Lawful for Thieves and Robbers to
assault all men's Persons, and take away their Goods by Force, or to Rob men of
those things (such as Food and Raiment) which are absolutely necessary for
Human Life, or that such a Law could ever have been made practicable, or have
been observed, without the absolute dissolution of the Civil Government?
Whereas if Mr. H. had but considered the distinction between that Natural and
Civil Property, which we have made out in the first Chap. of the preceding
Discourse, he had never fallen into this Error, of supposing all Theft or
Robbery whatsoever to become Lawful, if once ordained so by the Supreme Power.

. 3. I shall give you but one instance more from the Laws of our own Kingdom,
by which it is enacted, That whoever shall relieve a way going Beggar, Stat 7.
Jacobi. Cap. 7.
shall forfeit Ten shillings to the Poor of the Parish; which Law was made for
the Public Good, and to prevent Wandering, Idleness, and Beggary in the Poorer
sort of People. But does it therefore follow, that it might be Lawful for the
King and Parliament to make a Law against all Charity, or Relief of the Poor
whatsoever? So that you may see, that no Civil Laws whatsoever, can lay any
obligation upon men's Consciences, but as they either regard the public Good of
the Commonwealth, or the more general good of all Rational Beings.

. 4. But whether Mr. H. fell into this Error for want of a due knowledge and
consideration of this great Law of Nature; or else out of a desire to flatter
all Civil Sovereigns, is hard to determine; though it be very suspicious, that
he did it rather out of design than ignorance; since he teaches us in his de
Cive, and Lev. That Princes being free from all Promises and Compacts to their
Subjects, may dispose of their Lives and Fortunes at their pleasure, and
therefore can do them no injury, though they treat them never so cruelly,
because he is in respect of them still in the state of Nature; by which means
he at once endeavors to destroy all Virtue and Goodness in Princes, and all
Reverence and Respect in the minds of their Subjects; and makes no difference
between a Nero or Caligula, and a Trajan or an Antonine. And consequential to
this, he likewise makes the will of the Supreme Power, though perhaps but one
single man, to be the only measure of Good and Evil, Just and Unjust: So that
whatever he Commands or Forbids, must immediately be looked upon as Good or
Evil, because he has Commanded it, or Forbidden it; by which means, Princes
would have no other Rules left them of their Moral, or Politic Actions, but
their own Arbitrary Humors, or Wills: Which if it were so, men would be in a
much worse condition under the Power of this irresistible Leviathan, than they
were in the state of Nature; since a man is in more danger, as to his Life and
Fortune, who is at the Mercy of one Cruel and unreasonable man, who commands an
Hundred thousand men, than he who was before in danger of the violence of an
Hundred thousand single men in the state of Nature, since it was Lawful for him
to have provided for his own security by combination with others, which in a
Civil state it is upon his Principles unlawful to do; though I confess, not
being true to them, he leaves every man a Right of self-defence, or Resistance,
even under a Civil Government whenever he is strong enough to Rebel, or Resist
the Magistrate, by which means he takes away with one hand, all that he had
before bestowed with the other.

. 5. But I think I have now sufficiently exposed the Falseness, as well as
Wickedness of those Principles: And though I will not be so uncharitable as to
affirm, that either Mr. H., or all his Followers, either did, or would always
act according to them, (yet as Cicero long since observed in his Offices) they
have more reason to thank the natural goodness and generosity of their own
Natures, than the Doctrines they have embraced, if they do not. But if I have
been too tedious in the performance, I hope the Reader will pardon me, if these
pernicious Principles are sufficiently Confuted at last, since it is impossible
for any man to judge of their Truth or Falsehood, without first considering the
Author's Opinion, in his own words, and then strictly examining the reasons he
brings for them; which could not well be contracted into a less compass. But
having not only, I hope, laid foundations for a more solid building in the
precedent Discourse; but also cleared off that Rubbish in this second Part,
that might obstruct its Evidence in the minds of all Candid and indifferent
Readers; I shall therefore beseech God, the great Ruler of men's hearts and
affections, That what we have said in this Treatise, may have that good effect,
as if not to produce, yet at least to increase true Piety toward God, and good
Will and Charity among men.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Baldwin.
STate Tracts: Being a farther Collection of Several Choice Treatises relating
to the Government. From the Year 1660 to 1689. Now Published in a Body to show
the Necessity, and clear the Legality of the Late Revolution, and our present
Happy Settlement, under the Auspicious Reign of Their Majesty's, King William
and Queen Mary.

Mathematical Magic: Or, The Wonders that may be performed by Mechanical
Geometry. In Two Books. Concerning Mechanical Powers, and Motions. Being one of
the most Easy, Pleasant, Useful, (and yet most neglected) part of
Mathematics. Not before treated of in this Language. By I. Wilkins, late Lord
Bishop of Chester. The Fourth Edition.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or a Discourse by way of Dialogue, Whether Monarchy be
Iure Divino: Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and
Modern. Dialogue the First.

Dialogue the Second. Whether there can be made out from the Natural, or
Revealed Law of God, any Succession to Crowns by Divine Right?

Dialogue the Third. Whether Resistance of the Supreme Power by a whole Nation,
or People, in cases of the last Extremity can be Justified by the Law of
Nature, or Rules of the Gospel?

Dialogue the Fourth. Whether Absolute Non-Resistances of the Supreme Powers be
enjoined by the Doctrine of the Gospel, and was the Ancient Practice of the
Primitive Churh, and the constant Doctrine of our Reformed Church of England?

The Speech of the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Stamford, Lord Gray of
Grooby, etc. at the General Quarter Sessions held for the County of Leicester,
at Michaelmas, 1691. His Lordship being made Custos Rotulorum for the said
County by the late Lord Commissioners of the Great Seal.

Truth brought to Light: Or, The History of the First 14 Years of King James
the I. In Four Parts. I. The Happy State of England at His Majesty's Entrance;
The Corruption of it afterward. With the Rise of particular Favorites, and
the Divisions between This and other States abroad. II. The Divorce betwixt the
Lady Francis Howard and Robert Earl of Essex, before the King's Delegates,
authorized under the King's Broad Seal. As also the Arraignment of Sir Iervis
Yelvis, Lieutenant of the Tower, etc. about the Murder of Sir Thomas Overbury,
with all Proceedings thereupon, and the King's gracious Pardon and Favor to
the Countess. III. A Declaration of His Majesty's Revenue since he came to the
Crown of England; with the Annual Issues, Gifts, Pensions, and Extraordinary
Disbursements. IV. The Commissions and Warrants for the burning of two
Heretics, newly revived, with two Pardons, one for Theophilus Higgons, the
other for Sir Eustace Heart.

The Memoirs of Monsieur Deageant: Containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry VI. till the beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richlieu. To which is added a particular Relation
of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the Advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Bukingham's Letter to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that Affair;
which happened the last Years of K. James I. his Reign. Faithfully Translated
out of the French Original.

The Present State of Christendom considered. In Nine Dialogues between, I. The
present Pope Alexander the VIIIth, and Lewis the XIV. II. The Great Duke of
Tuscany, and the Duke of Savoy. III. King James the Second, and the Marescal de
la Fuillade. IV. The Duke of Lorrain, and the Duke of Schomberg. V. The Duke of
Lorrain, and the Elector Palatine. VI. Lewis the XIVth, and the Marquis de
Louvois. VII. The Advoyer of Berne, and the Chief Syndic of Geneva. VIII.
Cardinal Ottoboni, and the Duke de Chaulnes. IX. The Young Prince Abafti, and
Count Teckely.

A New, Plain, Short, and Complete French and English Grammar; whereby the
Learner may attain in few Months to Speak and Write French Correctly, as they
do now in the Court of France. And wherein all that is Dark, Superfluous, and
Deficient in other Grammars, is Plain, Short, and Methodically supplied. Also
very useful to Strangers, that are desirous to learn the English Tongue: For
whose sake is added a Short, but very Exact English Grammar. The Second
Edition. By Peter Berault.


