Tyrconnel's Letter TO THE FRENCH KING, FROM IRELAND.
Licensed August 18. 1690.

Thrice Invincible, Thrice August, and Thrice Christian Majesty,
WHilst for many years the most thinking Statesmen have not been at a loss, nor
altogether in the Dark, when they have considered, That the vast and ^pendious
Growth, and Preparations of the French ^own, must necessarily produce most
Astonishing ^d unaccountable Effects and Revolutions on the ^heatre of the
World: Now is the Time, when ^ur Intrepid Councils, your Irresistible Arms,
your ^fathomable Conduct, and stupendous Alli^ces, are to show themselves in
the Acquest of that ^ory, which must unavoidably be the Consequence of ^ch
Sagacious, Close, and Important Designs.

It is by these Inimitable Methods, that your unri^l'd Majesty has Aggrandiz'd
the Throne of France, ^hilst the immortal Names of Nero and Caligula, ^ll fade
and languish, when that more Tremendous ^le of Lewis the Great shall be
mentioned. The ^ighty Lewis, who sits at the Steerage of the Vni^erse, having
grasped the Power of the Fates in his ^ands, and can sink or swim the trembling
Vessel at ^is Pleasure. This has occasioned some of our Modern Divines to see
the Deity through the Hero, and, with a Flattery beyond any but your own Ab^st
Parasites, give you a Style no less Sacred and ^mmortal, than that of the Gods
of Old; There ^anted nothing but the Assigning Altars, and a Ser^ce, and you
might have sat in the Pantheon, if that ^ompany be not too much beneath your
Standard.

With what polished Foreheads have our Jacobited Clergy, and their inferior
Fry of Kittling Tories made the Coffee-houses and Clubs of the Town, resound
with your unparalleled Victories and Successes? The Glory of your Arms, the
Grandeur of your Empire? The Wealth, Ease, and Luxury of your Vassals, have
been their daily Theams, not omitting the unspeakable Happiness of those that
have put themselves under the Umbrage of your Protection.

O! Had the Courage of their Hands equaled the Rhodomontades of their Tongues,
your Royal Allie, our Abdicating Master had again been Re-instated in the
Throne of Britain, and called his perfidious People to account, for opposing
his Sacred Designs of Restoring Religion to Pristine Paganism; the Monarchy to
an Absolute, Uncontrollable, and Unlimited Sway; and the People to an Orthodox,
Couchant, Bigoted State of Slavery.

But that the Infallible Maxims of Polity, whereby your All-subduing Majesty
arrived to this indisputable Power, may now at length, shine forth in their
Native Luster, and convince the stupid World, how impossible it was for them to
hinder the Accomplishment of your glorious Purposes; I shall with all humble
Reverence, presume to open the sacred Cabinet of your most Christian Intrigues,
that the whole World may see how Unavoidable it is for them to become your
Vassals.

The Foundation of that stupendous Machine upon which the whole Texture of
your Majesty's Glorious Projects have moved, may aptly fall under these four
Considerations, mentioned in the beginning which gives an undeniable
Demonstration of your profound Sagacity, and the great Ascendence you have
acquired over Princes of inferior Allay. I shall touch these in Order, and
speak,

1 First of your Council, which may be divided into two Parts, Simple, and Mixed.

That which I call Simple, is either the uncompounded Advice which is taken
from the mighty Oracles of Cardinal Mazarine's Papers, when the Great Lewis
retires into the Conclave of his Closet to consult his Father, Guardian and
Tutor, who having the Ambition of an Ecclesiastic, and the Subtilty of a
Statesman, easily foresaw, 'twas impossible for France to increase, as long as
that Great Captain, and Politician Cromwell, sat at the Helm of England:
Therefore 'twas necessary to Contract private Alliances with the Exiled
Princes, and to give them such measures, that France might always keep the
Ascendent.

He that considers the state of your Majesty's Kingdom in the Year 60, and the
prodigious Increment it is arrived to since, may easily be satisfied in this.

But the more simple Council is, when your most August Monarchship consults
only your own Will and Pleasure; and then by an Uncontrollable Power, raise an
ARMT to thaw the Snow off the sides of the Alps with their Encampments, whilst
the Vicar General at Rome is compelled to set up the Picture and Hatchment of
your Divinity above that of his Holiness; and by a formal Embassy to
supplicate, That the Trophies of your Glorious Victories may be enclosed from
the public View, least the Inhabitants of Rome fall to their old Excess of
Loyalty, to Deisie their Emperor.

Your mixed Council is such, as of whom it may without Vanity be said, That no
Prince in the World, except the Prince of Darkness himself, ever saw the
Fellows of them: Their Councils so close and dark; Their Designs so
Impenetrable and deep, as if brooded in the Infernal Region: Nor has it been in
the power of your Enemies, with all their Subtilty, to bring their amazing
Projects to Light, 'till they have discovered themselves by the Radiant Beams
of Opulent Cities all on Fire, and Fertile Villages in Blaze. What did they ever
stick at, that might advance the Grandeur of your Throne, and spread your
devouring Legions over the Neighboring Provinces? Have they not precipitated
your Majesty on all those Glorious Enterprises that must render you the most
accomplished of H^roes, and Eternize your Memory in the same fragrant and
immortal Roll with Julian, Tarquin, and Heliogabalus? With what Indefatigable
Zeal have your great Ministers been listing up the Reputation of your Faith and
Veracity, of which the Exiling your Protestant Subjects, and Ravaging the
Territories of you^ Neighbor Princes and Allies, are such standin^
Testimonies, that they have raised Monuments t^ your Fame, that will out-last
your Statues, Pillars, and Triumphal Arches. So that what was onc^ said of your
Neighboring Clergy, may no^ with greater Reason be applied; Clerus Brittanic^
slupor^ Mundi, may very aptly be recorded of you Matchless Council; They are,
like their stupendi^ Master, the Wonder and Astonishment of the rest of
Mankind. And when your Sultanship descen^ to sit in Divan among them, you look
so like the Son of the Sun, or Jupiter Hammon, or what yo^ please, that
compared to your Greatness, all you Predecessors looked but like Tooth-drawers
or Jac^ Puddings.

2. And this, most August Monarch, brings m^ to the second Head (viz.) your
Allies, which speak you no less formidable then your Counci^ If the strength of
a Monarch be to be Calc^lated from the considerableness of his Alliances Those
of the Mighty lewis cannot but speak yo^ Majesty very terrible to the Opposers
of yo^ Greatness; for that, having for many years co^tracted an Amity with your
Brother of the Alcors He has on his part so irrefragably stuck to yo^ powerful
Interest, that it has not only cost t^ displacing one Emperor from the
Throne, but e^dangered the total shaking off the Empire from the present
Sultan: Notwithstanding which, so Inviolab are his Resolutions of preserving
your Majesti^ Friendship, that he prefers it above the Contem^ible Throne of
Mahomet; and there being so gre^ a Resemblance in your Designs, there is no fe^
of his falling off, unless some unhappy Different should arise betwixt the
Musti, and the Arch shop of Paris about Precedence.

Others, which your Immense Wisdom admitted t^ the Honor of your Friendship,
were the two la^ Kings of Great Britain, who likewise postponing a^
Considerations to that of serving your exalted I^terests, gave up themselves
and their Councils to b^ wholly at your Majesty's Disposal. The first of the^
was so entirely devoted to the pursuit of his sens^ Appetites, as if the
Safety, Honor and Wealth of (...) Kingdoms had not appertained to his Care,
but the all the Trust, Power, and Interest he was exalted (...) had been only
entrusted with him to aggrandi^ your sacred Sultanship, and to capacitate your
Majesty for the attaining your vast unbounded Design^ 'Twas this gave the rise
to that mighty Flota, which from your Majesty justly claims the Name of
Invi^cible: This was it, That made him hold the Neighboring Princes in
suspense with Treaties, League^ and pretended Alliances, till your Majesty had
by a^ unpractised Method taken their Provinces, and Te^ritories into your
powerful Protection, and Poss-ss^ And it was this made the Faith and Conduct of
the unw^y Prince of very little Reputation amongst the ^r Potentates of Europe,
as was well and nota^ expressed to your victorious Majesty, upon deli^ing up
the Keys of the City of Ghent, and lay^ them at your Illustrious Feet.

^he last of these by an Act of superlative, inimita^ and unpresidented
Friendship, so absolutely renoun^ all his own Interest to his Crown, and
Kingdoms, (...) he relinquished, and abdicated them All, rather ^n not follow
that incomparable Pattern, your ab^ (...) Majesty had set him, to compel all
his People (...) submit to what Law, and what Religion the un^ing Wisdom of a
Prince, who alone aspired to the ^our of being like your Majesty, should think
fit (...) ^et up. Oh! had his Troops been so good Apostles (...) your Dragoons,
and the Doctrine of Passive Obedience ^n as heartily obeyed, and practiced, as
it was preached, (...) inculcated, what a happy Reformation had been on the
Face of the Earth? How boundless had ^n the Extent of your Glorious Empire? Who
^ld not have been of a Religion recommended (...) the most Christian Monarch?
And why, since ^r Potent Predecessors of Assyria, Persia, Ethiopia, (...) Rome,
and your present Ally at the Port, have ^med to themselves a Power (some of
them) not to determine the Modalities of Worship, but ^r very Gods too; should
the more potent Lewis (...) denied setting up Temples, and Altars to whom (...)
thinks fit; Yea even to your most sacred self, if so Royally inclined? Has not
a late Bishop ^arker Ec^s. Polity.
Empowered the Magistrate to set up any Religion he thinks most agreeable to
the Nature and Ends of ^vernment? and ought such a Glorious Preroga^e to be
parted with? No, farewell Crown! fare^l Dominion! -- It were much better, with
my great ^ster, to be content to keep a Nursing Room, and ^k the Cradle of a
growing Prince at St. Germans, ^n to be head of such a Refractory People.

What Prince in the Universe could ever be hap^r in his Allies? it is in the
Choice of these the ^ustre of your great Wisdom shines to the Admi^ion of all
the Courts in Christendom! Was ever ^ith, was ever Constancy, and Sincerity
like theirs? ^ok into all the other Actions of their Lives, and ^u will find
them bear no proportion with their Fi^ity to your Majesty's most Attractive,
Charming, ^d All-Chaining Interest.

3. A Third head to be spoken to is your Invinci^ Arms, the Terror of which
has put the whole ^orld under Contribution to your matchless Prowess! Are not
the Gates of more Cities opened to your ^oles, than ever were broken open by
your Bombs? ^ave not your Lewi^'s D' or contributed more to your ^ighty
Conquests within, than ever your Batteries, and ^cks could arrive to without!
What General ever ^ounted so succesful an Artillery? These never sail^ Petards
have turned so vastly to your Majesty's Interest; That out of an unexampled
Piece of Pol^ty, your most Christian Majesty has ordered the Coyning-up of
your Houshold-Plate, and the Church-Plate, into Battering Pieces of that Kind:
And having heard of a War maintained by Bodkins, and Thimbles, your Majesty
has resolved to try how a Storm of Cawdle Cups, Candlesticks, Basins, and
Church-Plate will succeed. This unaccountable Stratagem can never fail of
attaining wonders; especially if the Titular Prince of Wales, and the Duke of
Burgundy lead the Van. Of your other Artillery I shall take leave to speak when
there is Occasion.

4. That singular, and auspicious Conduct which has managed, and given
Reputation to all your Majesty's Actions, shall be the last thing I will now
presume to mention, and trouble your Royal Patience withal! And, herein, it
must be acknowledged your Majesty has outdone all former Precedents. Has not
the ever victorious James reduced Ireland? Is not Monsieur Catinat in the
Bowels of Savoy? were not the Dutch Troops all cut to pieces in the Plain of
Flerus, and the English Fleet sunk to the Bottom of the Sea, all but about
Eighty Sail now in quest of the Victorious French Fleet? Are not not all the
Maritime Towns in England burnt, their Country Ravaged, and have given their
late King, Queen, and the Prince of Wales for Hostages, that they will be Loyal
and Obedient Vassals to your Majesty for the future? If this Horour be denied
to your Majesty after so many glorious Efforts of your inimitable Courage, and
Conduct, what can be hoped from a blind, sordid, and ungrateful World?

I am not ignorant the Censorious part of Mankind think, that the equipping the
most Glorious Fleet that ever put to Sea out of the Ports of France, and that
to a Charge so stupendiously great, that it has sunk the mighty Heaps your
Majesty has been for many Years past Ravaging from the rest of Europe; They
think the proligious Charge of that Fleet, and the Army in Ireland have not
been answered by Successes of either. They little consider the Glory that is
acquired by burning the Fisherboats, and Cottages at Tingmouth; and the vast
Reputation Monsieur Lauzun and my self have purchased to our selves by
fortifying Limrick, and Galloway, from whence we have Convenience of Retiring,
when we can stay no longer! And what will their Great Captain and Leaden King
William have Conquered after all the exposing his Person, and fatigue of his
Army, but a bare Skelleton of a Kingdom; a Country despoiled, and depopulated?
And such your great Wisdom has taken Care the French Kingdom shall be, if ever
the Consederate Arms should possess themselves of their Dividents there.

We have not omitted, Mighty Sir, to smoke the Altar of St. Patrick every Day,
and to call upon all our Tutelar Guardians, Male, and Female; but whether they
are so busied in preparing Equipages to grace your solemn Triumphs, or whether
they are resolved your Majesty shall have the Glory of your Acquests entirely
to your self; certain it is we have not been able to prevail with them, to set
one Finger to the work; which makes our Enemies vociferate, as if the Day were
their own: Nothing can give checque to their Insolence, but the Pomps of your
Majesty's Triumphal Medals, Statues, and Arches; and rather than let the Notion
of your Victories yet out of your Peoples heads; had I the Honor to be of your
supreme Divan, my humble Motion should be, that Lustrations, Ovations, and a
General Jubilee should be proclaimed; That if the Enemies Troops come into your
Country, they may find such Marks of Joy and Satisfaction, that may prevail
with them to lay down their Arms, and put themselves under the happy Government
of so clement a Monarch: Or if that shall not prevail with them to omit the
Prosecution of their Revengeful Purposes, How glorious, and unpresidented will
it be for your Invincible Monarchship to expire Phoenix-like in your own Nest
of Spices at Versailes!

To conclude this swelling Paper, How very ^temptible must the great Alexander,
and Caesar, (...) upon themselves to be, when they shall consider much greater
Lewis in all his Glories, amidst Altars, Triumphs, Acclamations and Statues,
sitting down (...) an undisturbed Calmness, like a Roman Deity, ei^ playing a
Game at Cards with Madam Maintini^ his Pompous Trianon, for the next
To-be-conqu^ Kingdom, or else diverting himself amongst his ^ter-works: And
that shall see the Mighty James loa^ with Laurels and Triumphs, forsake his
growing ^tories to come, and shake a Rattle to his Mirac^ Prince at St.
Germains? Who, I say, can behold (...) unexampled Heroes; thus innocently
entertaining th^selves amidst the unintelligible Crowds of their h^ble Adorers?
This, Mighty Conqueror, is the h^piness I most Ambition, and shall take the
first o^portunity to number my self amongst these (...) Throngs: I am,

Most Dread, Your Most Christian Majesty's, TYRCONNEL


London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, in the Old Bailey, 1690


