TWO LETTERS Discovering the Designs of the Late KING JAMES in Ireland. WRITTEN
From a Person of Quality to a Noble Peer sitting in the HOUSE of LORDS.
Licensed Apr. 25. 1689.

Ja. Fraser.

My Lord,
YOU are pleased to lay your Commands upon me, that now and then I should
trouble you with a Letter; nothing can be more forcible on me than your
Lordship's Orders, which I shall for ever think my self obliged to obey as
often as opportunity presents; and indeed, my Lord, I think the occasion of
this is none of the least considerable; it is to give your Lordship an account
of a Discourse that lately happened between my Lord Brittas and Mr. Foleys, the
Minister, one whom I am sure your Lordship knows to be a person of Ingenuity,
Learning, and Integrity.

My Lord Brittas is one of those that attended the late King James into Ireland
from France; Mr. Foley is by his Wife related to my Lord Brittas; soon after my
Lord's Arrival in Ireland, Mr. Foley (who was then there, but is very lately
come to this City) waited on him, and amongst other Discourse told his
Lordship, that he hoped, now the King was come amongst them, that His Majesty
would prevent those grievous Disorders, and some barbarous Inhumanities that
had lately been committed in Ireland to the poor Protestants there; for that
this merciful course of Clemency and Lenity to the Protestants of Ireland
would procure His Majesty a considerable interest in the Hearts and Affections
of his Protestant Subjects in England, by whose means he must expect to be
restored, if ever he regained his Crowns. My Lord Brittas returned this Answer,
Cousin Foley, His Majesty is naturally merciful and compassionate, and
therefore will as much as he can prevent all Injuries to any of his Subjects;
but I can assure you, not out of the design that you mention, of gaining the
Affection of his Protestants in England, and by them of obtaining his Crown;
no, he is wiser than so, ever to trust them; and both his Majesty and all his
Catholic Subjects had rather he should hazard the Loss of all his Crowns, than
come in by their means; for we know well enough the conditions they would
propose to him would be such, that he could not* nor should he keep them; he
designs to regain his Thrones by down right force of the Arms of his Catholic
Subjects, and by assistence from France, and then he will be free from those
Fetters and Chains wherewith his rebellious Protestants would bind him, and may
do what he please.

This, my Lord, I had from Mr. Foley's own Mouth, so that it is unquestionable,
and my Lord Brittas being one of the best scent amongst them, we may thereby
find what their Design is; it is now visibly, no Papist, or no Protestant; and
if at this juncture we fall a quarrelling at home amongst our selves, I think
we are an infatuated Nation, and designed for Ruin, Destruction, and
Desolation: God grant to your great Council Wisdom and Unity, for otherwise the
Nation is lost.

But above all, my Lord, in my poor Judgment, it were expedition that the
Militia should be speedily regulated, and the Country put into a posture of
Defense.

Your Lordship may make the best use you can of the forementioned Story, by
communicating it to those you think fit, only be pleased not to mention my Name
as your Informer.

Your most humble Servant.

THE The Extract of another Letter to the said Noble Peer, By the same Hand.
LEst Jackson omit telling your Lordship one material Passage, I thought fit to
intimate to you, that upon King James's going down to the North to reduce
Londonderry, Mr. d' Avaux advised him to buy the Officers off, and reduce it
that way: We see the French way of besieging Towns is coming in fashion in
Ireland too. The late King has sent hundreds of Commissions to raise Men in
Scotland. The French King has sent with King James into Ireland Four hundred
thousand Crowns, and promised him whatever supplies he shall want, provided he
expend it as he shall direct; and therefore the French King has sent a
Treasurer along with King James, to see that the Money be disbursed according
to his Order. This I have from an undoubted hand.

Chester, Ap. 20. 1689.
LONDON, Printed for James Partridge, and Sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall, 1689.


