TWO LETTERS, The One, Sent by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of
LONDON, To his Excellency, The Lord Genesis Monck, By Their Sword Bearer: Which
Letter was sent in Answer to a Letter formerly published, and sent to the
Common Council by his Excellency.

Delivered to them by Col. Markham, and Col. Atkins.

The other, His Excellencies Answer Thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, 1659.

The Letter of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of
LONDON.
Right Honorable,
WE dare not enter upon the answer to the merits of your Excellencies Letter of
the ^^th of November, which came to our hands the 23d of the same (which was
the first and only that came to us) without Prefacing our hearty, and thankful
admiring and acknowledging the transcendent Mercy of God, in putting into your
Heart those Pious and Noble Resolutions, to appear at such an Exigent to be the
glorious Instrument in his hand, both to Assert and Vindicate the greatest
Interest, both Civil and Religious of these Nations. And next, That your
singular Humility of Spirit, and Affection to this City, in Communicating to us
so early, those your just Resolves, and inviting us to share in the Honor of
Assisting to the obtaining of those great and glorious Ends, in which the
^^ppiness of these Nations in general, and of the City, as a Corporation,
consists.

In all which our Spirits were both enlightened and warmed by a spark from your
zeal, and actuated by God to a present activity in our sphere and capacity in
compliance with your Excellencies advice, as we trust the whole world that has
seen our Actings since the receipt of your Letter, can bear us witness, and
that we hope may be our sufficient plea for pardon for our not returning a more
timely answer to your Excellencies said Letter. But we desire your Excellency
to believe, that was principally retarded by suspicion cast on the
Authentiqueness of it, by those who had the confidence on that score to
imprison the Deliverers, and by the Interposition of the Forces here, and led
out against your Excellency, who lay in the passage to You.

But now (may it please Your Excellency) seeing it has pleased God in some
measure to remove those Obstructions, We presume by this to Assert in Writing,
what We hope all Our Actings, since the Receipt of Your Excellencies Advice,
have evidenced.

That We have cordially concurred with Your Excellency, in disowning the
Author of that Force who in^errupted the Parliament, and ravished the
Birthright of these Nations, by daring to null and make void Acts of
Parliament; and We think, have contributed somewhat by Gods blessing on Our
Counsels, and Actings, to the preventing of the sad consequences of that
exorbitant presumption. How fully and entirely We comply with Your Excellency,
in asserting the Authority and Freedom of Parliaments, and the just Rights and
Liberties of the People, a National Ministry, for the enlightening of the
Ignorant, and suppressing of Atheism, We humbly Refer Your Excellency to Our
enclosed Declaration, and do seriously assure Your Excellency, That We shall
(by Gods assistance) persist faithfully and vigorously in this Good Cause: And
praying God to preserve Your Excellency, and those Noble Commanders with You,
in these Your Just, Honorable, and Christ^^ Undertakings, shall Remain,

Guildhall, London, December. 29. 1659. Your Excellencies Most Affectionate and
Faithful Friends and Servants, The Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council Assembled. In Their Names, and by Their Order, Sadler.
This Letter is Conveyed by the Sword Bearer of London, by the special
Directions of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Court of Common Council.



The Letter of his Excellency, the Lord General MONCK, in Answer to the former
Letter.
My Lord,
I Received a Letter from your Lordship, and the rest of the Common Council, of
the 29th of December, and do humbly thank you for that great esteem which you
are pleased to put upon our poor Endeavors of the Parliaments Army under my
Command, far transcending our Merits and Services. As to those Ends which we
then declared f^r, I bless the Lord I acted Conscience, and I hope we were
found in the way of duty, and are resolved by the grace of God to adhere to
them, having found such wonderful blessings following us in these our just and
honest Undertakings.

As your prudent Counsels and courageous Actings ^ere the great means under God
of restoring this Parliament to its just and lawful Authority, so of the safety
and welfare of the Nations, for which I do for my Self and the rest of the
Officers here, return my very hearty thanks, and we shall have ever cause to
bless the Lord for this great mercy, in putting into your hearts such righteous
and honorable Resolutions, to appear at such a time when our Liberties and
Properties, and all that is dear unto us, even the Ordinances of our blessed
Savior, were in such hazard.

Indeed, it was much in our hopes, that such a glorious City, that had redeemed
themselves from slivery at the price of so much blood and treasure, and had
been the great Instruments in the hand of God for the carrying on the work of
Reformation, and bringing three Nations our of the Captivity of Tyranny and
Arbitrary Government, could not ever consent to such illegal and unjust
proceedings. As we do acknowledge your great activity in promoting those great
ends which we lately represented to you, so we do heartily thank you for the
honor and encouragement which you have been pleased in this your Letter to give
to the Parliaments Army here; for our selves, we having nothing to seek (we
bless the Lord) in all this Affair, but to endeavor the safety and settlement
of these Nations in general, and of the famous City in particular.

We received your enclosed Declaration, and do cheerfully join with you
therein. And I do promise you for the Army under my Command, that they are
resolved (by the assistance of God) to stand by and maintain this present
Parliament, as it sat on October 11. from whom we received our Commissions;
and do hope, that you that have been so eminently Instrumental in their
restoring, will heartily concur with us therein; and shall to the utmost of
our power defend the freedom of successive Parliaments, and the ^^erties
Spiritual and Civil of the People in these Nations, and shall encourage in our
Stations, the Godly and Learned Ministers, and shall continue faithful in this
Good Cause, that the Nations may be stablished in a free Commonwealth, and the
Army kept in due obedience to the Civil Authority.

And as we have experienced the great affection of your City in such a day of
Darkness and great Trial, so we shall ever study to the utmost, to express our
services for you, and shall not think our lives too precious to hazard for your
welfare. I think to wait upon you shortly, and shall reserve those further
acknowledgements to that opportunity, and remain,

New Castle Jan. 6. 1659. Your Lordships very humble Servant. George Monck.


