Medicina Veterum vindicata: OR AN ANSWER To a Book, entitled Medela Medicinae;

In which the ancient Method and Rules are defended, and farther showed, that
there is no such change in the Diseases of this Age, or their Nature in
general, that we should be obliged to an alteration of them.

Against the Calumnies and bitter Invectives of an Author who calls himself M.
N. Med. Londinens. but in his Epistle before a Book, put out by Mr. Bolnest,
gives himself the name of Mar. Nedham.

By John Twysden, Doctor of Physic, and one of the Fellows of the Kings
College of Physicians in Land.

London, Printed by J. G. for John Crook, at the Sign of the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1666.

To the Right Honorable, Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of
England, Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council. AND To the Right Hon. Sir John Keeling, Knight, Lord
Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of King's Bench. The Right Hon. Sir Orlando
Bridgman, Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of
Commonpleas. To the Right Hon. Sir Matthew Hales, Knight, Lord Chief Baron of
His Majesty's Court of Exchequer: With all the rest of the Judges and Barons of
His Majesty's Courts in Westminster.
My Lord, and you, my Lords, the Judges,
BE pleased to give me leave to acquaint your Lordships, that I have not
presumed to present this small Tractate under so noble a Patronage, out of any
worth I conceiv it can draw from the Author, but only what it takes from the
nobleness of the Subject, being the Profession of Physic, a Profession of late
struck at by many Writers, who have not made themselves in any thing more
famous then in their bold Calumnies against those Rules and Method, which more
learned men then themselves have for many Ages thought fit to recommend unto
Posterity. Neither have they rested here, but endeavored to draw His most
Gracious Majesty's concurrence to their undertakings, and by that dangerous way
of innovating through subscriptions of Hands, labored to erect a new Society
of Chemical Physicians in London, in opposition to that Body already settled.

It Is certainly high time to fly to your Lordships for protection, whose
wisdom is discerning enough, and integrity always awake to do justice to our
poor College, especially when His Majesty's Name is like to be traduced, their
Liberties granted by His Charters, and confirmed by Acts of Parliament, in
danger to be infringed, by introducing a Liberty in practicing Physic by every
one shall pretend himself able in that Faculty.

I shall humbly cast my self and what I have written at your Lordships feet,
being in nothing more ambitious then by any act of mine to express the great
Honor I have for all of your learned Profession, and the service I shall ever
readily pay to your Persons, who am,

My Lords, Your Lordships Most humble Servant, JOHN TWYSDEN.

THE PREFACE.
IT will not be amiss to let the Reader understand, that I had not put an end
to the Answer of Medela Medicina, published by M. N. when there came to my
hands a Treatise, made public by one Edward Bolnest, called Medicina
Instaurata, with an Epistolatary Discourse prefixed by the Author of Medela
Medicinae; at the end of this Epistle you have his name, Mar. Nedham: so that
we need no more guess at him who now owns the Name and Book. I have passed my
censure upon the first, and hold it not unprofitable to the Reader to make some
Reflections upon the last. He begins with a commendation of those noble
Preparations, the virtues whereof the Author of that Treatise gives, as he
says, the world some account of; then commends his learning and ability, and
from that one example concludes, that their Society are not a company of
illiterate Professors: 'twould indeed follow, that if there were one learned
man among them, that they were not all illiterate; but, notwithstanding, the
Society might be unlearned, and, as perhaps it will be found, most of them very
ignorant, for denominatio sumitur a majore part. But I had let this pass had
he not made use of this man's parts to upbraid those, that are truly and
deservedly made Doctors in our Universities, by calling them in scorn their
Worships, and Mr. Doctors, telling us of strange Cures every day performed by
their party, with new Medicines and Preparations, which are left as incurable
by Galenick remedies; things false and ridiculous, and with no wise man to gain
credit, till upon a full information of the fact and knowledge of the Medicine,
it might appear to the world to be new, and I believe it would then be found,
that nothing is used by any of that gang but what has been long enough known
to others, and often practiced with various success. But it is with these men as
with your common Fortune Tellers, who upon a good guess are cried up as rare
Artists, when their numerous lies are not taken notice of. So one cure, after
the application of any remedy by these men is by their own Trumpet blown about,
whereas the many killed by their ignorance are not taken notice of. After some
more vain excursions against the unprofitable learning and idle pride of the
Professors of Physic, and the Scholastic way of learning, which must needs
strike at all Universities where it is professed, as he does at that Scarlet
there given them as a badge of their honor, worthily acquired in those places,
interlarding his discourse with disgraceful speeches against Hippocrates and
Galen, whom he calls Dreamers, and a jeer or two against those that were
admitted Fellows of the King's College of Physicians in London, in honorem,
not considering, that unhandsome glances at actions done by Collegiate Bodies,
allowed by the Kings Charter, and established in their Rights by Acts of
Parliament, does obliquely strike at the Founder and Protectors of them: nor
that those preferred by us to that honor were persons most of them of great
desert and knowledge in that Science they before made Profession of, and many
of them dignified with Honourary Titles from the King. He tells you of the
great labor of him and his fellows to erect a new College, (which, by the way,
yet lies in Utopia, or buried in the middle of the Atlantic Sea) to put people
in a ready way of ease and security for their lives and purses; asserting, that
most of the Lords and Noble Gentlemen of learning prefer their way before the
Galenick; and that therefore we cry up our selves also as Chemists, things very
injurious to the whole body of the Nobility and Gentry, out of which I am
confident they cannot pick ten Families that will venture their healths upon
the practice of these Operators (as they call themselves) by Fire, without the
sound advise and judgment of those well skilled in the Dogmatick or Galenick
way. It Is true, Gens humana est novitatis avida, some may be content to hear
them talk and brag of their great feats in Physic, and perhaps to divert
themselves, see some Chemical operations which are delightful enough, and by
these great boasters commended in their effects above the truth. But let these
men be touched with on acute sickness, to whom will they then have recourse I
would gladly know? to these, many of them illiterate pretenders, or to others
of sound judgment and understanding? Experience shows their practice lies
generally among those who frequent Mountebanks Stalls, who for sixpence will
sell them Medicines to cure all diseases. In the next place it is a wrong to
those Physicians that are skilled, as many are, in Chemical operations, as if
they made a pretense of that knowledge, because they saw the other way
deserted; whereas with more reason he ought to believe their study and
knowledge therein proceeded from their consideration, that 'twas a necessary
part of that learning belonged to every Physician, yet not to make the other
despised. From pu ting a scorn upon the Scholastic rode, deriding the Kings
College of London, and slighting Hippocrates and Galen, lest we might judge
nothing left praiseworthy, he falls into the commendation of himself and his
fellow-writer; yet must that be ushered in with a contempt put upon the
Universities, as well foreign as our own, for their easiness to confer Academick
Honors upon undeservers. He tells you they are Vniversity-men, and, no doubt,
paying their Fees may bring their Formalities to London. But that all Academick
Honors, and the Venison that helps to make them, are not worth the loss of one
afternoon in their Laboratory; where they are so employed, that they have not
leisure to cross the Seas, and have the Proverb made good of them, Accipimus
Aurum, dimittimus Asinum. 'Twill certainly be well for the world, when they
shall see this great Harvest, now in expectation from their immense labors,
brought under the Sickle. I wish it may not be verified which is wittily said
by Minsichtus, in his Testamentum Hadrianeum, Stercoreum inveniet qui stercora
seminat arvum: Sow dung, you shall reap muck. But in earnest, Mr. Nedham, are
you not to blame, that at once make all the world your enemies? is it not a
strange piece of ingratitude, that a son should complain of the indulgence of
his mother, when it is applied to himself? If Universities either at home or
abroad have been too easy sometime in conferring degrees, shall any one
matriculated into that University take a liberty to upbraid them for it? Does
the reasons of their actions always appear? Perhaps they may think, and justly,
that ability in other parts of literature may be fitly rewarded with the
Honors due to another Faculty. Perhaps they may discover something that may
promise a future progress worthy that Honor they confer. But in truth, will it
be found so easy? Let him go abroad, perhaps he will find himself deceived. I
never knew any Degree conferred abroad without a previous examination, and
rigid enough, if they believe you intend to profess that Faculty you desire to
be promoted to. Let him then return and desire admittance to the same Degree in
his own University, when he has passed the examination of the Professor in
Physic, the Vice Chancellor, and other Delegates appointed for that Faculty,
and has obtained Certificates from such a number as is designed to attest they
believe him fit to pass; and after all this, shall then come to supplicate the
University for his Degree. Let him lastly come to be admitted as a member of
the College at London, and pass a three months examination by the President and
four Censors, and after this stand the test of all the Fellows met together,
and perhaps he will not find his passage to that Degree, and the accumulations
of it so very easy a matter to pass through. Yet after all these unhandsom
reflections, both upon the men and the Universities which promoted them, we must
believe he despises not Academick Honors, nay, that ours are the most refined
in Europe, and deserve all honor we can give them. This were pretty well from
one that has not leisure to go to them. But we may observe (as it is said of
the Lamprey) a string of poison runs through the body of these words. It Is a
good flower in Rhetoric, often used by Tully in his Orations against Catiline,
Anthony, and other, to reckon up the virtues, parts and abilities of them he
means to destroy, that by laying to view what those virtues should have taught
them to do, their vices might be more conspicuous. Quos laudando maxim
vituperat. The Academick Honors are not to be despised, ours are the most
refined, more wary in distribution of Degrees. But still the body of Practisers
are made up of titular things, foisted up among Foreiners, or else by alliance
at home, the favor or recommendation of some Father, or Uncle, or Cousin
Doctor, that has had a name, though perhaps little more of true knowledge in
Medicine then the Novice he prefers. Great wariness indeed in the Universities
to admit such titular things, but whom has he known by them or the College of
London so admitted? Where is then that great body of Practisers so preferred?
Perhaps he may reflect upon the Bishops and their Chancellors, and their
admittance of persons to practice upon such favor or commendation. If there be
such an abuse by any of them, let them answer for themselves, upon examination
I am confident no such thing will be found. The other mean ways of promoting
their practice from listing themselves in the number of some numerous party,
colloguing with Midwives and Nurses, as I believe them for the generality very
false, so admit them true, yet have they much more honesty then that used by
these new pretenders to advance themselves by defaming all others, nay those
great Masters, to whose labors all the world is beholding, that by this means
they may work upon the credulity of ignorant persons, unable to judge in any
Science, much less in that of Physic.

After this, and an excursion in commendation of himself and Mr. Bolnest, with
a slight neglect put upon others, he falls upon Dr. Sprackling, the Author of
Medela Ignorantiae, whom he scorns to name, lest the world should take notice
of him by this great persons vouchsafing any thing in reply to what he says,
but tells you, he calls him illiterate, (which, by the way, is not applied to
his person but his plea) but if he had done so, Mr. Nedham is not behind-hand,
for within a few lines he reckons him among the slight Fellows that are made
Doctors, talks of other small Beagles and little Doctoral fellows at the Press
ready to open against him, but that neither he nor the Book-buyers shall take
notice of them, in a contest which it rather concerns their grave and formal
Leaders to clear if they can, and the world (as he says) has reason to expect
it from them. And upon the same subject quotes a sentence out of Joseph
Scaliger, who being told that an obscure fellow had written malapertly against
him, expresses himself thus, Mihi relatum fuit Scarabeum quendam contra me
scribere cui respondere neque dignitatis est nec otii. I confess I dislike not
Mr. Nedham's artifice to neglect a reply, to what it may be is not so easily
answered, and that under pretense of giving the obscure Writers some name and
reputation, by this Champions appearing in the lists against them. Did he not
at the same time endeavor to raise to himself some glory and renown by
provoking more learned Pens to write against him? But I presume he will fail in
this particular, and go away with the reward of the poor Vicar, who in the
times of Rebellion got to preach at White-hal before Oliver Cromwell, and there
inveighed bitterly both against him and all the proceedings of those times;
insomuch that Oliver had it in debate to question him for his Sermon, till a
wiser man represented unto him, that he was an obscure person, who endeavored
by this means only to get himself a name and better living from that party
which was loyal to His Majesty, after, it may be, a month or two of
imprisonment; whereas otherwise if he were let alone, the Sermon would die and
the man be forgotten: which counsel was followed with a success according to
that prognostic. But lest our Authar should glory too much in the example of
Joseph Scaliger, and think himself equal to that great man in learning, and
therefore imitate him in his pride in reviling and scorning others, as Mr.
Nedham does: give me leave to tell the Reader the whole story of that passage,
and the occasion of it, which, if this Gentleman's intelligence had not failed
him, he might have applied to himself and eased me. Thus it was: One Thomas
Lidiat, Vicar of a poor Town called Alkerton in Oxfordshire, or the edge of it,
a very learned man, but especially in Chronological learning, happened to put
out a Book de emendatione temporum, much about the same time, yet before that
large one of Scaligers, of the same Title, in which Lidiat falling upon many
Notions that Scaliger had, and differing from him in others, particularly in
the time of the Birth of our Savior, which Lidiat puts four years before
Scaliger; this incited the learned man, wh^ could not well brook a
contradiction, to writ^ an Answer to Lidiat's Book, in which he slights the
poor man, calls him in scorn Anglus homo and nescio quis propheta, with suc^
like scoffs. But soon after Lidiat replies against this Answer, and justifies
himself both solidly and modestly; but whilst this Boo^ was in hand, Scaliger
thought fit to mak^ an Answer, before it came out, in the word quoted by Mr.
Nedham. Other it never had (...) Many thought then and do still, because hi^
reasons were too strong to be refuted. But n^^ long after the poor man lying in
his bed ha^ his house broken, and was himself sore^^ beaten and wounded by
disguised persons, who were never known, nor took thence the value of one
farthing: insomuch that many suspected that usage to come from the forge of
Scaliger, who not being able to answer his reasons, thought fit to be revenged
upon him with clubs. The relation of this last passage I had from the mouth of
a person of great integrity, who saw and spoke with him when his face was
swelled, and ill with the said beating. Let Mr. Nedham take heed that the first
part of this Relation be not applicable to him; and if he shall hereafter think
fit to engage himself farther against Hippocrates, Galen, and all the Ancients,
I should advise him to write in some language that may carry his conceits
beyond our English world, that other Nations may both judge of the
controversy, and either submit to his determination, or vindicate those
Authors, if none in England shall think fit to do it. The rest of his Epistle
is but a short abridgment of what lies scattered in his Book, and is there
spoken to. There only rests now that I should advertise the Reader, that this
Treatise, such as it is, had come out many months sooner, had not the
Visitation by the hand of God hindered the going on of the Press. My absence
upon other occasions, and the Corrector's carelessness have caused some faults
to have escaped the Press, chiefly literal, in the omission of a letter
sometimes in the Greek quotations, other times mis-accenting, sometimes false
spelling; all which the Reader will, I hope, heartily correct, particularly to
blot out the word smattering in the third page, which I assure him was not in
the Copy sent by me to the Press, however it crep^ in, as did also the Titular
Superscriptions i^ some of the leaves of the first and second sheets which I
desire Mr. Nedham as well as the Reader to believe were not my own, who neither
affect lightness nor abuse toward one (...) know not to have ever seen or
spoken with.

Medicina Veterum Vindicata: OR, A JUSTIFICATION Of the Ancient Method OF
PHYSIC.
IN this scribbling Age wherein we live, and in which all men take liberty to
present the world with things unknown, or pretended to be so, to precedent
Ages, I have not observed any Professions more assaulted, by these bold
attempters, than the three most noble, Divinity, Law, and Physic. The first
directing us to a future happiness, as we are men endued with Reason, and an
Immortal Soul. The second, as we are a Society of men to be kept and governed
by such rules and directions, as are fit to preserve the whole in Unity and
Peace with one another. The third, as we are natural bodies, made up of such a
harmony and conjunction of parts, which being fitly united together and so
kept, each of them subservient to the other in their proper Functions, preserve
the whole entire as a fit Instrument for the Soul to exercise her faculties by.

I shall let pass the two first, as not proper to my Profession or undertaking,
but leave it to the sad consideration of those that are expert in those
Professions, if the very foundations, and most received Maxims of them both
have not been struck at by some late pretenders to a greater measure of
knowledge, or revelation, than their Brethren. In Physic, what almost has not
been attempted by confident and over-bold persons, who though they would be
thought Masters of much more knowledge than their neighbors, will yet upon
examination be found not to have peirced so deep as others have, into the right
knowledge and understanding of the first praecognita, without which, it is
impossible to lay any solid foundation, upon which either themselves or others
may safely raise any permanent superstructure? Amongst many, I find none seems
more assured of his cause, than an Anonymous Writer, yet well enough known
under his veil, and is it seems, a person of some (...) understanding in
Physic and other parts of Learning; yet who from some disjoynted passages in
several both Ancient and Modern Writers, and some uncontroverted truths, would
make us believe that the Art of Physic lay sick, and almost desperate, except
supported by his helping hand; but indeed, in stead of a Cordial, presents us a
Purgative potion, which if taken, would soon send her to the grave, and leave
nothing to arise from her ruins but ignorance and contempt. I must however
give him thanks for his pains and labor, Saepe etiam olitor est opportuna
locutus: but truly shall advise none to buy his Medicine, who from some
scattered Collections out of good authors, endeavors to violate the memories of
those noble Artificers, and to shake the foundation which with so much wisdom
has been laid by them, and since happily built upon by others. Perhaps I shall
find it a less easy task to answer him (...), than some man at the first
reading his Book may imagine, and that chiefly for two Reasons.

First, Because it will be always found a more easy task to dispute with any
Adversary, than with him, whose confidence makes him adventure at the denial of
those very Principles upon which the Art is built, and that have passed the
approbation of the learned of many Ages, and that upon full consideration,
and, as most of the world has since judged, a full confutation of what then
was, or since is (for I find little materially new) urged against them; I mean
the composition of bodies from the four. Elements, the doctrine of the Humors,
and the combination of Qualities, of which I shall have occasion to speak
hereafter: because such a man cannot be confuted, without telling over again
those Reasons that induced the Ancients, both to believe them rational, and lay
them down as things fit to be believed; and are like those Eccentrick Circles
and Epicycles in Astronomy, which are not necessarily true, yet serve to
reconcile appearances, and therefore are of equal value, as if they were
undoubtedly so; since by them we are brought to a certain knowledge of that
truth we seek for, at least such a knowledge as the nature of the thing sought
for is capable of.

Secondly, Because I find this Author make use of many laudable sayings, both
of Ancient and Modern Writers, inverting them to clean different senses than
what they were produced for, as I shall in their examination, I hope, make very
manifest. Insomuch that I have very much doubted, whether this Writer be not
somewhat of kind with those persons whom Aristole speaks of in his 30. Problem,
Sect. 1. who being otherwise sober and grave, yet through some passion that
transports them, are taken with such fits and fancies, that it is hard to
distinguish whether they owe this to any acquired indisposition, or rather to a
natural temperature of the body: his words are these, (...) -- (...). And
truly had not this irregular work of his been in some measure of general
concern, I should unwillingly have been drawn to have awaked him out of so
pleasing a rapture; but have allowed him that return which the Emperor (if I
mistake not, Commodus) is reported to have thought him worthy of, who in the
pastime of darting at a Bull, used by the Romans, had unfortunately missed his
mark many times, the Emperor caused money to be given him, with these words,
That it was praiseworthy to be excellently ill.

But let me now come to a little nearer consideration of the book it self, and
in it begin with his first Chapter, whose title is,

That it is for the good of mankind there should be a liberty allowed in the
profession of Physic.

What he means by this equivocal word, Liberty in the Profession of Physic, I
well understand not; it is capable I think but of three interpretations.

The first is, that it should be free for all men to make that their Study and
Profession, and use all reasonable endeavors to make themselves capable of that
faculty.

The second is, a liberty in the examining and judging the dictates of those
went before us, and adhere to them so far as they do to Reason. A liberty in
these two senses, was (that I know of) never denied to any, nor a greater than
this ever contested for by any Learned man. This, and no more will his
quotations out of Galen, Page 3.
out of Langius, my Lord Bacon, and all the rest warrant, who in all their
quotations, and the design of all whose writing was no more than to encourage
all men in the enquiry after truth, and new discoveries thereof, in which he is
so far from having me his adversay, that I shall embrace him and his design,
and approve of them to my utmost power, so that with modesty he propound his
notions, and not magisterially deliver them, as dictates capable from his
single authority and less experience, to overthrow all that has been laid down
before him. But that the overthrow of all before him, is part of his meaning, I
am the rather induced to believe, from his rash censure upon those who did not
at the first proposition embrace the new doctrine of Ticho, Helmont, Harvey,
Quercetane, and others, as you may see from the twelfth Page, to the end of the
first Chapter.

Is not this against his own rule quoted out of my Lord Bacon, p. 6. Antiquity
deserves that men should make a stay a while, and stand thereupon, etc? and
does not he live to see every one of these men possessed of their due honor,
and their truths, such of them as are found to be so, embraced with gladness?
Who is more famous or esteemed all the world over, than the most learned Dr.
Harvey, whose statue set up in the public College, and Anniversary Oration
upon his account will preserve his memory perhaps longer than the numerous more
noble progeny deduced from other branches of that ancient and deserving family,
whose notions have been more improved, and whose writings in their kind more
admired? Why does he so much blame the censure of the Physicians at Paris, upon
the Spagyrical works of Quercetane, when as in truth there was no more than a
prohibition of the use of them, till after a convenient stand made upon them,
they had past their trial, and with their Author, both received, the one as
good Medicines, the other as a learned man? We must allow something to the heat
and passion of men, who being exasperated, have not always that temper and
moderation required; the like may be said to their censure upon Sir Theodore de
Mayern, whose rough language is more condemned than any thing else; and it soon
appeared to the world, what estimation they both deservedly had, and were both
as great admirers and followers of the rational way in the practice of Physic,
as any that went before them. Certainly this Writer, if he have any ingenuity,
cannot but acknowledge, that it is not reasonable to make use of any new remedy,
either Spagyrical or other, whose virtues are not at all known so much as in
basi, until by some convenient experience it had been approved to be effectual
to that end for which it is produced.

As for the purpose, put case some new Plant, Root, or Mineral should be
brought from any Foreign part of the world, or found at home, of which there
were no footsteps to be found in the materiae medica, would not he be a bold
adventurer that should make use of this in Physic, till he were assured it
were not endued with a Noxious, rather than a Medicinal quality? Nay, admit he
were assured, would he condemn all others that came not immediately to the like
assurance, till they might have time to ground it upon some competent
experience? This was the case with Quercetane and other Chemists at the first;
the beginning of which Art (though in it self good and profitable) we must
attribute to that Auri sacra fames. For men having in vain labored from the
Aenigmatical writings of those Philosophers, which are called the Adepti, to
find out that Universal Medicine, which should not only cure all diseases, but
likewise their itch of Gold, by turning all metalls into it, commonly called
the Philosophers stone, were loath, when they saw themselves deceived, to lose
all their labor, but not being able to cure themselves in whole, thought fit to
propound what they had found, as fit Medicines for the cure of diseases, that
by this means they might give a palliative cure to their own covetousness, and
in some measure re-impurse themselves of some part of that expense, they had
been, by cunning knaves, either cheated of, or themselves vainly expended.
Since which time this Art has, I confess, been much cultivated by many Learned
men, and to a much better end. I mean to the advancement of Physic, whose
labors therein deserve their due praise, so as they do not make use of the
Daughter to pluck out the eyes of her Mother; and under pretense of Medicines,
that forsooth must operate by occult qualities, and insensible transpirations,
thrust out of doors all those that operate by those that are known and
discovered, and indeed reduce all the materia medica, to the narrow compass of
the Minerologia; for most of their preparations are out of a few of them, to
wit, Vitriol, Antimony, Saltpeter, Sulphur, Mercury, and perhaps one or two
more; to the end that with the help of three or four bottles carried in their
pocket, they might supply the office of all other remedies used by the
Dogmaticks, as they in reproach style them; whereas in truth I dare confidently
avow, that some of them have as much practiced, and better understand the way
of Chemical preparations, than the ablest of these pretenders do; they differ
only in this, the one makes use of them when his reason and judgment direct
him they may be useful; the other promiscuously and at adventure; whose
argumentations for the most part run thus (especially if at any time they deal
in Vegetables) such and such a Vegetable is good in such a case, being taken
into the body, therefore it shall be much more effectual if it be given in the
Spirit, Salt, Extract, or the like; whereas in truth they are deceived, and
many or most of them operate best, being given in substance, and the body left
to make its own extraction. I shall let pass his immense commendations of
Paracelsus and Van Helmont, whose writings are to my understanding so obscure,
that I shall forbear any censure upon them, till this or some other charitable
person shall make me clearly understand the meaning of them.

I come now to the third and last way of the acceptance of these words,
Liberty in the Profession of Physic. That is, a liberty for all men to profess
and practice it, that will pretend themselves knowing in it, whether Students
in the Art or not; if so, then why not in all other professions whatsoever,
Divinity, Law, Music, etc? a liberty which some of those persons, who call
themselves Gifted Brethren, have endeavored to bring in: Scorners of all
humane Learning, many of which have appeared upon the Stage of late, and whose
dictates must of necessity be admitted upon liberty taken in this sense. Nay
then, why not a liberty in professing all Trades? which must bring a disorder
and confusion upon the whole.

For a liberty of practice in selection of the remedies, the application of
their Medicines, the judging the disease, was never denied to any Physician.
But he that shall more narrowly look into this Writers design, will easily
discover his intention to be to introduce an Empirical way of practice, wherein
the practisers under-borrowed names, such as Kibrick, Azoth, Alkahest, Drif,
and a thousand such used frequently by some of that crew, would make the world
believe themselves Masters of great secrets, which by insensible ways of
operations must cure all diseases, and by that means open a door to ignorance
and pride; for truly what needs any man Study Physiology or Pathology, when at
the first turn he comes to the last round of the ladder, Therapeuticks?

It Is true indeed, they pretend a great deal of Charity to the poor, but the
very plain truth is, it is to themselves, that, by disgracing others, they may
bring custom to their Shops.

I shall not be obliged to use many arguments to prove that this is his main
end. He that shall thoroughly read his Book, will see that poison scattered
through almost every leaf of it. I shall mention some of those passages, to
which peradventure I shall hereafter speak more largely. Page 92. He tells you
much mischief is often done by the use of such Medicines as in the common
opinion have a pasport every where to be employed against the Scurvy, as
Scurvy Grass, Watercresses, and the like; what is this but upon his single
authority, and a freak of his own brain, to shake the use of all Specificks in
others, and yet himself propound no better? and if not he (I am sure most of
that crew) pretend by some one specific Medicine, which forsooth must be held
as a great secret, to cure all diseases.

Page 149. and forward to 153. He falls upon a large commendation of Helmont,
in these words, The most acute and noble Helmont (whose doctrine, so much of it
as he had labored to understand, he could not but admire) and then from his
Authority, and the example of one child so brought up by him, would persuade
the world against bringing up children from the Breast, and have them all
suckled by hand; and this from a conceit, that all the world is infected with
the Pox, Scurvy, and I know not what complication of diseases; whereas in
truth, admitting this were true, twill secure you only against the Nurse (in
the choice of whom commonly great care is taken) and not against the Parents,
from whom is the greatest danger.

Beside, it is observable, that he makes almost, if not all diseases, not only
infectious by taction, but to transmit their poison at a distance by
communication, breathing, and the like; so that upon this account he must bring
the world to a solitary and single conversation, or the matter will not be
helped.

Page 211. He dislikes the distinction of Rational and Empirical, and then
tells you the great benefit he has reaped from the collections made from them
and old Women. I shall transcribe his words, though they are long. But lest you
should think, that I like this Distinction in the common use of it, let me tell
you, that I, who for many years have conversed with such Professors of Physic,
as some in scorn term Empiricks, and observed their various ways, and thought
it no shame to make Collections from them, and from all the Old Women I could
meet with, which pretended to any thing of Physic, could seldom find any of
them so irrational, as not to give some tolerable reason, and so much as
satisfied me, that for the most part they had reason for what they did; and
though perhaps their Discourse came not from them, clothed with such delicate
Terms of Art, as pass current among the Schools, yet giving them some grains of
Allowance, I concluded they spoke reason, and that their Method was right,
because it was sitted to the Medicines they used, and both Method and Medicines
so well agreed as to make Cures in many desperate Cases, left as incurable by
others: And I must profess, that by observing the Practices of these, I have
had opportunities to see more of Nature in her naked appearances and operations
(as to the condition wherein she now stands in this present Age) than ever I
could discover in all the Volumes that I have read. Therefore call men
Empiricks, or what you will, because they are neither graduated nor
incorporated, I shall ever esteem such to be most Rational, as make Art to
follow Nature, rather than strain Nature and her Anomalies to general Rules of
Art, and who seeing Nature degenerated into Extravagancies never known
heretofore, do endeavor to find out new ways and Remedies to deal with her:
which he that adheres to that old Philosophy, which is usually made the
entrance into Physic, will never be able to do.

I confess this Writer has had good luck to receive such light from the
reasoning and receipts of sage women. I have for the best part of twenty years
been perhaps as curious as another in the perusing and examining what I have
met with in that kind from any of them, but could yet either never or very
seldom discover any good thing in any of them, but generally found, they were
the prescriptions of some Physician, which he appointed for some particular
occasion and Patient, and after being transcribed into their receipt books, have
become of universal appointment to all bodies, all constitutions, and all
tempers, which by the Authors thereof were not intended to have their
operations to so large an extent; and hardly one of their Chemical preparations
(but ordinary drinks or decoctions) for which he only contends, and for their
sake would overthrow all other Physic, both in its foundation and method. But
in this place, lest he should seem to speak without book, he draws in
Hippocrates to be of his party. In his PAPAGGELIAI, at the beginning of his
book, where he gives directions to Physicians, how to demean themselves, he
commends ratiocination that is joined with exercitation, (...). then tells you
that Ratiocination is a kind of memory, that compounds and puts together what
are obvious to the Senses. He then soon after has these words, (...): Which
words I must thus render: Simul etiam approbo ratiocinationem, licet ex
fortuito casu originem sumpserit, and impetum vel morbum dirigit methodice ex
apparentibus; his meaning is this, that he approves of their ratiocination,
notwithstanding it had its beginning for some accidental chance, provided their
reason be directed according to the appearances of the disease. Mercurialis
renders the words thus, Collaudo quidem igitur etiam ratiocinationem si ab
experientia principium facit, and comprehensionem ex apparentibus dirigit. The
difference is not great, if by experientia he means casus fortuitus, to wit,
a Medicine found out by chance, for so (...) signifies, and was taken up by
Empiricks for any Medicine they fell upon by chance or accident, so that
experientia is by Mercurialis no more but (...) a trial, and by comprehensio,
he understands that lapsus or impetus, by which the man is overtaken, for so
the word (...) signifies, or a disease. Then after the interposition of some
lines, he tells you, (...): That is, that a garrulous asseveration is unsafe
and subject to error; he subjoyns those words quoted by our Author, (...). That
a Physician should not be backward to hear the discourses of ignorant persons,
if they knew any thing profitable for the cure of the disease. So that it is
clear, that Hippocrates here joins Empirical Medicines with Rational
discourses, tells you that reason is to compound and assume one thing after
another, that being divided garrulous asseverations are unsafe and erroneous,
whereas our Author dislikes the distinction between Rational and Empirical, and
undoubtedly would reduce all Physic to the last, to wit, of hazardous trials
grounded upon every man's fancy and humor, and the application of all Medicines
to all at random.

What Hippocrates advises all Physicians in this, will willingly be allowed:
Why do we otherwise read books stuffed with Medicines and Receipts, but that we
might ground our selves upon the experience of others, and then use our own
reason and judgment.

Page 14. He tells us that Regius has reduced all Physic unto the knowledge
and curation of diseases; whereas it is evident that Regius under the knowledge
of diseases comprehends all Physiology; and though he disapprove the common
doctrine of the manner of the composition of bodies by the four Elements, yet
he lays down another kind of Philosophy, following the Method of Descartes; and
whosoever shall read him will find the knowledge of his Physiology will be as
necessary to the right judging diseases, as that of the Ancients is by others
now esteemed; and though peradventure the knowledge what the disease is with
which a Patient may be troubled, may many times be obvious to the Standers by,
as where an intense heat, a high water, and a quick pulse meet, it is ordinarily
judged that a Fever is there (for which part of knowledge they are yet
beholding to the preceding directions of Physicians, and the often return of
like sicknesses) yet what kind of Fever it is, whether boni or mali moris,
whether Idiopathical, or Symptomatical, upon what accident it did invade the
body, requires many times the use of our best reason, and not presently upon
the knowledge of it run upon the general cure of a Fever, as this man aims at
by his so much commending Ignorance and Empiricks.

Page 17. He tells you Fernelius speaks but lightly of Anatomy; and in another
place Galen of Herbs. It Is true Plantius tells you in the life of Fernelius,
that he disliked those that did ad extremum usque senium desudare in evolvendis
anatomicis libris and in cognoscendis simplicibus medicamentis, nullum interim
aegrum inspicientes nec quae a veteribus prodita sunt in aegris observantes. He
dislikes the spending a man's whole time in reading Anatomy, of which he says
there are as many and as discrepant, as there are diseases; and spending your
whole time in that employment without visiting the sick, and taking notice of
the observations of the Ancients; but advises you to read diligently some one
of the best, both in Anatomy and re herbaria, since a man's life is not
sufficient to read all men. What slighting is here of Anatomy, of which he
himself writ a Tractate? It Is true he advises men not to lose the end of
Physic, the easing of sick persons, by standing altogether upon circumstances
and things precedaneous to it. I need not here enlarge my self in the
commendation and necessary knowledge of Anatomy, every days experience makes it
evident that he that goes about the cure of diseases, without a competent
knowledge thereof, goes wildly and absurdly to work; which way had Galen cured a
lame foot, by applying his Medicines to the back, had he not known that the
Nerves that run down from the sixth Vertebre of the spina dorsi, had there their
rise? How can any Surgeon with safty so much as let blood, or make an issue,
that knows not how the Arteries, Tendons, and Muskles lie? And certainly the
Art is exceedingly beholding to those persons, whose industry and inclination
gives them time and will to enquire more curiously into these things.

He that shall read Harveys works, Dr. Glissons Book de anat. hepatis, Dr.
Wharton de glandulis, Pecket de vasis chiliferis, and others, will find how
much the world is beholding to them for their pains therein, and the Art
enriched by their discoveries. I must needs say of Anatomy and Botanicks, what
I have often thought of the general Study of the Mathematics. Without the
knowledge of Astronomy we should in a short time lose the account of Time,
Navigation, the knowledge of the Stars, the foretelling Eclipses and many other
things of most necessary use would be soon lost with mankind. So without
Geometry, the measure of all things would be forgotten, Surveying,
Architecture, both Civil and Military, and many other things, insomuch, that
were their knowledge of as particular an use, as it is of general concernment,
those professions must be the only rich and admired of the world. But the
misery is, that the Learning of some few men in those Studies, is able to
supply the necessities of a whole Nation. It Is just so in Anatomy and Botanicks;
the curious and useful speculations of some few, are able to give a competent
stock of knowledge to all others, without wholly taking them off from their
more necessary employment in the cure of diseases.

It shall suffice to have marked these things in transitu, by which it may
appear how unjust his dislike of that distinction of Rational and Empirical is,
and may serve to show the venom that lies scattered through his whole Book,
and ease me of some labor hereafter in the answering the rest of it; and having
thus showed you what liberty in the profession of Physic was taken by the
Ancients, and allowed by all others; and how unjust and noxious to mankind an
Empirical and Tentative way is, I might here make an end of the consideration
of his first Chapter, did he not call me into the lists again from a new
Topic, not yet by me taken notice of, though at the very beginning, That it is a
matter out question, that diseases of this present time are of another nature
than they were in former times (and undertakes to prove this) and if that be
once proved, then it cannot be denied, we must proceed by other definitions of
their nature, and indagations of their causes, and invent other remedies,
reasons, and rules of curation, than have been delivered by the Ancients. I
must acknowledge, hoc magnum quid sonat, if he make this good, he and I must
shake hands, and be no more adversaries. Let me examine his words; Of another
nature. By nature here he cannot understand some circumstantial change or
alteration in the subject; as for the purpose, a Fever in Peter may differ from
that of Paul; for this will not put us to new Definitions, new indagations, new
Aphorisms, new precepts, and in sum, of a general new Method, and he cannot be
ignorant of that trite Maxim, aliud est curare morbum, aliud curare Petrum and
Paulum. He must therefore understand, that either those diseases which were
known to the Ancients, are wholly lost in the world, and New sprung up again in
their room, or that those which were known heretofore, are now quite changed to
another sort and nature. I ask therefore, whether Apoplexies, Fevers, Catarrhs,
Epilepsies, diseases of the Ears, Eyes, Teeth, and all other treated of by
Hippocrates, Galen, Avicenna, and the rest, and now frequently invade mankind,
stand in need of new Definitions and new Curations from any alteration of their
nature? If he say yes, I then ask from what cause this change can come? for if
the Disease be in this manner altered in nature, it must necessarily follow
that the Bodies of all Men and Beasts which are the subjects of them are
altered in their nature, as it must likewise follow, that all Meats, Drinks,
Fruits, Herbs, and all things that serve for the nourishment of mankind are
altered likewise in their nature: for it is unreasonable to believe that the
same natural agent does not act alike at all times, caeteris paribus, and
consequently, that all distempers that arise from the inordinate use of those
things that should nourish the body, or from any other disorder in the use of
the six natural things, are the same still, not altered in their nature, and so
not standing in need of new Definitions, etc.

Nay would it not be considered whether this new Doctrine does not introduce a
Transmutation of Species? for perhaps it will be as easy to change the Species
of mankind, as his Nature, and so a Man's body become that of an Ass, as
Pythagoras thought of the Soul. Does he mean that many persons now adays in
respect of the Complication of one disease with another, require a different
way of treating them than formerly they ought to have had in the same cases? If
he mean so, it is absolutely false: for where there is the same Complication, the
same method in the cure which has been successfully used heretofore, may
undoubtedly be used again. But in this I would not be mistaken, as if we were
necessitated to tread in the steps of our Ancestors in the use of those very
Remedies by them prescribed (which this Author would fain persuade us, is the
opinion of the Dogmaticks) since never any diseases (I believe) either simple
or complicate, did twice so correspond in every circumstance to any
observation, that there was not latitude enough left to the Physician to make
use of his best Judgment and Reason in the selection of his remedies, and
attempering them to the disposition and constitution of his Patient.

Or lastly, is it his intention to show, that in this last Age of the world,
there is a Complication of many new diseases not known to the Ancients, and now
generally raging? This seems probable to be some part of his meaning from the
whole scope of his three next Chapters, chiefly the fourth, where he endeavors
to show, that there is now a complication of the Lues venerea, Scorbute,
vermination, etc. and I know not what fermentation and seminal productions
contracted either from new disorders, or brought by contagion from our Parents,
which quite alter the nature of diseases

Should all this be granted him, of which there is not one part but is
questionable; for he cannot but know that many grave Authors are of opinion,
that the Scorbute and Pox were both known to the Ancients as well as
Vermination; he would from hence obtain no more than that liberty which
Hippocrates took, and was never denied, to make use of his own judgment, as
well in discerning as curing diseases. Neither have the late discoveries of the
Motion of the heart, Circulation of the blood, the use of the parts ordained
for the distribution of the Chile over the body, and the Sanguification of it,
any whit changed the nature of the diseases formerly known, or altered the
method of their cure. As for the purpose, put case the Ancients mistook much in
the office of the Liver, but found among many other, that Agrimony was very
effectual in the cure of many diseases, whose seat they took to be there,
called them Hepatick Herbs, which perhaps performed their office by deputing
the blood, which was carried to the Heart another way, and might therefore more
rationally have been called Cardiacal; does it hence follow, that their virtue
is different in the cure of those diseases that are still the same, though
peradventure we have been deceived in their seats?

But after this it may perhaps be said, that those diseases that have by the
ancient method been taken away by Evacuation, viz. Purging, Bleeding, Sweating,
Urine, or the like, may be taken away by some other way, different from any of
those mentioned before, that is to say, by some Universal Medicine, of so great
Analogy with the natural Balsame of the body, that the Disease shall be taken
away by an insensible way of operation, which shall require none of the
forementioned helps to be used. This indeed was Helmonts way, who by his
Alkahest and Alterative, would cure most diseases without Bleeding, and seems
to be the mind of this Author too, who Page 46. tells you, he would write a
treatise of the mischief done by bleeding in most diseases. Truly, if such an
Universal Medicine be in nature, the Art would be extremely beholding to that
man should discover it to the benefit of mankind.

But yet let him, who ever he be, consider, that this is not yet enough to
alter the ancient tried method, practiced for many Ages, though it be another
different from it; because there may be, and perhaps are, several ways of
bringing to pass the same effect or end. If a man shall tell you by experience,
and many years travel, he has found it a good way from London to York to go by
Lincoln, another by Nottingham, is the way to York altered by the one or the
other method of bringing you thither? Just so it is with this great Pretender,
the nature of diseases is altered, new indagations, new causes, Page 2. Page
237, 238.
new cures must be found. Physic must be rebuilt from the very ground, and
have a new foundation, the Philosophical principles false, etc. In his seventh
Chapter at large. So that we must cast off whatever our Reason and Judgment
has found profitable in the cure of diseases, and preserving the health of
mankind, and all this upon his bare testimony and unknown method, not backed
with the authority of one Age. A man meets with a Porter heavily burdened,
tells him, Friend, I see you laden, and faint under your burden, I have an
invention that if you put it upon your back will make your burden seem
lighter. Another tells him, Friend, I see you laden, I will take part of your
burden from you, and then you will easily master the rest; which of the two is
likeliest to gain credit? The case is alike. A sick man troubled with a
Calenture, Pleurisy, or the like, in which the blood being inflamed, disorders
the whole. One tells him, Sir, I have an Alterative Medicine will cure this
distemper, as I have often tried by experience, without Bleeding, or any other
expense of time or Physic; another tells him, Sir, many hundred years
experience evince, that by Bleeding, this disease of yours may be cured, and
the other method is not more certain than this, and not backed with the like
experience. Were he not mad should relinquish the first for the second? I very
well remember a learned Physician, in a part of France where I then was, who
upon the reading Van Helmont de Febribus, resolved to quit the Ancient, and
follow his New way by Alterative Medicines to cure all Fevers he there met with
without letting his Patients blood; but 'twas accordingly observed, that in the
space of six months, more had dyed under his hand, than he had been observed
to have cured in many years before.

Forestus tells you in his observations de Febre quartana, of one in Delf, as I
remember, that having been troubled a whole year with a Quartane, and in vain
used the assistance of the ablest Physicians, was thus cured by an Empirick, He
was advised to drink about a quart of very strong wine just when he expected
his fit, and then to anoint his body all over with butter, and roast himself
by a fire, enduring as much heat as he could possible. This Medicine cured him,
and made him very jocund, and himself now become the ablest Physician for that
disease in the world. It fell out, the next fall of the leaf his Ague returned,
and he to his Medicine, but instead of being cured, was found dead the next
morning; the Observer has this note upon it, that the Humor being the first
time by much use of Physic, rationally applied, well prepared, might give way
to that violent remedy, which it would not do the second time when it was crude
and unprepared. So fallacious and uncertain are their new ways, where the
Ancient Method is rejected for another not more certain and less reasonable. We
have lately seen how dangerous it is to shake foundations without erecting more
firm in their room; and I wish these new Undertakers would before they
discountenance the old, set us up a new body of Physic that might as well
satisfy our judgments as tie our hands. But I have yet never been so happy to
meet with two of them that agreed in the same Method, but every one pretended
himself to be the most skillful and possessed of the most Universal Medicine of
any other. One pretends to have an Universal Powder, another a Salt, another an
Oil, a fourth a Spirit, and he that is possessed of one of these, shall
generally as much decry all the rest, as they shall all agree to deery the
Rational Physicians, when in truth their aim is to cure only their own
Covetousness, that by disgracing others they might set up themselves.

Immediately after his demand of liberty of profession of Physic, from the
alteration and change of the nature of Diseases, he falls upon Hippocrates,
tells you, he took a liberty by strength of Reason to judge and condemn the
opinions and practices of such as went before him. That he writ a body of
Physic I allow, and such a one as has been approved by the whole world, but
that he condemns the opinions and practices of such as went before, this
confident Assertor should have done well to have showed us, till when this must
be looked upon as a Calumny he makes use of to fit his turn, for his greater end
of disgracing the Art of Physic, except one of his own setting up; then he
goes on and says, He may be called the Father of the four Elements, and of the
four fancies called Humors; which our Hippocrates (as some call him) Doctor
Harvey approves not, and allows but one. How heartily he dealt with the old
Hippocrates, we have had occasion to speak before; let us now see if he deal
any better with the New one, as he terms him. He, after he had in his 50.
Exercitation asserted against Aristotle, that the Blood, and not the Heart, was
Prima particula genitalis, itaque neque Aristoteli ipsi assentiri possum qui
Cor esse particulam hanc primam genitalem and animatam statuit; in his 51.
Exercitation he handles it as it is pars principalis, shows, that before any
thing else of the body is discernable, that the Blood has both its birth and
increase, backs this with the authority of Aristotle (of whom, by the way, no
man was a greater admirer than Dr. Harvey, who has often to my self said, who
had the honor to know him many years, that he was the most rational and acute
Philosopher that ever lived, that his writings were near divine, that he never
met with any thing in Philosophy, of which he met not some track in him)
Aristotle I say in his book De histor. anim. cap. 19. has these words, (...).

That the blood always beats in the veins of living creatures; that it is the
only humor that disperseth it self all over the body, and always lives as long
as the body lives. That it is first begot in the heart before the living
creature is perfected. After this he falls upon that controversy, whether the
office of the Blood be only for the Aliment of the body, says, Aristotle, and
all the School affirm it. The words, though long, I must transcribe. Nec de
alter a controversia (number sanguis sc. nutriendo solum corpori inserviat?) hic
anxie disputandi locus est. Aristoteles quidem plurimis in locis sanguinem esse
ultimum alimentum contendit, eidemque tota medicorum schola suffragatur.
Plurima tamen explicatu ardua maleque cohaerentia hanc illorum sententiam
consequuntur. Cum enim Medici in Physiologicis suis agunt de Sanguine, atque
hunc solum ejus usum, and finem docent ut alimentum corpori suppeditet; eum ex
quatuor succis seu humoribus compohunt; argumentum ejus rei a quatuor humorum
combinationibus deducentes, ac proinde asserunt massam sanguinis ex utraque
bile (flava nempe and atra) pituita and sanguine proprie dicto componi: Ideoque
quatuor humorum genera recensent; quorum frigidus and humidus Pituita dicitur,
frigidus and siccus Melancholia: calidus and siccus Bilis, denique calidus and
humidus Sanguis nominatur. Porro ex singulis eorum generibus alios Nutritios
(unde totum corpus constet) Excrementitios alios statuunt. Praeterea ex
nutritiis illis (seu partibus heterogeneis) Sanguinem constare autumant, ita
tamen ut Pituita sit pars crudior, quam calor nativus validior possit in
Sanguinem laudabilem convertere. Bilem vero in Sanguinem transire posse negant,
licet Sanguinem facile in Bilem atque hanc in Melancholiam (nempe a caloris
concoquentis excessu) mutari, affirment.

Quae si vera sunt, nullusque in iis regressus conceditur; scil. de Melancholia
in Bilem, de Bile in Sanguinem: oportet fateantur dictos omnes succos esse in
ordine ad Melancholiam, atque hanc esse principale, and maxim concoctum
nutrimentum. Quin etiam duplicem Sanguinem agnoscant necesse est: nempe totam
simul in venis massam, ex quatuor illis humoribus compositam, and partem ejus
puriorem, florentiorem, magisque spiritalem, quam strictiori sensu Sanguinem
nominant, quamque aliqui in arteriis separatim contineri contendunt. Ideoque ex
eorum sententia Sanguis purus non est alimentum, sed commixti succi, sive
potius Melancholia, ad quam tandem reliqui humores pertendunt. The question he
handles in this is nothing at all concerning the number of the Humors, but
whether the Blood serve only for the nourishment of the body, and whether it
be the last aliment; tells you, that the whole School of Philosophers and
Physicians affirm it; tells you, there are some things hard to be explained;
says, that Physicians who make its office be to supply nourishment to the
body, compose it of the four Humors, Pituitose, Choler Yellow and Black, and
Blood, to wit pure; that those Humors cannot have any return unto Blood, though
the Blood may easily be changed into Choler, and that into Melancholy; and then
assumes, If these things be so, and that it be true that there be no regress
from any of the Humors into pure Blood again (neither of which he positively
affirms) that these things will then follow, that Melancholy is the most
concocted nutriment; and next, that there are two sorts of Blood, one most
pure, the other composed of the four Humors; and that pure Blood is not alone
the aliment of the body, but the commixed Humors, or rather Melancholy, to
which the other tend. I confess I see not here nec volam nec vestigium of the
denial of the Humors, nor any absurdity, either in the affirmation of the
Schools, or incoherence in his assumption from what they say. He that says,
that Blood consisting of the four Humors, does supply the ultimum alimentum to
the body, does not say any one alone of them separated from the rest does
supply any aliment at all, no more than he that shall say Bread does nourish,
is bound to affirm that any one constitutive part of it, or any res contenta in
it separated from re composita, does so; for that may be true in toto
composito, which is not true in any one of its parts separated from the rest;
so that that part of Dr. Harveys assumption will be easily granted, that Pure
Blood alone is no nutriment to the body, but the whole mass as it is conjoined
with the Humors, that is, as he calls them, the commixti succi.

In the next place he does truly assume, that if there be no regress of any of
the Humors into Blood back again, and that Melancholy be the last, it will
truly follow, that it is the most concocted, but not that it is the best
concocted, for it is over baked, (nempe ex caloris consequentis excessu) so not
the principal and chiefest nutriment, as he seems to affirm, though it be the
last acc. to Aristotle, but does not follow from the Opinion laid down by the
Schools. But pray what is here against the Four Humors? Does he that says
Melancholy is the last and most concocted, and to which the other Humors seem
to tend; does he say, there is but one, (nay, does he not the contrary rather?)
Or if they tend to that Humor, do they tend thither to be swallowed up by it,
or as they may stand together in composito? Yet by the way it is to be observed,
that neither Dr. Harvey, or any other, by Composition do understand the Humors
to be Principia Sanguinis, for that were to confound them with the Elements;
whereas they knew, or at least thought they did so, that every one of those
Humors were compounded of the four Elements, and were Mixed bodies: but by
Composition they understood only they were there, or things contained in the
whole. So that for ought I see, the later Hippocrates does not at all fight
against the first, but leaves him to justify himself upon his own Reasons
largely deduced in his Book, PEPI PHYSIOS ANTHPOPOY, which Book I wish this
Author had well read before he had taken upon himself the liberty to call the
Four Humors Fancies, or any book of Hippocrates Vain, as he does that learned
book of his (...), page 243. and in another commends that saying of Helmont,
who calls Galen the great Corrupter of so much as was tolerable in Hippocrates;
Page 240.
words too big for the mouth of such a Mushrom as he is in respect of Galen in
all parts of Learning: but I shall only say this of him, that it is much easier
to revile a man that is dead, than to have met him in the Schools living.

I might here very well take occasion to examine the ancient Doctrine both of
the Composition of bodies out of the four Elements, as that of the Humor and
Combination of the four Qualities, but that I shall have a sitter opportunity
for that purpose, when I come to examine his Seventh Chapter.

The Examination of his Second, Third, and Fourth Chapters.
I Shall consider these Chapters together, because their Subjects are not much
different, being only subservient to prove the necessary alteration of the
Precepts of the old Physic, and the pulling up the Foundations thereof, from
the alteration of Diseases now from what they were anciently, and that in
respect of Worms, (that of Worms I shall consider in the first Chapter) Fevers,
Women's diseases, the Scorbute, Pox, and some other. In which I would have it
observed, that if he had done all this he pretends, yet the Shoe would be too
short for his foot, since these Diseases would still remain the same in their
nature, and the alterations require only a difference of Remedies in their
Composition, not either in their substance or nature, and so would not put us
to new Precepts and new Foundations, but only to raise some Superstructure
upon the old. But I believe we shall find him fail in all his attempts.

His first instance is in Agues. These, he tells you, give the baffle to
Physicians, being distempers quite of another nature, insomuch that the old
Rules and Remedies for the curing them are quite out of doors, seldom doing
good, but generally hurt: as for instance, Bloodletting, which should we in
these days administer in all Putrid Fevers, (as Galen directs, and too many
follow) we should make mad work with our Patients, etc. And then has a fling
at Avicenna, who gives the same precept if the Urine be thick and red. Against
all these Directions of the Ancients he only opposes a new sort of Quartan in
the year 1662, which had tokens of Malignity, and some others in the years 1657
and 1658. both in the Spring and Fall of the year, and in the Autumnal quarter
of the other; in which are these words, Page 30.
Whereas I have observed generally in former years, (and particularly in this
Spring) that bodies either ill-habited or scorbutically inclined, being
phlebotomiz'd for Agues, have grown very much worse upon it, etc. -- Then
follows a mis-translation of Sennertus his words, Plurimae febres quae hic
aegros infestant, omnes notas febrium a Graecis and Arabibus descriptas non
obtinent: by him thus rendered; Most Agues which insest men in this age, do not
agree with the description of Agues made by the Greeks and Arabians. Very good.
For the first part of it, viz. that Agues are altered, we have his word and
observations in the years before mentioned, that the ancient Remedies generally
hurt, particularly Bloodletting, as he generally observed in former years, and
particularly in this Spring. To this I need make no other Reply, than that
other Practisers, as much in credit, and far more judicious, have not made the
like observatitions; that if he has found Bloodletting so dangerous in his
Patients, he ought rather to mistrust his own preposterous application of that
remedy, without preparation of the Peccant humor before hand, if the Fever
were free from Malignity; if Malign, perhaps his using that remedy after the
Malignant humor was too much dissused, by which the veins being emptied, drew
poison instead of good blood from the greater vessels, and so transfused the
Malignity all over the body more than it was before; with many other cautions
fit to be observed. In the Precepts of the Ancients two things are to be taken
notice of; First, that they are given as Directions to Physicians, not
Mountebanks; that the first shall seldom miss, the last as rarely hit, in the
pursuit of them. Secondly, that as to the matter of Bleeding, we are to
consider that they framed their directions according to the constitution of the
Inhabitants in those Countries, where generally drinking Wine, their bodies
were more easily inflamed. I wish this London-Physician would travel over
Spain, Italy, France, and other hot Countries, and see how many Proselytes he
shall gain unto this new Doctrine: if I be not deceived, he will find himself
laughed to scorn. Nay, in our own colder Country, I am very confident that
remedy of Bleeding in persons Scorbutically inclined has been many times
succesfully made use of. I love not to brag of my own Knowledge or Practice in
Physic, I know they are both very inconsiderable in respect of many others;
yet this I must avow, that I was a Practiser in those very years by him
mentioned, have had to do with some Aguish and Scorbutical persons, and in some
have let blood, in others forborne, as my Judgment led me, but never had that
misfortune to turn a Tertian into a Quotidian or tedious Quartan. But lest he
should be fully without show of Authority, he rather chooses to mis-allege
Sennertus, whom he makes to say that most of the Agues now adays agree not with
those described by the Greeks and Arabians; whereas he says only, that Agues
now a days have not all those marks that are recounted by the Greeks and
Arabians: there is a great difference between not having at all, and not having
all. Does he believe that their Descriptions were made upon the disease of one
or many men? or did he ever know that all the marks of any one Disease were at
any one time found in the same man? Let him take for pattern the Scorbute, and
tell me whether he ever found all the signs described by Engalenus, Reusnerus,
Sennertus, Johnstonus, Riverius, and others, in any one man. Does he not know
that some Agues are exquisite, some bastard, and sometime complicated, and so
all the Marks never or rarely to be expected to meet in any man? It Is enough
that the signa idiopathica are found. When found he in an Intermittent Ague,
where there was not a preternatural Heat, an inordinate Pulse, or Horror, or
some one of these, if perhaps the Urine might deceive him?

His next step is to show there is a great alteration as to the severe Symptoms
now happening to Women in their several Diseases; but this he passes over
without giving any reason, so shall I by the bare denial of it; not but that
it is very easy to show that most of what happens now to any of that Sex, has
formerly been upon them with as great severity.

The French Pox comes in the next place, much altered, he tells, from what
'twas at first; but as it appears by all his Quotations out of Fracastorius,
Fernelius, and Sennertus, less malignant than at the beginning, and now
frequently taken by Contagion without any act of Coition: then he instances in
the Scorbute and Rickets. Admit all these had those variations and alterations
he contends for, what is this to the overthrow of Physic, and the Precepts of
it? Either these Diseases are new, or old; if new, as some hold the two first,
others doubt, certainly we shall only need Descriptions of these Diseases, and
Methods to cure them, which the Ancients could not give if they knew not the
Diseases in so particular a manner. Yet will not the general method of curing
Diseases teach us to judge of the Parts affected, the seat of the Disease, and
so apply Remedies? How was the Cure at first found? by Revelation, or
reasonable Discourse by Learned men among themselves, and then Experience
grounded upon Reason? Lastly, if the two first of these Diseases were unknown,
the first in Europe till the Spaniard brought it from the Indies to Naples, and
infected the French Army in the year 1590; the later a Disease peculiar to
Islands, and probably first brought in by Seamen, used to hard and salt meats:
does it thence follow, that no men knew them till we did here? Sen. de lue Ven
c. p. 1.
Was the Pox new to the Indies who gave it the Spaniards, how then had they so
readily the cure of it? No certainly; 'twas of standing long enough there, and
perhaps upon good examination will prove to have been in those hot parts but a
kind of gentle Leprosy or dry Scab. Very much of kind with this is the
Scorbute, and but four years difference in their birth, the first being a
stranger in Europe till about the year 1490 and 96, Fern. Sm^z. p. 204 ex
sp^ngent. Senaer, de Lue Ven. cap 1.
as some think; the last known first in the Northern parts of Germany 1486, but
not necessarily so in all the world: then will it fall out that these Diseases
were not so very great strangers to the Ancients.

It Is not unknown to any man, that many learned Physicians have maintained that
the French Disease was known to the Ancients; he that is curious may read what
Valesius, Reusnerus and others have said as to that point, or look what
Sennertus and Fallopius have collected out of them touching this subject; and
though they both incline that the Pox does not answer to those Diseases
described by the Ancients, and known in those parts, yet Sennertus is very
clear, that though it were till about that time beforementioned unknown in
Europe, yet it had been a common guest in the Indies many ages before, and so
not unknown to the Ancients wholly, nor by them thought of force for its sake
to change the Body of Physic.

Touching the Scorbute, Sennertus does with many very strong Arguments prove,
that that Disease was known and described both by Hippocrates and Galen, though
perhaps not in every thing and circumstance so particularly known as it now is.
Pliny tells you, that when Julius Caesar passed the Rhene, this Disease was in
Germany, and known by the name of Stomacace or Sceletyrbe: he adds further,
Plin. hist. not. cap 3. lib. 25.
Reperta auxilio est herba, quae vocatur Britannica, non nervis modo and oris
malis salutaris, sed contra anginas quoque and serpents. Strab^ tells you,
that in the Expedition of Aelius Gallus into Arabia, Hos morbos Arabibus (...),
populares esse refert, Strab. lib. 16. in expedit. Aelii Galli.

I might have been very much larger in the deduction of the Reasons of the
Authors before mentioned, and many others both of one and the other side; but I
labor to be short, and not spend time in what (were it never so true) would
avail very little to overthrow the general Method of curing Diseases, because
every day new ones may come up.

Rickets, Rising of the Lights, which he takes to be Hysterica passio,
Convulsions, Measils, Small Pox, and Scorbutical Gout, come next into play.
Touching the first, whence it came, where its seat is, and a rational way of
the cure of it, let the Reader consult the learned book of Dr. Glisson on that
subject. The rest, because there was no color for him to make them strangers
to the Ancients, they must from the great alteration they now have from what
formerly, require new Precepts and new Methods for their cure. The great
severity of these Diseases now a days more than heretofore is indeed most
doubtily proved out of the weekly Bills of Mortality collected by Mr. Grant,
and his own Observations, worthy proofs to overthrow an Art by: as if he knew
not that in the world there can be no so fallacious a way of proof. Every one
is enough acquainted with the Searchers, and their way of dealing, who regard
nothing more than to give the general account of the Dead and the Born, and to
let the World know when the City is infected with the Plague, with whom nothing
is so usual, as to put one Disease for another; Consumptions and Fevers are
general names comprehending all sicknesses whatsoever; and the mistake is in
them no way material, the end being only to inform the Magistrates what
Malignant Sicknesses reign: and though that way be tolerable in Mr. Grant,
whose design is only to prove the Increase and Decrease of Mankind; yet from
hence to prove the Alteration and Severity of Diseases to the overthrow of all
Rules of Physic, savours too much of Ignorance, Self Ends, or both. He comes
after this in his third Chapter to inquire into the Causes of the alterations
of diseases from their ancient state and condition. But till he had proved an
Alteration, such as would be subservient to his purpose, in Diseases, I need
not trouble my self to follow him in his Causes; yet that I may not seem to
pass by any thing he thinks material, I shall trace him in those also. It Is
observable that the subject of his second Chapter, that there is an Alteration
in Diseases; the third Chapter pretends to show the Causes of this Alteration,
to wit, The Pox and the Scorbute by their invasions made upon the universality
of Mankind, have been the two main causes of this alteration. What the meaning
of these plain words is, may perhaps be a little intricate: for if he here
understand that these Diseases are solitarily in most bodies, then certainly
their presence cannot be the cause of Alteration of other Diseases that are not
there with them. If he understand their Complication with other Diseases makes
such an Alteration as he contends for, so that a Fever, or what else, assailing
the body already infected with the Pox or Scurvy, makes such an alteration, as
must change the Precepts of Physic; this is the whole subject of his fourth
Chapter, and carries something of reason in it; but then the third Chapter is
wholly useless, or as to those Diseases coincident with the second, and only
brought in to fill up room, and to bring in one whom he calls Doctor John
Winnels Preface, and to call this a wanton, painting, patching, Page 69.
perfuming, issuing age. Certainly all these Epithetes have been much more
ancient than this age; let him look upon Jezabel in the Jewish, Julia Messalina
in the Roman, Rhodope Crispa, of whom Ausonius speaks, Praeter legitimi
genitalia foedera coetus,
Repperit obscaenas veneres vitiosa libido.
Crispa tamen cunctas exercet corpore in uno,
Deglubit, fellat, molitur per utramque cavernam,
Nequid inexpertum frustra haec moritura relinquat.
Where is Wantonness equal to that described by Petronius in a Woman? Junonem
meam iratam habeam, si me unquam virginem meminerim; nam infans cum paribus
inquinata sum, and subinde prodeuntibus annis majoribas me pueris applicui,
donec ad hanc aetatem perveni. What wantonness in this age ever answered that
of Messalina? Ziphil.
quae efficiebat ut multae in palatio viris suis praesentibus ac videntibus cum
adulteris coirent. What Parysatis was author of his Sons incest with his own
Sister in this age? Plut. i^ A^t^xt^x^.
Where has Prostitution been encouraged or promoted by a Reward and Law? If in
this, as in all ages, something be amiss, what has this man to do to upbraid
the times, being neither Divine nor Magistrate, to whom the correction of Vices
in any kind might belong? for though the words are taken out of the Preface of
another, he that with applause transcribes them, makes their Sordidness as much
his own, as they were before the Authors that first writ them. And truly it is
no marvel that men of light Principles should be of loose Tongues. He first
tells us, in this age we have lost Philosophy, we understand not Physic, and
now we fail in Sobriety and Cood manners. Page 62.
After this large Preface, which has given us the diversion of two leaves, he
falls upon a discourse by what means the Venereal and Scorbutic Miasms have
gained ground in the world, to wit, by Carnal Contact, ill Cures, accidental
Contagion, hereditary Propagation and Lactation, and is large upon every one of
these heads. To what purpose all this is, and how it will serve his turn, I see
not, except to usher in their complication with other Diseases, which is the
subject of his next Chapter, as I touched before. The Propagation of this Lues
by Carnal Contact he passes over to insist upon a truth of much importance to
be laid open for the security of mankind, viz. That after the committing that
folly with an unwholesom person, though there appear no sign nor symptom of a
Disease for the present, yet it may lie latent and lurking in the body many
years before it make any discovery of it self, either in its own noture, or in
the disguise of other diseases. And in another place tells you, Page 6^.
that it may be in the Father, lie quiet in the Son, and at last discover it
self in the Grandchild: and whatever he says of the Pox, he would have you
understand of the Scurvy also. This he proves from prostituted Women, who
having long lived in that wicked course, have infected many others without
being privy to any ilness in themselves. In which Assertion he begs two things
which are impossible for him to prove; first that those persons were not privy
to the knowledge of any Infection in themselves, notwithstanding they
impudently enough might say they were not. For truly it is not hard to believe,
that those persons that will lie with their Bodies in those unjustifiable ways,
will also lie with their Tongues when it is for their advantage, either to make
themselves appear more innocent, or their Copesmates more confident. Secondly
that the Infection given to so many persons has proceeded from a Disease long
latent, or perhaps one newly taken. I much fear, that Men and Women so given,
keep not themselves so constantly to the same person, that they can tell either
when they give or take Infection, till by the succedaneous effects it discovers
it self. Something more reasonable might have been urged for him, were he able
or any other to prove, that those hundreds infected, as he says, by the same
common Woman, had never touched any other from whom they might possibly as well
take it, as from her that did not know her self infected. From this he passes
to examine the teasons why some that practice that wickedness, most of their
days seem sound even to old age; and there gives you a large transcript out of
one he calls Dr. Winnell, which being no may material, though in some things
not true, I leave to the consideration of those whose time and leisure will
give them the liberty of a more serious examination of this Writers
extravagancies. Only let me remember, he omits the main cause why men guilty
of that wickedness escape sound, viz. their frequent taking Physic for the
expelling that Contagion they suspect may lie in their bodies, though they find
it not in any effect. And as he directs me what here I have spoken of the Lues
Venerea, may be also understood of the Scurvy, mutatis mutandis; only by the
way let it be observed, that he conceives the Contagion of the French Disease
less apt to be communicated than that of the Scurvy; for page 65. and seq. he
gives you many reasons why some sinners in one kind are not at all, or know not
themselves infected; but in the Scurvy he tells you page 75. That wherever
either of the mates is Scorbutically tainted, the other never scapes, but
catches the taint more or less, etc. It Is pretty boldly asserted; Never scapes!
What Aphorism of Hippocrates, that he so much carps at, is so general? yet this
Pigmy must be believed, or he will take it ill, without reason and without
experience, when Hippocrates cannot upon both. Pray why may not those reasons
taken from the difference of Constitution, the difference of Temper, the
strength of the Body, used by him for assoiling men of the Pox, be used here in
the Scurvy, since by himself they are so near of kin? Or let him tell me what
difference there is between not being, and not being discovered in its own
colors, but in the garb of some other disease. Pray how shall one know that
any Disease, that appears in its own garb, has any of the Scorbvtical taint in
it, except there be also some Scorbutical colors appear? unless he would have
my faith as large as his, to wit, that wherever the one Mate is Scorbutically
tainted, the other never escapes; for then whatever Disease may be, we are sure
the Scorbute is with it. But we have a caution here to check any opposition to
this, viz. Let him first observe the course of things before he oppose it; so
that his Answer is ready, Dr. Twysden opposes this, but he has not observed
the course of things. Pray, Sir, what course, or what things do you mean? they
are both of very large extent, and you know Dolus versatur in universalibus. I
conceive the course of things to be observed must be something concerning the
disease of the Scurvy, or else you speak not ad idem. If in that Disease, then
what period of it is most observable, or to be taken notice of? The Beginning
cannot, for you say page 75. sometime it discovers not it self at all, the
progress nor the ending cannot oftentimes, for it sometimes discovers not it
self (you say) in its own colors, but in the garb of other Diseases; and the
discovery of it self in its own colors, and in the garb of other Diseases, are
by you contradistinguished: so that except when it discovers it self in its own
colors, which sometimes happens not, it cannot be observed at all; and
therefore that Caution, either altogether, or in the greatest measure, is
useless and unprofitable. For my part, I have been for some time an observer of
Diseases, both in their beginning, growth, and termination, and must agree with
you, that the Scurvy is very frequently at the beginning or end of most
Chronical sicknesses in our Island-bodies, and that the Lues is likewise very
general, but cannot subscribe to that Opinion, That their Infection is so
catching, that all the World must needs be infected at so eafie a rate without
Contact, by the Emanation of I know not what Effluviums, invisible Atoms or
Bodikins, as our M. N. loves to call them, Page 99.
page 97. (rather than a subtle Vapor, which being sucked in by our breath,
may poison the body though it operate not presently:) whenas he determines not
their Sphere of Activity, nor at what distance their noxious qualities shall
cease. Sennertus in reckoning the manner of the Scorbutical Contagion says,
Med Prac. ti. lib. 3. part. 5. ca. 3.
Indeed it may be taken per semen and sanguinem maternum, vel lacte instillari,
aut alio modo per contactum and conversationem, pocula (scil.) aegrotantium usu
in bibendo praecipue inquinata; oscula etiam, ut nonnullis placet, aut aerem
exhalationibus, expirationibus, and foetidis halitibus, aegrorum infectum
inspiratione attractum communicari potest. Here you see is but a nonnullis
placet when the Communication comes either by Kissing, which is a Contact, or
by the noxious Vapors taken in with the breath. Nay further, Censent etiam
nonnulli per Venerem communicari posse Scorbutum, si (scil.) vir cum foemin a
Scorbutica, fluxu albo laborante, concubuerit. You see here is but a Censent
nonnulli, and then too a Circumstance required which seldom falls out, that Men
or Women have any Communication when the Woman is so disposed. So far you see
is this learned Author from M. N. his confident Asseveration, That wherever
either of the Mates is Scorbutically tainted, the other never scapes, etc.

You have thus heard the Opinion of Sennertus; in Forestus I find nothing at
all touching the Contagiousness of this Disease; perhaps he has mistaken his
words, as he has the sense of Sennertus, Horstius, and Reusnerus. But because
I would use him with all civility, let us examine what their Opinion is
touching the Contagion of the Lues Venerea at a distance. But there is an
unfortunate rub lies here in his way, which he well knows not how to balk, Page
128.
viz. That Sennertus in other places of his book is so gross, as to deny its
Communicableness at a distance, as other Contagions are, etc. I wish he had
showed us those places where he says, that Contagion may be taken without
Contact. I am sure where he handles the Question purposely, he determines the
contrary: Hoc tamen concedi non potest, quod sicut pestis per aerem and loca
dissita ad alios transferri potest; ita etiam Lues Venerea communicari possit.
Experientia enim quotidiana testatur, Medicos and alios multos cum infectis hac
lue familiariter conversari, nec tamen ab iis infici. De Lue Ven. lib. 6. part.
4. cap. 4. page 503. edit. Venetianae. Forestus is of the same opinion, lib.
32. observe. 2. Itaque Lues Venerea contagiosus est morbus, non sponte intimoque
corporis vitio, sed attactu solo contrahendus: then tells you of a Priest, that
was adeo facie deturpatum, ut leprosus videretur, and carcinomate totius faciei
infectus; who being drunk, and finding a handsome Maid dancing with her
Companions, kissed her against her will, and solo osculo eadem lue infecit.
Certainly here was a Contact, and in all likelihood he hung so long upon her
lips, to leave filth enough there to beget that disease, without having
recourse to these Bodikins and Atoms, which must infect at a distance by the
vehiculum of the Air and I know not what medium. You thus see the Opinion of
Sennertus and Forestus, of the same Opinion he is forced to confess Fernelius,
Page 126. and 127.
though his wit is in many other things divine, flies so low a pitch concerning
the contagiousness of this disease, as to place it only in humor and dull
contact. Aurelius Minadous tells you, it ought not to be defined by Quality,
but by name of a Bodily Substance, and that it so passes from body to body by
contact. A man would have thought these Authors had been plain enough, and I
thought of Learning enough to express their own sense in significant words, but
it seems they were deceived, and we too; for as to Fernelius he tells you, that
in another place he speaks plainly to our sense, and quotes him De morb.
contagiosis cap. 14. he should have done well to have told us a piece of news
we are as yet strangers to, where Fernelius writes fourteen Chapters de morbis
contagiosis. But I will let that pass, since the good man means well, and would
have said lib. 2. cap. 14. de abdit. rerum causis, where he has one Chapter de
morbis contagiosis, the place he quotes is (in the last Edition put out by
Hackius, 1645.) page 212. where besides his false translation of his words,
quod dum vident symptomata haec omnia, cum humoris cujusdam vitio insultare,
nihil praeter humorem inesse putant. Which he renders, they think of nothing
but humor; whereas the Author means, they think there is no other matter in
the disease, than the peccancy of that humor, and do not carefully search
whether any thing else be latent under the cover of that humor so peccant, to
wit, that Contagious quality he then treated of; for I never before read, that
subesse signified to prevail. But I shall let that pass, and only observe,
that in that whole Chapter there is no one word to contradict what he said
before touching the Lues Venerea, but in his whole discourse instances the
Contagion to come by Contact, and not per actionem ad distans. So Sennertus,
whose words before cited, Censent nonnulli per Venerem, etc. si (seil.) vir cum
foemina Scorbutica, fluxu albo laborante, Page 13^.
concubuerit: he tells you Sennertus is very positive, where his words are,
Censent nonnulli, Some think. Next by lying with a Scorbutic Woman, or with
one that has the Fluor albus: where does he find (or) in the Text? Sennertus
puts them both together, as if in the judgment of those nonnulli 'twere not
enough to lie with a Scorbutic Woman, but she must likewise have that disease
upon her, to make the Contagion to pass from one to another: where is now the
speaking home of Fernelius, or positiveness of Sennertus? or what else is this
but a corruption of Authors, and straining their words contrary to their sense
or meaning? Yet that I may do him no wrong, though the foregoing Authors are
not of his Opinion, yet Zacutus Lusitanus, the learned Jew, is otherwise
minded. In his Praxis admiranda, lib. 2. observe. 125. he gives an Example out
of Manardus his Epistles, of one troubled with an Ophthalmia Gallica, who
infected his servant that waited upon him with the same disease; and therefore
observes that that Disease is contagious at a distance. Our M. N. should have
done well to have likewise taken notice of Sennertus his Answer to this
Observation; first, that there is no Example but this of Manardus; secondly,
that a simple Ophthalmia is infectious, and therefore a Venerate may more
likely. He might likewise have observed, that this Servant was always about
him, wiped off his sweat, and undoubtedly dressed and washed his Eyes; so that
here was, if not a direct, yet very near to a Contact. Besides, the diseases of
the Eyes are more likely to be Contagious, than those that have their seat in
any other part of the Body; because, whether Sight be performed by the
intromission of species from the Object, or by emission of Rays from the Eye,
or both, it must of necessity be granted, that the Eye does receive Rays, or
else one Eye could not see another, where one is necessarily the object to the
other. Lastly, it is to be taken notice of, that this is in praxi admiranda, and
so much out of the common rode. Lastly, it is much to be feared that this
Servant had got the disease some other way, but was glad to put off the guilt
of his fault by laying it to this of Infection. Well, but it cannot be denied
that there pass effluvia out of the body, atoms, bodikins, as he calls them,
Page 141.
not a Spiritual substance; yet page 128. he tells you out of Sennertus, they
are a Spirit or Spirituous substance, a thing of so subtle a nature, that it
can make its own way through bodies without the help of immediate contact. If
this last Assertion be true, the first cannot, and so farewell his Atoms and
Bodikins, for certainly they cannot pass through bodies any way, nothing but a
Spirit can penetrate Dimensions. Bodies or Bodikins, (...) or (...), call them
as you will, differ only in Majority and Minority, and so can enter in at the
Pores only, and no other ways. Well, however it is manifest such Emanations
there are, (and he is copious in proving what no man denies) as in the Plague,
Spotted Fevers, Small Pox, Leprosy, Itch, and the like: if so, then he wishes
some tolerable reason were produced why they deny it in reference to the Pocky
contagion. Page 129
See Winnel, cap. 7. fol 28. Where he shows his opinion to be, that this
disease can not be taken otherwise than by Contact.
Since the reason given by them, that the disease is lodged in a slow dull
viscous matter, does not please him, I will endeavor to satisfy him with some
other. I would first tell him after his own language, that the Atoms or
Effluxes that come from the Pocky body are of another figure than the Empty
parts in the texture of the body, and so cannot enter into them. Perhaps the
Effluxes that come from the sound body are more and stronger than those that
come from the infected, and so purify the Air, that it shall not be a
vehiculum for the Contagion; as we see a Perfume will destroy a Stink. Whether
these reasons are true or not, is not material; I am sure, according to his
Principles, they are specious, and are sufficient Answers ad hominem, if they
be not ad rem, and are urged by me to let him see how fallacious that way of
Argumentation is, which is drawn from the application of Reason from one thing
to another, contrary to Experience. 'Twere a strange way of arguing the
Loadstone, which is a black heavy stone, of such a bigness and weight, will
take up a pound of Iron; therefore every Loadstone of that bigness will have
the same virtue, contrary to Truth and Experience. Just so it is with him; the
Plague, etc. is infectious, and the Contagion passes from one body to another,
without any immediate contact; therefore every Disease that is infections, as
the Pox and Scurvy are, must do so too. Nay, he has the boldness to improve
this Notion so high, as to tell us, Page 130.
no man never so innocent can be secure that he is sound: A Doctrine every way
pernicious and unsafe; for the innocent, it makes them upon every light
occasion doubtful and suspicious of themselves; the guilty, bolder and more
impudent, being fitted with this lie in their mouth, However I am now tainted,
it is not by my own fault, but the fault of my Parents, Nurse, or any other I
have seen or conversed withal; endeavoring by this cheat to vindicate their
own Credits in the world. And thus this miserable flagellum scortatorum is made
an Arrow to wound the innocent and excuse the guilty, who will be always ready
to cast their disease upon that fine way of communication M. Page 97
N. has taught them, which suits not with the conceit of a brain that measures
every thing by the gross Philosophy which Aristotle ties men to in the Schools,
who teach men that Infection may be by Incorporeal qualities insinuating
themselves with the Air; whereas in truth they are infected by invisible
indivisible Atoms corporeal effluxes, as he says Dr. Flud in his Mosaic
Philosophy, and Sir Kenelm Digby in his Discourse at Montpellier, have made
manifest, with some others. How far these Examples will warrant the efflux of
Corporeal Atoms; or whether the same effects may not follow from the impacting
incorporeal qualities, and the dullness of Aristotle's Philosophy, I shall have
fitter opportunity to discourse of hereafter; and I doubt not to show, that
this anciently-confuted and now lately-revived Philosophy, of making Atoms the
beginning of all Bodies, and their flying up and down in vacuo not to be
without great difficulties, and probably not true. This that has been said I
conceive abundantly sufficient to clear that part of his discourse concerning
the Propagation of the Lues Venerea and Scorbute by accidental Contagion,
Hereditary Propagation, and Lactation, by all which ways I admit those diseases
may be transferred from one to another; but deny, that either of them are so
general as he would infer, or that they are transferred by such an infection at
distance, as the Plague, Malignant Fevers, and some others, but must be got by
Contact, or very near and frequent Conversation.

There rest now only to examine his second cause, to wit, their Propagation by
the ill-curing of them both. For my part, I shall never rise up a Champion to
defend the ill-curing of any disease, much less either of them named; only I
would have him remember that of the Poet,

Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. He justly condemns the going for cure to
any Pretender, Page 76.
amongst which number I reckon all Mountebanks, or such as take upon them the
Practice of Physic without lawful Warrant thereunto; and then runs over the
ordinary Methods, first of Issues, where by the way he should do well to
observe his inadvertency, in calling this age by exprobration an issuing age;
for if the Pox be so general, and this be one kind of cure, though it be but
the Poor-Whores cure, certainly he ought not to blame the Age for taking any
course to cure their Maladies. Then comes Mercurial Unguent, Mercurial Cinabar
fume by Salivation, and inveighs against them all; notwithstanding he cannot
but know they have been all succesfully used by skilful men, and in unskilful
men's hands the best Remedies will not succeed. Moreover, he forgets the Method
used by Fernelius and most others by Sudorifick Potions, made with Lignum
sanctum, Sarsaparill, China, etc. He touches not upon Quercetans Method in his
Consilium pro Lue Venerea: Whether he approve these ways better than any by
Mercury, I know not, or whether he has any better of his own. It Is much to
condemn all the Physicians in the world, and then leave us in the dark. Out
with it, Man, tell the World if you know any better than others do: till then
give us leave to think this only an artifice to cry up your selves to the
defamation of others, this is usual with the rest of your Gang, Manwairing,
Odowd, and others, who pretend great things, but conceal what they are. In the
Scurvy likewise he inveighs against Bleeding Specificks, and that ordinary way
by which we find by daily experience that disease cured, if Judicious men deal
with them. He blames the use of Pills, Infusions, Powders, Electuaries reputed
Classical, and tells you, in all the Pharmacopoeus he cannot pick out one
Composition proper to purge Scorbutical Humors in so gentle and effectual
manner as they ought to be: What if there be not? Does not he know, that every
Physician is able to be his own Pharmacopoeist, and that those Books are rather
made for the use of Apothecaries and Surgeons than them? But let us see; what
thinks he of the Pilulae macri, of the Tartareae Quercetani, of the Sal
Cochleariae, Absinthii, and the rest? Cannot a Mass be made out of these proper
enough to purge Scorbutic Humors? Pray, Sir, bless us with something of your
own, that we may judge of your Abilities, and owe our Knowledge to you.

His fourth and fifth Chapters contain further Proofs of the Propagation of the
Pox and Scurvy, by their being complicated with other diseases. Their
Complication with other diseases he proves from Forestus, Eustachius, Rudius,
Sennertus, and others: Sensim in universum orbem est disseminata, says one,
maxima pars mortalium eo infecta est. I shall not much contend with him in this
particular, but easily grant, that there may be very frequently a Complication
between the Pox and some other disease, that may render that other disease more
difficult in the cure. But must this be enough to overthrow all the Rules of
Physic, and put us to new Studies, new Foundations, and Medicines of another
nature? Is the Complication of diseases but now known in the world? Did not all
the Ancients as well as we know and consider it? Is it not left to the judgment
of every Physician so to temper his Medicines, that they may answer to all
Indications? It Is hard, I confess, to do that when the latent disease appears
not in its own colors; for De non apparentibus and non existentibas eadem est
ratio: and I confess, I shall still be of the Opinion, not to believe any
disease in that body where I have no reason for it. I confess, it may make the
matter suspicious, when the disease shall resist all ordinary remedies
methodically applied; but then great care and heed is to be taken that things
have been methodically done, and not run upon that unstable Notion, All men
have the Pox by some of the ways this Author mentions; this may have been in
the Father, not appear in the Son, and break out in the Grandchild: therefore
if a man break his Shin, or cut his Finger, send for M. N. and he will put you
into a course for the Pox. The like may be said for the generation of Worms. Do
not all the Ancients almost take notice of them? Is not their generation in the
Body? nay, their Perforation of the Belly as ancient as Avicenna? let him look
lib. 3. Fen. 16. cap. 2. Et jam retulerunt quidam, qui viderunt eos perforasse
ventrem, and exivisse ex eo. I have in one person known the like, and I neither
discommend his nor any man's care in taking heed that Worms do no mischief. His
Experiments taken out of Kircherus I let pass, perhaps many of them are true,
others I doubt much helped by the Fancy, as particularly that of Worms upon
Sage. Page 193.
His third Experiment. I (not being content with any Glass of my own) May 27.
1665. went on purpose to Mr. Reeves house, a diligent Artist and Maker of those
Glasses, but after our diligent search neither of us could discern any such
thing; it is true, we saw very easily and distinctly things long and sharp at
one end, and blunt at another, as this Figure; other little Heaps or Points
joined together pretty near, but could perceive no motion whatsoever; neither
would they at all be either wiped or washed off: so that undoubtedly they were
only the roughnesses of the Herb, which by help of a good Fancy may be
supplied with Life and Motion, and so made Worms and Eggs. The later part I
easily believe, that out of the Mucor of many Herbs Flies and Worms may be
generated; Page 181. and alibi.
but why does he call these Animated Worms, Effluviums, or Atoms? certainly
they are Compounded bodies, those instruments that give them motion are Atoms
less than they, and certainly they are represented big enough to be divided.

I have thus done with the Argumentative part of his book, and have showed his
fallacious ways of Argumentation throughout. First, I have showed that the
nature of Man, Beasts, Plants, Herbs, Fruits, and all things conducing to the
nourishment of Man, are of the same nature; and therefore Diseases, at least
those that were known to the Ancients, are not altered in their nature, nor the
Method in the curing of them altered. That the discovery of new Remedies, if
any have been, do not take away the virtue of those that were known and
practiced before; but both may be good and stand together: and that my Lord
Bacon, and those other Worthy persons that have encouraged men to make further
search into the things of Nature, and those Noble persons that have written and
still labor in Experimental Philosophy, do not do it to disparage the
Ancients, but search into the Reasons of the works of Nature, and discover new
Truths, and establish the old by new Confirmations. I have in the second place
showed that the Pox and Scurvy, which this Author much insists upon, were not
new diseases in themselves, though perhaps lately brought into Europe: that
their Cures were found out by and upon the Foundation of the ancient Method,
which is able to furnish a Physician not only with means to find out the seat
of any disease, but also to apply appropriate remedies thereunto. I have showed
in the third place, that the Complication of Diseases cannot alter the general
Method of curing them, though it may cause a variation in the application of
Remedies. That the variation of Remedies, according to the nature of Diseases
in their Complication, is the Office of a Physician, who ties not himself to
any Remedies delivered in Pharmacopoeus, but ordering them pro re nata; and
that it is impossible to give any general Method to cure any one complicated
Disease, as it is lodged in Peter; because never any such Disease came twice
alike in all circumstances, nor can any Remedy be found out (I am confident is
not by this Undertaker) that shall have that effect. What the Chemists speak of
their Sulphur fixum, and their Universal solvens, which shall have that power;
and also with some other help of Art shall six an imperfect Metal into Gold:
as I will not deny the truth of it, so will I suspend my judgment till I shall
be better convinced. For all other Remedies, in the preparation whereof
Chemists have labored, I shall give them my ready thanks with much
gratefulness of mind for their pains: they have many of them made their
Medicines and Preparations public, and daily use is made of them; when this
unknown M. N. makes us partakers of any of his, better than what we know, I
shall readily return him my due thanks; but must not believe some few months
study of Chemistry under Mr. Johnson, set up by the College of London for their
use, have made him so perfect an Artist as to know more than his Teachers in
that Art. The pretending to be Masters of great and universal Remedies, and
conceal what they are, (a practice now used by Odowd, Manwairing, and some
others) is a thing so unworthy a Scholar, that I would not have this Author so
like a Mountebank in any thing.

The Examination of the Sixth Chapter.
THus have I with all possible brevity run over his first Five Chapters, which
indeed contain most of what is Argumentative in his book; I come to the Sixth,
which begins with a recapitulation of what he had formerly proved. In the
former we have had a taste of his Philosophy and Logic, we shall now try his
Logic alone, and see whether the Conclusion drawn from the Premises now laid
down be answerable to those of his first Chapter, where he argues thus: If
Diseases are altered in their nature wholly from what they anciently were; Then
New Indagations, new Causes, new Cures must be found, Physic and Surgery must
be rebuilt from the very foundation. But Diseases are wholly altered in their
nature.


Therefore in his sixth Chapter he argues thus: If there be now introduced in
Men and Diseases as it were another nature; Then The former Rules calculated
for Curation from other Causes, or from Causes less important, are almost, if
not quite, out of doors. But Men and Diseases are as it were altered in their
nature. Therefore the former Rules, etc.


Quo teneam tandem mutantem Protea nodo?
In the beginning of his book his premises were universal and general, in this
place they are limited and particular. At the first there was a total
alteration of Nature, now a partial, perhaps at the later end we shall find
none at all.

But this is not all; we must find other infirm parts of his Argument.
Certainly Aristotle, as dull as he was, would never have thus concluded, nor
any man that had read or well understood his Analyticks, or the reason why they
are so called. Where he first supposes the Conclusion, which is the Res
ignota, as known and true; and then infers it ex veris and concessis: so that
if there be any thing in the premises which is not verum and concessum, then
can the Conclusion be never truly inferred, and the thing sought concluded. Now
(Sir) would I gladly see how you infer the consequence of your Major; what have
we to do to leap from Nature to Causes? You ought thus to have assumed; If
there be now introduced as it were in Men and Diseases another nature; Then
Curations found out for Men and Diseases, which now are as it were of another
nature than formerly, must be as it were changed. But Men and Diseases are as
it were altered in their nature: Ergo.

But in this Syllogism both the sequel of the Major and Minor are neither of
them granted; for there may be a partial and circumstantial alteration of a
Disease, and if you will of a Man, without any alteration at all of the Nature
of that Disease in its Cause, or the Nature of the Man in its Cause. (But
certainly when we can believe the Nature of Man can be altered in its Cause,
the next step will be to believe he may be altered in his species too.) May not
a Fever that invades a Pocky or Scorbutic body have the same Cause, though in
respect of the Complication there may be a partial alteration in the Disease,
and consequently a circumstantial variation in the Cure? I admit that the Cures
of the Ancients were built upon the considerations of Diseases in their Causes,
but must not grant that the same Cause may not produce a Disease somewhat
altered in circumstances. So that if it were granted him, which he has no way
proved, and is not true, that Diseases anciently known are at all altered in
their Nature; yet would it not follow, that they were altered in their Causes.
The whole Argument brought into form ought to run thus: Major. If there be now
introduced in Men and Diseases as it were a new Nature, from rebellion and
alterations not known to the Ancients in their Causes, or taken notice of so
fully as they ought to be by the later Physicians; Then The Rules of Curation
calculated for Men and Diseases, now as it were of new natures from those
alterations, not known to the Ancients in their Causes, or taken notice of so
fully as they ought to be by the later Physicians, must be as it were altered
and changed. Minor. But there is now introduced in Men and Diseases as it were
a new Nature from malignity and alterations not known to the Ancients in their
Causes, or taken notice of so fully as they ought by later Physicians.
Conclusion. Therefore the Rules of Curation calculated for Men and Diseases,
now as it were of new natures, from alterations not known to the Ancients in
their Causes, or taken notice of so fully as they ought to be by the later
Physicians, must be as it were altered and changed.


It Is evident here, that the whole strength of his Argumentation depends upon
the introduction of a new Nature into Men and Diseases; so that till that be
proved, it is not at all material to enquire into the Causes of this change, nor
whether the Ancients knew them or not: but certainly he is very far from having
proved either a total or a partial alteration of Men or Diseases in their
natures.

All Ages have produced as great mortality and as great rebellion in Diseases
as this, and Complications with other Diseases as dangerous. What Plague was
ever more spreading or dangerous than that writ of by Thucidides, brought out
of Attiea into Peloponnesus? What Complication now caused by the presence of
the Pox or Scurvy in a sick body, can make a greater alteration in any
diseases, than the Complication of the like disease with the Leprosy
heretofore? Does he not believe there is as great a (...) in the blood by the
Leprosy as the Pox? yet those diseases were cured by the ancient Method, why
not these? So that for ought I see we need not be put to the necessity of
establishing new Doctrines, Page 204.
new Methods and Rules of Curation, agreeable to the new frame of Humane
nature, and to the new Phenomenon of Diseases. The old Notions and old Remedies
may be good enough; not that I shall discourage him or any man for increasing
the Materia Medica with any new piece of Knowledge, but dislike they should
pretend to what they have not, (as many do) to the dishonor of others far more
knowing than themselves.

These things being considered, this Chapter is not so hard but it may be read
over without a Festuke or spelling-book, and by those that have set up their
rest without any new going to school by them; Page 206.
and yet the saying of prudent Celsus the Plagiary of Hippocrates may be true
too, Vix ulla perpetua praecepta ars medicinalis recipit: which saying has not
relation to the Method or Art, but to the Medicine and Person; for though
general Precepts may be given curare morbu^, they cannot be curare Petrum and
Paulum; and I dare confidently aver, that no man has been lost by the
adhering to the Precepts of Physic, though some may have by the misapplication
of them, in reducing them to use and practice; whereas hundreds daily are cast
away by the preposterous use of Remedies, especially Chemical ones slovenly
prepared by these Mountebanks, and as immethodically applied at adventure.

In his next Breach he endeavors to draw to his Cause by the shoulders Mr.
Boil, whom he often quotes, and would fain induce the world to think him of
his party; the passage he tells you is in his Experimental Philosophy, part 2.
essay 5. he should have done well to have given us a little nearer guess at the
place, for that Essay consists of twenty large Chapters, near half the book,
and I believe he has particularly concealed it, lest something might be found
not to make for him. Perhaps that Physician might think that Method fair, which
in it self was not, and the party not killed by a fair but a foul Method. But
this Gentleman would from hence have us look upon Mr. Boil as an Enemy to
Method; but pray hear himself, Exper. Philos. part 2. essay 5. cap. 18. page
266. speaking of the nature and causes of Diseases he has these words, Nor is
the Method of curing diverse particular diseases more settled and agreed upon,
that depending chiefly upon the knowledge of those causes, which as I was
saying are controverted: It Is not that I am an enemy to Method in Physic, or
an undervaluer of it; but I fear the generality of Physicians (for I intend
not, nor need all along this Essay speak of them all) have as yet but an
imperfect Method, and have by the narrow principles they were taught in the
Schools, been persuaded to change their Method rather to the barren principles
of the Peripatetick School, than to the full amplitude of Nature. You see with
what caution this Learned Gentleman delivers his sense: First, the Method of
curing diverse particular diseases, to wit, as they may be in Craso or Celsus;
not that the general Method of curing diseases is unsettled. Secondly, that he
intends not all but some Physicians, though perhaps what he says may fall upon
the greatest part of them. Thirdly, that himself is no Enemy to Method, though
its Precepts do not answer to the sull amplitude of Nature. What can be more
cautelously laid down? What is here to favor a casting away old Methods,
erecting new Foundations, new Aphorisms, and I know not what, which our M. N.
drives at?. Touching his opinion of Chemists, and their costly application of
Chemical Medicines in slight cases, see what he says chap. 6. page 147, 148,
etc. 152. the words are too long to transcribe, but in general he blames the
Chemists as well in their unskilful preparations, as not dexterous applications
of their Medicines; and is so far from tying up Physic to that Sphere only,
that he propounds many great Cures performed by simple Medicines taken from
Vegetables and Animals, without any Chemical preparation at all. As to that
Noble Person himself, I must tell the world I have had the honor to have been
particularly acquainted with him now upwards of twenty years, that I know him
to be a Scholar and Valuer of Learning where he meets it; he has spent all his
time from his very youth amongst Men of Learning, and much of it in our
Universities, and therefore I am sure will give him little thanks that
endeavors to bring him in as a Patron to those that decry Universities,
Degrees, Learning, and Arts, endeavoring to bring in thereby Ignorance in the
Professors, and Contempt upon the Professions themselves. I shall further add,
I have frequently been in his Laboratory, seen and been from him made partaker
of many of his Preparations, before the world knew them in Print, have received
from his own hand not only the manner of the Preparations, but the Medicines
themselves, which I have often used with success, and have returned to him some
of my own, which he has taken kindly from me. But in all the course of this my
knowledge of him, have ever found him Free, of a Communicable and Noble nature,
a Friend to Scholars, free from that arrogance and pride of his Own Knowledge
above Others; whose Pots and Glasses these petty fellows, who with so much
boldness cry up themselves, are not worthy to clean after him. To this he has
added the communication of many excellent Preparations and other Medicines;
whereas this Writer, and many other of his Accomplices, pretend only to a secret
and concealed kind of Knowledge. And in many other places of his book quotes
this Noble Person very little to the purpose, of which I shall take no further
notice, the Character here by me knowingly given of him, being able to silence
all Calumnies that by Consequences of their own drawing out of his words,
contrary to his meaning, may be pinned upon him; of which it is none of the
least that by this M. N. who in the quotation of that passage even now recited,
leaves out the most material part of the sentence he cites; first altogether
leaving out that which gave a rise to the discourse, viz. that the Method of
curing some particular diseases was not perfectly settled, and then recites the
sentence he does cite, lamely; for whereas Mr. Boil says what may concern the
generality of Physicians, (is not intended by him all along that Essay to be
spoken of them all) this Parenthesis is left out, because it made not for him,
and struck only at such who rested upon the bare Physiology, wherewith
Physicians as well as others were wonted to be imbued in the Schools, page 236.
part 2. without endeavoring to advance that knowledge by new accretions, and
neglected the use of Specificks in diseases, because they found in them no
sensible Evacuations of the Peccant humor. If the generality of Physicians
should be of that mind, I should blame them as much as he, but it appears he
believes not that all are, and I thank God I know none that are so inclined;
for my self, I daily make use of Specificks when I know them, nor ever met in
consultation with any Learned person that refused the use of them. I find
nothing material in this Chapter that has not already been answered: the
passage out of Hippocrates, page 217. that of Riverius learning of a
Begger-woman the curing the Haemorrhoides, I approve well; nor will I refuse to
learn what I know not of any man; not that this Medicine was the Begger-womans,
for you may find it commended for stopping Fluxes of blood both in Matthiolus
Commentary upon Dioscorides, and in Macasius his Promptuarium: but it is not
possible any Physician should have such a memory, to carry in his mind whatever
he had read. I very well remember a Gentlewoman once told me, she learnt of a
Begger-woman that Hollihock flowers boiled in Milk would stop the Fluxus
mulierum post partum; 'twas new to me then, but I have since found it commended
by many Authors for the like effect: and truly I have not yet been so happy to
meet with any of those Old Women's receipts, which I have not been able to trace
where they had their beginning. These Country-women get the Country Houswife,
some English Herbal, or the like, and sometime light of good things, which to
those that know them not pass for their own.

Page 222. he enters into commendations of Humility: I join with him in that,
and shall not only commend his Conversation with those that cure Horses, but
would advise the use of his and the rest of that Gangs concealed Medicines upon
those creatures, before they ventured them upon Men, till the world were better
acquainted with their Preparations, or their Abilities thereunto.

I should now give over this Chapter, did I not find it necessary once again to
vindicate my Noble Friend Mr. Boil from the Calumnies of this bold Assertor
and Disingenuous person, who now page 226. mangling Mr. Boyle's words,
endeavors to make him say, there is no need of Learning (commonly so called)
to make a good Physician. I will transcribe his words though they are long.
Page 394. And in the last place, Pyrophilus, I must advertise you not to expect
that every one of the Remedies I commend should be Physic and Physician too; I
mean, that it should of it self suffice to perform the cures of those diseases
against which it is commended. For Medicines are but instruments in the hands
of the Physician; and though they be never so well edged and tempered, require
a skilful hand to manage them: and therefore I cannot but admire and disapprove
their boldness, that venture upon the practice of Physic, wherein it is so
dangerous to commit errors, barely upon the confidence of having good
Receipts. For though I dare not deny, but that he may prosperously practice
Physic that either ignores or dissents from the received Doctrine of the
Schools, concerning the causes of diseases and some other Pathological
particulars; yet I cannot but dislike their boldness who venture to give active
Physic either in intricate or acute diseases, without at least a mediocrity of
knowledge in Anatomy, and so much knowledge of the history of diseases, as may
suffice to inform them in a competent measure, what are the usual symptoms of
such a disease, what course Nature is wont to take in dealing with the peccant
matter, and what discernible alterations in the Patients body do commonly
fore-run a Crisis, or otherwise the good or bad event of the disease. Then goes
on and tells you, he will stand in need of a competent knowledge of the Materia
Medi^a, and the Method of compounding Remedies. Now then let the world judge
what ingenuity there is in this Citation, as he has mangled it; and what he
says more than Fernelius says in his Life put out by Plantius; nay, Avicenna
himself says as much, lib. 1. Fen. 1. cap. 1. fol. 8. edit. Venet. 1608. apud
Jun^as, speaking de subjecto Medicinae; Harum vero rerum quaedam sunt, de
quibus medico nihil aliud est agendum, [nisi ut quid sit tantum essentiali
formatione informet] and utrum sint vel non sint, doctori sapientiae physicalis
credat: and so goes on to the end of that Chapter. By which it is evident from
that learned Arabian, that a Physician is not bound with too great
scrupulousness to search into every thing, the knowledge whereof may be useful,
but not absolutely necessary to him as a Practiser. Of this rank I reckon the
too scrupulous inquiry into the nature of all Plants, the too much wading into
the niceties and new discoveries in Anatomy, of which, Mr. Boil well says, a
competent knowledge is necessary; not that I discourage or dislike the labors
of those that can afford themselves liberty to spend all their time in these
Contemplations for the increase of their own knowledge, and the great good of
others, but would not have it prevent their excellent Abilities in the cure of
Diseases and visiting Patients, which is the main end of all their studies. In
this number I would also reckon the Doctrine of the Composition of Mixed bodies,
the Combination of the four qualities, Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry; the Doctrine
of Critical Days, Pulses, Urines, and Temperaments, which is the subject of the
rest of his book; in which I hold it more safe for a man to rest upon the
Opinion of the Ancients, built upon great Reason and many years Experience in
the curing diseases by Remedies found out upon supposition of those things,
though perhaps in every minute particular not exactly true; than upon whimsies
and conceits of our own, not built upon greater Reason and less Experience, to
overthrow the Method and Foundation of Physic without first erecting another,
upon which we may build with as much safety and assurance.

I might here make a close to his whole book, the rest of his time and ink
being spent most upon Invectives against Hippocrates and Galen, persons above
the biting of his venomous tooth; and the first as to his Cavils against his
Aphorisms, Prognostics, etc. so fully and learnedly vindicated by Doctor
Sprackling, that when he or any of his Tribe shall give a solid Answer
thereunto, he shall then see what more may be added upon that subject; only
let me add this to the much materially said by Doctor Sprackling, that he
condemns some of them for their Plainness, in which he discovers his own
Ignorance, not knowing that Aphorisms are short Determinations, and therefore
ought to be plain. But pray, Sir, is it not as plain, that totum est majus
part, that the whole is greater than a part; that if from equal you take away
equal, the residue shall be equal, which may as well be called (...)? yet these
were thought fit to be laid down by Euclide as previous to his Elements, and
yet was never blamed for their plainness: nay, without them we should have been
at a loss, for many Demonstrations both by Euclide, Archimedes, and others,
made good only per deductionem ad impossible. But because in his next Chapter
he is so bitter against the frigid notion of Four Elements, that we must away
with them root and branch, without being heard what they can plead for
themselves, I shall enter into consideration of the Compofition of Mixed bodies;
and though I would not be understood to defend that Doctrine in every thing,
but only that those that make the principia corporum to be Atomi, and those
that make them Salt, Sulphur, Spirit, Water and Earth, either are the same with
the four Elements, or, where they differ, are subject to as inextricable
difficulties as can be urged in allowing their composition to be from four
Elements, Fire, Air, Water and Earth.

An Examination of the Doctrine of the Elements, and the Composition of Mixed
Bodies.
TO him that considers under what great obscurities the ancient Philosophers
labored to find out the causes and beginning of things, who being either
wholly deprived of the knowledge of the Creation, or but darkly comprehending
the History of it, delivered indeed very anciently by Moses, but by most of
them either not seen or not believed, to wit, that there was an Omnipotent
Power who was able of nothing to create all things, by the effectual operation
of his Word concurring with his Spirit; He commanded and they were made: Thou
sendest forth thy Spirit and they were created. To him, I say, that considers
these things, it will not at all seem strange to find them sometimes run into
errors, which we see those that come after them in this fertile Age of
Learning, and deep search into Natural Causes, cannot fully excuse themselves
of. Insomuch that had we that ingenuity which might deservedly have been
expected from us by our dead Predecessors, we should rather render them their
due honor, for many great Truths delivered by them to us, when like our M. N.
with too great presumption and boldness, rail upon their persons with
invectives, calling the Philosophy of Aristotle, dull; the notion of four
Elements, frigid; Galen, the great corrupter; Hippocrates his learned Book De
Principiis, slighted; his Doctrine of Critical Days called as childish a
conceit as was ever owned by any long beards, called the children of men.
Without returning invectives against this Writer, who lies open enough to him
that has a mind, I shall only with as much brevity as may be, propound the
several opinions, as well of the ancient as modern Authors touching this
matter, and with as much candor as I can lay them down, and then leave the
Reader to judge where the most reason is.

I shall not enter into the subtle speculation de Materia prima, an Abyss
fathomless, and in which all that have endeavored to penetrate have rather
lost themselves then found that out: and it is no wonder, for how can Man, who
is not able to judge of any thing but under the Idea of somewhat has fallen
under some of his senses, tell what that is that cannot possibly fall under any
one of them? Plato, Pythagoras, and those of their Sect, made the beginning of
things to be what could not be comprehended either by sense or imagination, but
made it consist in certain eternal and unchangeable Ideas or Numbers. Aristotle
makes Privation to have the nature of a Principium; for having disputed upon
that subject, Ex nihilo nihil fit, he tells you, (...): that is to say, That
according to his opinion, nothing could be simply made, ex non ente, yet per
accidens it might; for out of Privation, which in it self was nothing, having
no existence, something is made. Phys. lib. 1. cap. 8. Then after says, (...).
Here he tells you, That Hyle or Materia prima and Privation are different; and
of these, that Hyle is a Non ens by accident, but Privation properly; that Hyle
is near, and as it were a substance or existence, but Privation by no means.
Last of all says, Phy. lib. 1 cap. 9.
(...). That is, That Hyle is the first subject of every thing, out of which
what ever has being not by accident is begotten. By all which you may see how
Aristotle. was straightened to extricate himself in the business of the first
beginning of things. He found there was a necessity to admit in a manner
something to be made out of nothing, and yet not seeing how that could be,
tells you it could not be simply true, but true by accident, explains his
meaning by Privation, which though it were in a manner non ens, yet gave
beginning to something that was, as the privation of one thing is the
generation of another, where Privation is but accidentally the beginning of an
Entitie. Then after tells you, that Hyle is a Non ens per accidens, but
Privation properly so. Why is Hyle a Non ens per accidens? Because he could not
comprehend how, if it were admitted to be an Entitie, and have existence, there
must not be something precedent, which must be the matter of that matter, and
so there would be a climbing in insinitum. All this I conceive proceeded from
his not knowing the power of God to create all things of nothing, and that
Maxim, Ex nihilo nihil fit, was only true a part post, not a part ante. It Is
true, since the Creation, nothing can be made by it self, but must come from a
seminal virtue by God's blessing given to the Creation, that various things
might be produced according to their several kinds; but before the Creation it
was not so. But the speculation of these things being wholly Metaphysical, I
shall so leave them, and refer those that have a mind to wade beyond their
depths in them to what Vasques, Scotus, Suarez, and all the Thomists have
written upon this subject. Yet withal let me add this Observation, that both
Plato and Aristotle, who in many things disagreed, yet in this accorded, that
from this Materia prima were produced the four Elements of Fire, Air, Water and
Earth, Plato ascribing to them their several forms.

The next sort of Philosophers we are to deal with are Democritus, Epicurus,
and those of that Sect. Not that I am ignorant that Democritus lived before the
time of Aristotle, contemporary with Hippocrates, and that Epicurus succeeded
Aristotle, Democritus, Empedocles, Anaxagoras and Parmenides lived about the 80
Olympiade, and were looked upon as defenders of a different sort of Philosophy,
then what was generally by others of their age thought most probable and most
received; some holding one opinion, some another concerning the beginning of
things, as you may see them recited by Aristotle in sundry places in his
Physics, his Book de Coelo, and other of his Writings. Amongst them all
Democritus, or perhaps one ancienter then he, Leucippus, broached that opinion,
that all things were at first made of Atoms, though I confess I find not that
word used before the time of Epicurus, who flourished much about the time of
Aristotle: they maintained that the beginning of all things came from Atoms
flying about in vacuo, and that by their motion and concourse all bodies were
made. They agreed not well what to call them; some called them (...), unities;
others, (...), little bodies; (...), plena, and densa; (...), the first matter
of all things. And Epicurus says, as Plutarch relates it, (...). That it was
called an Atom, not because it was the least body, but because it could not be
divided, being incapable of vacuitie. See Gassend. Phys. sect. 1. lib. 3. cap.
^. Then they farther added they were aspera, levia, rotunda, angulata, hamata;
rough, light, round, angled, and hooked. Plutarch tells you, that Democritus
allowed them magnitude and figure, and Epicurus allowed them weight; so that it
seems they were both heavy and light. Vid. Lactan. de ira Dei, page 784. edit.
Hacky, 1660. However, be they what they will, from these, as the beginning of
all things, was the Universe made. This opinion seemed so unreasonable, that
for nigh 2000 years it lay buried and forgotten, till at last it was revived by
Gassendus, a learned Philosopher and Divine, Regius Professor of the
Mathematics at Paris, whom my self had the honor particularly to know, and
frequently converse with there, and often about this subject; I found him a man
very communicable, but to me would never declare his opinion to agree with that
of Epicurus, only resolving to write his Life and Philosophy, thought fit to
propound fairly what might be said on that subject. This opinion, in my
judgment, labors under many and great improbabilities. First, they admit of no
first Causes beyond the sphere of Nature, and are disputed against by
Lactantius as deniers of Providence. They held there was no difference between
Materia prima and Elementa: That Atoms were both, and had their beginning ab
aeterno from no other cause but Nature or themselves, against Aristotle, who
affirms, Exelementis eterna fieri impossible.

Secondly, They were (...), little bodies, that they had figure and weight; so
there was locatum, but there was no locus, for they did volitare in vacuo, for
in vacuo there can neither be space nor extension, and a Body cannot be without
both, neither can we have any other Idea of a Body, but what we have of Space.
Besides, in Vacuo there can be no terms of motion.

Thirdly, There is less absurdity to make maeximum divisibile the beginning of
things then Minimum. Nature might as well make a great body of nothing, or let
it be from eternity, as make many little ones out of them to make one great
one; for Maximum and Minimum differ not specifically, and divide a body into
what particles you please, the matter is still the same, and the magnitude
would be the same, could you restore the figure, and a thing is called Maximum
in respect of the matter, not the figure.

Fourthly, There can be no solid reason given for the passion of any body from
this Doctrine; for if the first Man were made from the voluntary concourse of
Atoms, they being impassible and eternal, why is not the compositum so too?
There is in them no contrariety, and so can be no fighting between contrary
qualities, which should cause either pains or death, their difference being
only in figure. This argument is used by Hippocrates in his book de natura
humana. (...). If a man be but one, that is to say, of one principle, he could
not feel pain. Fernelius tells you in his Book de Elementis, lib. 2. cap. 4.
His argumentis tanquam fustibus vis illa and turbulenta concursu atomorum
immutabilium per inane volitantium in exilium relegata, and de natura and
mundoque depulsa videri possit.

Fifthly, Aristotle in his Physics demonstrates, that a continuum cannot be
made of indivisibles, because in them there is nothing first nor last, in
regard there are no parts; the Chapter is well worth reading over, and confuted
by those that think themselves able to do it.

Sixthly, How comes it that all things are made with so great ornament, if they
came by a voluntary concourse of Atoms at first? why have we not still the
same things? An infinity of Atoms cannot be exhausted, nor can any reason be
given why there are not every day new Machines made equal to the frame of the
world. Why need we ^eeds of any thing? that which brought them at first may
continue them still. It Is strange to think this Machina mundi could be made by
a concourse of Atoms, and yet we never saw a poor Cottage so made. Or at least
whence comes it to pass, that some new concourse of Atoms does not disjoint,
and put this already made out of frame?

I let pass many arguments drawn from Geometry, viz. That a shorter and a
longer line will be equal, that the hypotenuse in a rectangled triangle is
equal to the perpendicular; nay indeed, that no triangle can be made. For let
the Triangle A B C be equicrural, and let A B consist of any number, for the
purpose of three Atoms, A C of the same, let B C be two Atoms, d e, which is
shorter then B C, cannot be less then one; let it then be supposed one, then
must it follow, that d e and f g are equal, for nothing can be less then one
Atom, and d e is but one by supposition, f g is therefore one also, and equal
to d e, which is absurd, unless a part be equal to the whole, for that part of
d e between the pricked lines is equal to f g, therefore d e is greater.

Again, if there be any hooked Atoms, it follows demonstratively they cannot be
indivisible; for let b d be a hooked Atom, from the term a draw a c, that is
shorter then a d c, as is easily demonstrated; then is not that Atom minimum
divisibile, for I have given you a less, viz. a c.

To say that here is a transition from Mathematical to Physical lines, is but a
mere effugium or cavil, for what ever is Mathematically true is Physically true
too, if you take it under a Physical consideration; and the line or Atom a c,
take it under what consideration or notion soever, will be still shorter then a
d c, and so a d c not the minimum divisibile.

Again, An Atom must be considered under the notion of a Quantity, let it be
the least. But Diophantus will teach you lib. 4. Arithm. quaest. 33. that an
Unit, that is to say, the least quantity is in its own nature divisible.

To say that an Atom is divisible in its own nature, but that nature never did
proceed to the dividing it, is to speak this not intelligible; for how is it
possible to consider a thing divisible in its own nature, and yet not to have
its beginning from something less then it self? Neither can you have any other
Idea of it then as a thing extended, and so occupying a place.

Perhaps it may be said, that those that assert the doctrine of Atoms are not
so rigid as I make them, but will allow, that though all bodies are made of
Atoms, yet they are made of fiery, aerie, earthly and watery Atoms, and that from
the discord of these all passions and death comes. If their meaning be this, we
shall easily agree. The difference being only verbal, they calling that an
Atom which Aristotle calls an Element, then will not the notion of the four
Elements be so frigid as our M. N. makes them, or so easily to be cashiered.
But certainly I know none of the Ancients of that Sect have explained their
meaning in that manner. You may see in Hippocrates in the place before cited,
some held all things were made of fire, others of water, others of earth, but
none of the mixture of them all; though perchance some later Writers, pressed
by many absurdities which would otherwise have followed, have expressed their
meaning otherwise. vid. Magnen. prop. 28. etc. lib. tertij.

Possibly it may be urged, that some of the inconveniences that follow upon
this doctrine of Atoms will fall out likewise upon that of Elements; for who
brought them together to make the compositum?

The Answer to this is easy to those that believe the Creation. Plato could
tell you the beginning of things could not be comprehended by sense or
imagination. Aristotle in several places speaks of (...), something that was
Divine; so that they had some dark knowledge of the providence and government
of God, which Democritus and Epicurus derided; though necessity sometime made
rather some of their followers then themselves let fall words sounding toward
the concession of a Deity.

Another opinion, somewhat different from those before mentioned, and the
commonly received Aristotelian Principles, is that of Mr. Des Carts, a person
certainly of as sublime a wit and deep reach as any that has gone before him;
he finding that the doctrine of Democritus and Epicurus was subject to great
difficulties, which required bodies that had both figure and extension, not
only to be indivisible, but also to move in vacuo, both which qualities he
held absurd and impossible: and therefore endeavors, Princip. Phil. pars. 2.
to prove there is no difference between spatium extensum and corpus, and that a
spatium imaginarium immensum fancied by some before the Creation, was
impossible, because no such space could be without a body to fill it, the
nature of Body consisting in extension, which in truth is no more then what
Aristotle had said long before, that there could be no spatium vacuum, because
there could be no terms of it. But from this suppositum Mr. Des Carts
concludes, and Regius his follower, that the matter of the whole Creation must
needs be one and the same, both of bodies Celestial and Terrestrial, because
the essence of Matter or Body simply and universally considered, consisting
only in extension, that being always the same, the matter must be so also.
This you may see laid down by Mr. Des Carts, Prin. Phil. p. 2. sect. 22. Regii
Philo. nature. p. 6. And having farther explained local motion and the nature
thereof, he comes in the third part of his Princ. Philos. to handle the
Elements or most simple parts, out of which he conceives this Mundus
aspectibilis might have been framed; and this he lays down, not as a truth, but
as an hypothesis, from which all appearances may be solved: for being a great
Philosopher, and withal a Christian, he tells you, that it is not to be doubted
but that God at first created all things in their perfection by his infinite
power, not out of Seeds or Elements. Yet for our better understanding the
manner of the Creation, we may well consider how all things might have been
made by God, though that they were by him so made we know to he false. v. Phil.
p. tent. sect. 45. For the better explication of this, he supposes, that after
all that matter of which the world consists was made, it pleased God to divide
it into magnitudes near equal to one another, endowed every one of them with
that swiftness they now retain and keep, and that every one of these particles
move in near a circular motion about its own center, separated and divided each
of them one from the other. These particles he conceives to be of different
irregular figures; that by their violent motion, hitting one against the other
by Attrition, they did wear off a very thin dust, which by reason of its
extraordinary thinness and lightness he makes to be the first Element, and the
matter of the third Heaven, which by reason of its infinite subtlety was
capable to insinuate it self, and fill up all vacuities in other bodies; and
out of which first light, and after by a congregation of more of that matter
the Sun was made. In the next place he supposes, that by the attrition of
these particles a second sort of matter was made, not so subtle as the first,
out of this the Stars and Planets moving in their several Vortexes were framed.
By this time these irregular figures by continual attrition wearing off the
angles of one another, at last grew round, and what was worn off thicker and
grosser, out of this thickest part the Earth and the things contained, he
thinks to have been made and composed. So that the matter of all things is
still the same, differing only in densitie and raritie. This I take to be
shortly the sense of this Author, and by which as the most simple he conceives
the appearances of nature may be solved, so that though things were not, yet it
might have pleased God to have made them so. I think him thus far in the right,
that he makes the Maximum divisibile to be the Materia prima, and divides that
into particles, which in my judgment is more reasonable, then to make Atoms
concur of themselves by a volitation in vacuo, because it is more agreeable
to reason, that God made all things as they now are at first, and that their
disposition by days, first, second, etc. was not that there were days with God,
but to teach us the order of the Creation, and that there should be days and
times with us: and this seems to be the opinion of Du Hamel page 69. de
consens. vet. and nov. Philos. and quotes St. Augustine to back it. This
Hypothesis of this great Philosopher seems to me to be subject to many
improbabilities: for why does he make three Elements? if the matter be the same
there is but one. Wheat and Flower is the same substance, though the one be
finer then the other. But if it be said he understands densitie in one subject,
and rareness in another, which makes a difference in the things themselves as
to their effects, the more rare entering into the composition of Light, the Sun
and Stars; the more thick and dense to the making more dark and opacous bodies,
why does he not then make as many Elements as there are diversities of densitie
and rareness?

Secondly, I cannot conceive how there can be any motion in those particles,
out of which these Elements are made. For first, it is admitted that the great
Expansum has extension, and so consequently is filled with some body or
bodies, which must then of necessity be contiguous one to the other, and
consequently no possibility of motion, except what is common to all the parts
together, like a bladder filled with air. For either you must say, that the
several faces of these particles meet together, which must hinder the motion or
abrasion of one another, or else the angles of some must meet and touch the
plains of others, then they will not complere locum solidum, so that there must
be an empty space not filled with any thing, since that thin subtle matter that
should fill up all these vacuities is not in nature, till it be first made by
abrasion. Thirdly, I see not Mr. Des Carts make any contrariety in these
Elements, and so the same inconveniences will follow that did from the other
opinions, to wit, that there should be no passion, death, or alteration of
bodies. For if these three Elements be made one out of the other, they must
needs be homogeneous without any contrariety, and so subject to no corruption.
To say that it may come from some disturbance in the motion of that very
subtle etherial matter which fills up the void spaces or pores in all bodies,
is very hard to conceive. For first, admit that such a disturbance in the
motion of that matter might cause an alteration or corruption, what extraneous
matter should cause that disturbance I see not, nature of her self never
tending to her own destruction. Besides, from hence it must follow, that
corruption and alteration of all bodies comes from a cause without them, and
not from any thing that enters into the texture of the body, or any
indisposition of the parts thereof. Lastly, to say that those little particles
that go to the texture of any body do of themselves disunite, does not avoid
the precedent inconvenience, for it may be asked why they disunite, or what
made them come together to separate? Neither can that be supposed of which no
cause can be given. vid. Magnen. p. 302.

Lastly, I see little difference between this opinion and that of Democritus,
since they both agree there was an infinity of small parts, from the
conjunction of which all greater bodies were made; in this they differ: one
says, they are solid, compact and indivisible; the other, that they are
indefinite though not infinite, divisible though not divided. One makes the
little Atoms, first made by nature, and that by their concourse the great
Machine of the world was made; the other says, the great Expansion was by God
first created, and that the ornaments and elements thereof were taken out of
the great mass by division, and separation of the parts of it.

I come now to examine the reasons of our late Chemists touching the beginning
or elements of mixed bodies, and I shall as shortly as I can not only show
their opinion, but withal show what deviation they have made from those
ancient Hermetick Philosophers, from whom they at first deduced their notions.
These late Philosophers by fire, as they style themselves, finding that the
ancient Hermetick Philosophers made often mention of Sulphur and Mercury in
their writings, to which others added Salt; and farther finding them to make
frequent mentions of Sublimation, Calcination, Ablution, Circulation,
Digestion, Reverberation, Fixation, and the like; and also of the different
Vessels and Furnaces to be used in their Philosophical works, adhering to the
Letter, but deviating from the sense, not considering the simple and easy
ways of nature in the production of things, though ever inculcated to them in
the ancient Writers, presently fell to the invention of several Furnaces proper
for those several works as themselves, not the true Philosophers, understood
them, who do not stick sometime to tell you, that by Sublimation, Calcination,
Circulation, Fixation, and the like, they understand things quite different
from what our vulgar Chemists mean; nay, that these several Operations are
performed in one and the same Furnace, nay, in one and the same Vessel, Nature
being the true Philosopher, who of it self excites the central and natural Fire
that lies hid in the prepared Matter, by the help of an artificial one in its
degrees, administered by the hand of the Artist. So that Sublimation,
Circulation, Digestion, Calcination and Fixation are but different steps in the
same work. But this either not suiting with the humor or pride of later Wits,
who thought nothing very good that was not attained by great labor, fell to
inventing of several Furnaces proper for these several works; thence came your
Furnus Sublimatorius, Calcinatorius, Reverberatorius, Circulatorius,
Digestivus, and as many more, as every man according to his several fancy
pleased to think of. Next, finding that out of several things, both Mineral and
Vegetable, by diverse preparations and different administrations of Fire, they
were able to produce different sorts of Substances, some inspid, some quick and
piercing, some acid and sharp, some viscous, Unctuous and inflamable, some
saline, some fixed, have attributed to these Substances several names, viz. to
the watery insipid part, phlegm; to the spiritual or piercing, Mercury; to the
unctuous, Sulphur; the saline, Salt; the fixed, Earth; and make these to be the
five Principles or Elements of natural bodies. So Mr. Le Febvre, whose words
are quoted by our Author, page 270. understanding Principles and Elements to be
the same thing. So Mr. de Clave, cap. 7. page 40. tells you, they find only
five simple bodies in their last resolution, and thinks them ridiculous who
make any difference between Principia and Elementa. So that these five
Principles must by them, at least by our M. N. be held up exclusive to those
four of Fire, Air, Water and Earth, the notion of which must be looked upon as
frigid and vain, and these five looked upon as the most simple Substances. In
this Disceptation it will not be unworthy our observation, that these persons
having deduced their notions of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury out of the Writings
of the ancient Hermetick Philosophers, ought not in reason to be believed
farther then they agree with their ancient Masters, not where they differ from
and fight against them: now it is very clear out of all their Writings, that by
Sulphur and Mercury they understood very frequently something latent in the
Materia magisterii, which matter they all held to be compounded of the four
Elements, by the circulation whereof in the Rota Philosophica, the Magisterium
was composed, when they then called Sulphur fixum, Universal solvens, nay
sometime Mercurius Philosophorum; not but that there was in it before it came
to this height both Sulphur and Mercury, the volatile part of the matter they
called Mercury, sometime the whole matter, crude and undigested, without any
previous preparation, was called Mercury, and this on purpose that they might
conceal their Art from such as they held unworthy to know it. The nexus
utriusque, to wit, of Sulphur and Mercury, they called Salt, which by many
Philosophers is left out, and indeed in the Philosophical work appears not, but
as a vehiculum to set the other two at work, that so superius haberet naturam
inferioris, and inferius naturam superioris. But there is nothing more clear
from all their Writings, that they admitted the four Elements of Fire, Air,
Water and Earth; this is very plain by Raimund Lully in codicillo cap. 33, 34,
etc. among the later Writers, Sendivogius throughout his Book. In tract. de
Sulph. he has these words, Sunt autem principia rerum, praesertim metallorum,
secundum antiquos Philosophos due, Sulphur and Mercurius; secundum Neotericos
vere tria, Sal, Sulphur, and Mercurius. Origo autem horum principiorum sunt
quatuor Elementa. Sciunt ergo studio si hujus scientiae quatuor esse elementa,
etc. And in another place of the same Author, Duplex est materia metallorum
(note, he says not rerum omnium, but metallorum) proxima, remota: proxima est
Sulphur and Mercurius, remota sunt quatuor Elementa, etc. By which it is
manifest these ancient Philosophers did not intend that these Principia of
Sulphur and Mercury should justle out the Doctrine of the four Elements, but
held that of Sulphur and Mercury distinct from them, and in the same Treatise
handles the natures of them all distinctly and apart. The Author of that little
Tractate called Physica restituta, Can. 58. tells you, That all mixed bodies are
made of two Elements, which answer to Earth and Water, in the which the other
of Air and Fire are virtually included. In Ar^an. Hermet. Philosoph. Can. 76.
^e tells you, That the other Elements are circulated in the form of Water. He
tells you of Ignis ^^aturae in mixtis, and a Humor ra^^calis, which are both
immortal and inseparable from any subject: explains his meaning by the example
of glass made out of ashes, which could not be made fluxile except there were
in those ashes a radical moisture; so of Salts. In sum, I know not one of
them but admit, that in all bodies there is something answerable to the four
Elements of Fire, Air, Water and Earth, which we feel and handle, and by the
mixture of which they are all, or at least some of them, composed. [For by the
way I would not be understood to say, that necessarily every body whatsoever
must be composed of all the four Elements, for a mixture may be made, and some
body, for ought I know, framed out of the conjunction of two or three of them;
and it is enough for the support of that Doctrine that there are four, to deduc^
rationally that any one body is composed of them.] By what has been already
said it is evident, that the ancient Philosophers did conceive and hold, that
their Sulphur and Mercury is something that lies hid in the heart of that
matter which is compounded of the four Elements. See Phys. restitut. Can. 224.
That Sulphur answers to the Calidum innatum, which is the spiritual fire, and
Mercury to the humidum radicale. So that by those names sometimes they
understand what ^n mixed bodies has some analogy with the Elements of Fire, Air
and Water; for under humidum radicale both Air and Water, in their sense, are
comprehended. At other times by Sulphur they understand the fixed matter, after
the circulation of the Elements through every degree of their Zodiac, and by
Mercury the volatile part, which ^auses that circulation to be made informa
aquae, and in ventre aeris, till at last all ends in rupem illumi^^tam, as they
are pleased to phrase it, which of it self is a powerful remedy for all
diseases, and has an ingress to the solution of all imperfect Metalls, and, as
they say, after some succedaneous preparations and repetition of the same work,
will cause a transmutation of them. But they never understood that any of these
Principles should destroy and put out of doors the four Elements, which
themselves always maintained. Some of the Chemists, I confess, as Monsieur de
Clave and others, have denied an Elementary Fire, not distinguishing between
the material Fire we see in its effects, and that central we see not. So by
their laborious operations of the ancient Philosophers, they have corrupted
their sense, and merited what Sendivogius says of them, Si hodie revivisceret
ipse Philosophorum pater Hermes, and subtilis ingenii Geber, cum profundissimo
Raimundo Lullio, non pro Philosophis, sed potius pro discipulis a nostris
Chemistis haberentur. Nescirent tot hodie usitatas distillationes, tot
circulationes, tot calcinationes, and tot alia innumerabilia artistarum opera,
quae hujus saeculi homines ex illorum scriptis invenerunt and excogitarunt.
That is to say, If those ancient and profound Philosophers, Hermes, Geber and
Lullius were alive, they would rather be accounted Disciples then Philosophers,
who would not understand the meaning of those many Distillations, Circulations,
Calcinations, and innumerable other laborious operations found by these Artists
out of their Writings, contrary to the meaning of them. What reason therefore
have we to believe, that these men have by their fiery and destructive trials
found out the Principles or Elements from which mixed bodies have their
composition, when they have so much mistaken the sense of those Authors from
whom they first took their names and notions of Sulphur, Salt and Mercury?

I shall only touch at many unreasonable deductions, which in my judgment will
follow out of this Doctrine. First, Entia non sunt multiplicanda nisi propter
necessitatem. So that all those parts in which humidity is prevalent, may be
well comprehended under the Element of Water; such are insipid Phlegm, perhaps
Spirit and Oil, except you had rather reckon them of the Element of Fire,
because of their inflammability. The drier parts under that of Earth, in which
Air and Fire are included, which two likewise insinuate themselves into all
other compounded bodies, for I believe Air is in the most rectified Spirit, and
natural heat in all water whatsoever, which causes first a fermentation, and
then a corruption. The different savours and viscosity may well be believed to
proceed from the different wombs of the Earth, in which the elemental mixture
or matter produces various offsprings; to wit, of Metalls, Marcasites,
Stones, Plants, and the like, endued with those several qualities and tastes we
find in them, participating in their nature of that part of the Earth whence
they had their beginnings. Beside, if this opinion should be admitted, we must
fancy as many Sulphurs as there are different sorts of Oils produced out of
any body; so of the rest. Neither do I see what more reason they have to say,
that all Oils, Phlegms and Spirits, though very different in their tastes and
effects, are the same Element of Sulphur, Water and Mercury; they, I say, are
all comprehended under that one of Water, in regard humidity is in them all
most prevalent. Secondly, in this resolutory way of theirs, many bodies afford
a volatile Salt that ascends with the matter to be resolved, and is different in
effects, and not very like in taste to that which is fixed and lies hid in the
earthy part of the matter, till by calcination of it into ashes any convenient
Menstruum becomes impregned with it, and that by evaporation of the Menstruum
taken out. I see not why these may not be called different Elements as well as
Phlegm and Spirit, the one called Water, the other Mercury; then in stead of
five we have six Elements. Thirdly, in many of those bodies which will be
distilled, all these different Elements will not, I think, be drawn, as out of
your Resins, out of which ( Terebintine for the purpose) I have never seen any
fixed Salt made; Faber tells us of a volatile Salt to be taken out of it. From
hence it will follow, that all bodies are not compounded of the same number of
Elements. The like may be said of your Pinguedines and many Gums. I think no
body will deny that our ordinary Water, or, if you please, May dew is a
compound, yet will it be found, I believe, past the cunning of these Artists to
draw from it either a burning Spirit or inflameable Oil. I am not ignorant that
Faber speaks of a sharp burning Spirit, drawn, as he says, out of Rainwater,
he counts it for a Panacea, and it may, I believe, be so judged, when it is
attained without sophistication. Fourthly, what shall we say to the Tincture
taken sometimes out of the crude matter, both Vegetable and Mineral, which
shall notwithstanding, after they are bereaved of their Tinctures, yield the
same Salts, Spirits, Phlegms and Oils they did whilst they were full of it?
Under what Classis shall we put these Tinctures? why may we not reckon them
another Element? and then we have gotten seven, viz. Earth, Phlegm, volatile
Salt, fixed Salt, Spirit, Oil and Tincture. If you say that Tincture is but a
subtle part of that body out of which 'twas drawn, I admit it, but still it is a
part of that body endued with a color taken out of the whole, and of which the
whole by that means is bereaved. Nay, what will he say to him that shall show
him a substance drawn out of the ashes of an ordinary Vegetable, after their
Salt is taken away, which evidently shows that those very ashes which,
according to this Doctrine, should be the pure Element of Earth, are still a
compound body? Farther, what will he say to the Quintessences drawn by
Chemists, what to the Prima entia of many substances both Vegetable and
Mineral, spoken of by Paracelsus in the end of his Tractate De Renovatione and
Restauratione? what are these? and why may not these be called Principia as
well as any of those named by our Author? So are we not certain at last how
many Principia we may come to. Paracelsus himself is more modest, for he tells
you in tractatu de rebus naturalibus, cap. 4. De sale and sub sale contentis.
Constat homo ex tribus, Sulphur, Mercurio, Sale. Ex his etiam constat quiequid
ubivis est, and nec paucioribus nec pluribus. And in another place tells you,
de tribus principiis, cap. 2. Id quod ardet Sulphur est, quod effumat est
Mercurius, qui cinis relinquitur Sal est. By which words it is clear, that under
Ashes he comprehends our Author's Earth and Salt, under Sulphur whatsoever is
inflammable; so that our Author's Oil and Spirit are comprehended under the
name of Sulphur, and under that of Mercury the parts of any matter that will
ascend in a smoke or vapor; by which two things are very manifest. First, that
Paracelsus here spoke in the sense of other ancient Philosophers, and did not
take these substances as things to shoulder out the four Elements, which in
another Tractate he particularly defends, and shows how they are in the body
under the form of the four humors; so that it seems neither the Doctrine of
the Elements nor of the four Humors were looked upon as fancies by Paracelsus.
Secondly, That these substances were looked upon by him as compounds, and so
not as the Elements and most simple parts of the mixed body, contrary to what
Mr. De Clave's and our Author, out of Le Febvre, have delivered, for in them
all will Mercury be found, for they will all give a smoke if they be set upon
the fire and made boil, except the dry Ashes divested of its Salt. Of the same
opinion is Dr. Willis, who tells you, he does indeed find those five substances
in bodies, but does not deliver them as most simple beings altogether
uncompounded, but only as such sensible parts, by the motion, combination,
inequality or separation whereof bodies are augmented or perish, and this to
the end that men may, in his judgment, better understand by the view of these
more gross parts how Fermentation is made, then by the more abstracted notion
of the four Elements, which never in their purity come under the senses. In all
this there is no absurdity, and let him in God's name enjoy his opinion that
conceives he can this way better explain the appearances of Nature. But the
understanding of these substances in this sense can be no part of our M. N.'s
meaning, who makes use of them to thrust out of doors the frigid notion of the
four Elements, with the fancy of Humors and Qualities; tells you these are the
Principles or Elements of natural bodies, in which after their reduction,
nothing heterogeneous can be found; whereas the ancient Philosophers as well as
Paracelsus and Dr. Willis do admit these which he calls Elements to be still
compounded bodies, and do all, notwithstanding this, allow both of Qualities,
Humors and four Elements, as I have showed before, and is yet more cleared,
when we consider that in the driving off of the Oils from many acid bodies,
Vitriol for the purpose, part of the substance of the Mineral it self comes
over with the Oil, which in time will of it self precipitate in the air in the
form of that body was drawn off, and, to my understanding, in all respects the
same, and so not the volatile Salt which peradventure others might, and my self
did at first suppose, till upon trial I was satisfied otherwise. I have by me
at this present a Balsame of Sulphur, which I prepared above fifteen years
since, which still retains as high a tincture to outward appearance as it had
at first, and yet has let fall some of my Sulphur to the bottom, which could
not come thither, had it not in substance first ascended into the Menstruum,
for whether it rise three inches or ten is not material: but this is certain,
it remained all in the form of a liquor for many years. I might add, that many
of these substances will in time corrupt and stink, others nourish, which
cannot well be conceived from what is simple, and has nothing in it
heterogeneous. Thus I have done with the examination of the several opinions,
and come now to the last Aristotelian way of the composition of mixed bodies out
of the four Elements, in which we have, after all this clamor of our M. N. and
those of his party, this advantage, that two of them are granted to our hand,
viz. Water and Earth; as for the other two, the parties are divided, some
denying an elementary fire, others admitting fire and denying Air; perhaps
their mistake may proceed from not being able to form to themselves any Idea of
Fire and Air, except what they see and feel in their effects; whereas
undoubtedly the elementary Earth and Water are as different in their natures
from that Earth and Water we see, as the Fire and Air in their elements are
different from those we see and feel. But the Ancients, with Aristotle and his
followers, finding by experience that there were four contrary qualities, to
wit, Heat, Coldness, Drought, Moisture, and that these being accidents must
needs inhere in some subject, did from hence rationally enough deduce, that
that subject in which heat was without any mixture, might be well called the
element of Fire, and so of the rest. Finding, secondly, that most bodies, as
well animate as other, were endued with a certain temperament, that is to say,
some in which heat prevailed, yet so alloied with coldness, that the heat did
not utterly consume and destroy the compositum; others in which Drought was
most intense, yet attempered in some measure with moisture, deduced, that this
temperament could not well be introduced in nature, without a mixture of those
qualities which resided purely in their elements; hence came first the notion
of the four Elements, found out primarily by the consideration of the four
qualities, the mixture of the Elements in the composition of bodies, by the
temperament of them; so that the qualities and temperament, the one introduced
the Elements, the other the mixture of them, in which they were careful to
distinguish between apposition, confusion and mixture; apposition, where two
different things were put together, so as again they might be separated, as,
for the purpose, different seeds or grains. Confusion, where different things
were put together, which could not be separated, yet introduced not a new form,
such is the putting of wine and water together, which retains still the same
form it had of liquor. Lastly, Mixture properly so called, in which, by most
Authors, these four conditions are required. First, that the Miscibilia must be
endued with contrary qualities, that they may mutually act and suffer one from
the other, for otherwise they would remain in the same state without any
mixtion at all. Secondly, there must be a certain proportion both in quantity
and quality, otherwise one would destroy the other, and there could be no
temperament. Now this proportion and contrariety in the Miscibles, if it be of
equality, produces a temperament ad Pondus, which so long as it remains in any
body, that (as it seems to me) cannot receive any change or alteration. But
where there is not that equality both in quantity and quality, but that one
prevails over the other in some measure, yet not so to destroy hastily the
Compositum, this is called Temperament ad Justitiam, by which the Compositum
may be preserved for many years in a good estate, yet at last, from the
constant fight of these contrary qualities, alteration, death and corruption at
last let in. Thirdly, the Elements must be so put together, that every part of
the Compositum must retain them all four. And, lastly, that they must remain
formally in Mixto. I know this last is controverted by some Writers, yet I
believe will, upon examination, be found a truth, but the disputation thereof
is not for this place.

Avicenna, lib. 1. d. 2. proves the Elements from the necessary things that
must concur to the generation of every natural body; he tells you, no
generation can be without a fixion of the matter and extension, a dilution and
permeation of the parts, a subtiliation and mixture with motion: he tells you,
fixion comes from the Earth, extension and dilution from the Water, permeation
and subtiliation from the Air, the motion of the mixed from the Fire; and then
concludes, that since those things are necessary to all generations, and are
supplied by those four Elements, those Elements must needs have existence to
supply that office. This argumentation from this learned Arabian, will, upon
good consideration, be found to have more weight then at first sight does
perhaps appear. Of this I am sure, that this, with those before drawn from the
combinations of the four qualities amongst many others, have so far prevailed
with the world, that they have, I think, for nigh, if not full 2000 years, been
thought reasonable, and therefore not so easily to be exploded, and thought dry
and jejune notions, as our M. N. would have them. Let every man, however, for
me, safely enjoy his own opinion, and the learned judge which carries most
weight of reason.

I should now come to a particular examination of the eighth and ninth Chapters
of his book, which are very long, but contain in them nothing, or little more
then a repetition of what has been several times inculcated in other parts of
his Book, and already taken notice of. What he speaks touching Digestion,
Fermentation, and the mistake of the Schools in the notion of Diseases, whether
a disease be only a distemper in the excess of qualities, as the Galenists, or
a real substantial thing inherent in the Archeus, as Helmont, may admit of an
endless dispute; but he should do well to explain what they mean by Archeus,
and how a disease can be inherent in it, or how any Medicine can work upon a
Spirit and incorporeal thing, or disease cured, except it can be done by means
of the qualities in correcting their excess. I am sure none of them have
hitherto delivered us any such Medicine or method, and till then, for ought I
see, we must be content with our old ones. No more to the purpose is what he
says in the same Chapter touching the distribution of the Chyle, in which the
new discoveries have not at all altered the old method, which stands firm upon
its ancient base of long experience and practice. Neither does he or any other
make it appear, that Chemical preparations, which he only contends for, do
otherwise operate then the other Galenick ones do, viz. by Purging, Vomit,
Sweat, Urine, Digestion or Transpiration, which effect they had long before the
new discoveries in Anatomy were at all made known to the world: and therefore
from that Topic, no casting off the old Medicines, and erecting a new method
can be evinced. What is new in his very long ninth and last Chapter, (except
his carping at Hippocrates, who is vindicated enough in Dr. Sprackling) is the
Doctrine of Critical days, Urines and Pulses. I shall speak very shortly to them
all.

As for the hypercritical Doctrine of Critical Days, that he derides, and calls
it as childish a conceit, etc. tells you it is like children's game called Even
and Odd, because, forsooth, the indicatory days fall upon every fourth, the
decretory or critical upon every seventh day, says, this doctrine is useful for
two ends; first, to cloak the ignorance of Practisers; and, secondly, to hide
the insufficiency of the Art: and yet withal is forced to admit, that this
shameful conceit, as he terms it, has been received in the world for 2000
years, and so indeed has it generally been, and the truth of their assertion
grounded upon constant experience. So that it must be either conceded that
there is truth in the thing, or that the assertors have been all ignorant, and
have used this as a cloak to hide that and the insufficiency of their Art. It Is
strange that for 2000 years there has been no learned Physician, but such as
have obtruded things false and ridiculous, and not only so, but defended with
their pens their opinions, and given reasons for it, which had it been used as
a cloak to ignorance, they needed not have done. But now in this learned Age of
ours, M. N. is sprung up to carp at all the Ancients, and yet offers nothing of
his own so good as what we have received from them. But he vouchsafes at last,
page 313. for the information of his Countrymen, to descend to a view of the
odd conceits of the even and odd gamesters about critical days. Is pleased
moreover to let us know that in his judgment Hippocrates was wiser then his
followers, and that Avicenna approves of Hippocrates in that particular,
because he contented himself only with experience. Pray, Sir, if he delivered
you nothing but observation, why do you deride him? Is a man to be scorned
because M. N. does not believe what he says? He that shall readhim de
Principiis, shall find many handsome observations of the Septenary number, as
well in the conception, growth and dentition of children, as also of the same
Number in acute sicknesses: And in the end of his Book, de Judicationibus,
tells you, that Fevers are judged the fourth, the seventh, the eleventh, the
fourteenth, etc. This that he has thus delivered has passed current ever
since, only upon the truth of his and the concurrent observations of others.
But he tells you it is lawful to object experience against experience; that in
our days things fall out as well upon other days as those he calls Critical. I
am glad yet he allows that such changes fall out upon those days Hippocrates
called Critical. Who ever said they never fell out upon other? I am sure
Hippocrates does not; nay, he tells you, that those changes will fall out
commonly, though no Physic at all be given. He does not say, the Medicine
rightly and duly or unduly administered, may not either hasten or retard the
Crisis, which may also happen from many other causes. From the great leader
hippocrates he comes to his followers, the embracers of the Pythagorean fancy
of the mysterious power of the number Seven, which, say they, may have effect
upon men, though the cause be not known. I will not enter into that high
speculation, but remit him to the Jewish Cabalists, to Plato and his Ideas of
later standing, to Leo, Isaurus, Brentius, Cornelius Agrippa, Trithemius,
Gaffarel, and many others, thought in their times learned men, and yet did not
think the mystical doctrine of Numbers so vain and idle a conceit as M. N.
would have us think it. I, but Galen has confuted that Doctrine well enough,
but has lapsed into a worse error. It Is true, Galen has spoke much against
the fancy of the mystery in Numbers, and with becoming gravity and modesty, but
that he has lapsed into a worse error, by attributing the cause of the Crisis
in acute sickness to the motion of the Moon, is more then M. N. will well
prove. It cannot with any color of reason be denied, but that the Moon has
very great influence upon sublunary bodies, this is evident enough from many
Shell-fishes, Rabbets, and many other creatures, who some in their brain, some
in other parts, receive increase or diminution in such a Phasis of the Moon.
Your Lunatici, Epileptici, men bitten with mad dogs, have always their accesses
with more vigor, either at the increase or full of the Moon; why therefore it
should have no power over the bodies of men, from whence judgment may be made,
is past my understanding. Against it he urges, If it were so, then the squares
and weeks of the Moon would always concur with the quaternions and weeks of the
disease, but this very rarely falls out. I am troubled to make sense of these
words, viz. what he means by quaternion of the disease, if he mean the fourth
day from the decubitus, as I think he does, then he is much in the right, for
the square or week of the Moon never did, nor never can concur with the fourth
day of the disease, unless the Moon could go above twenty degrees in a day: if
he would have the quaternion of the disease answer to the square of the Moon,
then his words must sound thus, The square and week of the Moon should answer
to the square and week of the disease. But who ever heard of the square of a
disease? The truth is, the square and week of the Moon is one and the (...)
thing, for in the seventh day from the decubitus, the Moon always goes 90
degrees, or thereabout, in her own Orb, and so has a quartile aspect with that
degree of the Zodiac that was ascendant at the time of the decubitus, which is
sometime called the square of the Moon, because it is the chord of 90 degrees,
and consequently the side of the greatest square can be inscribed in that
circle, and comprehends in its four angles the cusps of the first, the fourth,
the seventh and tenth Houses. Now the Moon, the fourth day from the decubitus,
comes to a sextile of the ascendant, which being an aspect of amity, if the
Moon be likewise well aspected by the other Planets, is said by Astrologers to
indicate a good event of that sickness, and so consequently a good Crisis on
the seventh day when she comes to quartile, which may decree good or bad
according to the nature of those Planets that are then with the Moon, or
aspected by her. So on the eleventh, when she comes to a trine, the fourteenth
to an opposition, and so of the rest, till she has absolved her Circle, before
which time acute sicknesses are commonly judged. Not that these indicatory and
decretal days do always just meet in that direct number of days to an hour,
because the Moon is sometimes velox, sometimes tarda cursu; but he that is
careful may gather much from them. Again, men are sometime deceived in the time
of the Crisis, because they know not from what time precisely to reckon the
decubitus; but he that shall heedfully observe the first great mutation in a
sickness, and accordingly look back from that time, and account the decubitus,
he will generally find the mutations happen according to the rules and days
before mentioned: I am sure if it be otherwise, the Astrologers are much
deceived. So is Argolus, who in his Book De diebus criticis, has given many
observations of the event of sicknesses, which happened according to these
grounds. So that for ought I see, the judgment of diseases from the motion of
the Moon and her aspects is not so frivolous as M. N. would have it, nor
perhaps so much to be attended as some others require it should be; only I
would give our Author that advertisement, not hereafter to gainsay those
opinions that have had long footing in the world, without he were able to give
demonstrative reasons against them.

Paracelsus reckons the knowledge of Astronomy as necessary to a Physician,
therefore could be no enemy to critical days. The opinion of Fracastorius I let
pass, and shall now have done with the doctrine of critical days, leaving
Asclepiades and Celsus to their opinions, without quarrelling with them, though
they differ from Hippocrates and Galen.

The next exception he takes is at Galen's too scrupulous description of the
Pulse, and reduces its motion to a far lesser number of varieties. He shall
not have me his enemy in this matter, I agree with him, the varieties he
enumerates are enough, and more then are generally observed; yet however let us
thank Galen for his diligence, and if at any time we should light upon any
variety in the Pulse not comprehended in this Writers ten varieties, let him
remember Galen had taken notice of it before. Sennertus, and out of him
Johnstonus, is content with three varieties, viz. Aequalis, and inequalis,
velox tardus, validus debilis: so that he may see that all the Dogmaticks were
not so nice to insist upon all the subtilties of Herophilus.

Touching the judgment of Urines, I shall refer him to Forestus and Fernelius,
from both which Authors it will appear, that the Urine is not sufficient in all
diseases to make a perfect judgment, though in many it is a great help,
especially those sicknesses that are acute, as well as diseases of the Reins,
Kidneys, Bladder, Obstructions, and some others. But our Author tells us, he is
only for rectification and improvement of the doctrine of Urins, and propounds
out of Dr. Willis ways of resolving them into those he calls the Chemical
Principles, that by this means the temperature may be rightly investigated. I
shall commend his or any man's diligence that shall contribute any thing to the
improvement of our Art, where his own time and the disease will give him leave;
let us only be thus far wary, not to mistake and call that an improvement
which perhaps is none, or not at all conducible to that great end of more
speedy and secure curing a disease; to which purpose I do not yet find any of
our new and learned speculations touching the motion of the Blood, the carriage
of the Chyle, the manner of sanguification, injection of Medicines into the
veins, have proved hitherto very effectual. In the mean time I would not be
thought to take from the due praise of those persons that have labored herein,
and heartily imparted their observations for the benefit of the Profession,
without upbraiding those Authors to whom the world is beholding for much of
that knowledge it now enjoys, by their communication of their labors to those
that came after them.

His invectives against Hippocrates and Galen, which hold him many pages, I
shall let pass, till the vindication of them by Dr. Sprackling shall be
answered by this undertaker.

Touching bleeding in Scorbutic diseases, Fevers, etc. I shall be very short,
having had occasion to speak more fully to it in another part of this Treatise;
my mind not being to follow him in his unnecessary repetitions of the same
thing. Page 383. he gives us caution to be very wary of drawing blood in our
climate, in regard of the universal spreading of the Scorbutical tincture.
After that, gives you the judgment of Thonerus, against bleeding in Fevers in
the Northern climates, confirms this by the different nature of the blood of
Italians and Germans, that in one it is safe, in the other dangerous; out of
Zacutus Lusitanus. Thus far he and I shall agree, that not only in the
Scorbute and Fevers in Northern, but Southern climates also, caution is to be
used in bleeding, as also in the use of all other Medicines. The want of this
is what we blame in our M. N. and others of the same feather, who would make us
believe they can cure all maladies with some one or two Chemical preparations,
which they use promiscuously, without any caution or consideration had of the
temperature of the party, the prevalency of the peccant humor, or preparation
of the body to make it more fit for the reception of more potent remedies. As
to bleeding in the Scorbute, I see not why it may not safely be administered,
provided the Scorbutic pollution be before well corrected, the stomach
strengthened, and the chylification made good, so that a good and wholesome
juice be carried (by what ductus is not material) to the heart. Bleeding at
this time may be properly made use of, for in regard the whole mass of blood is
infected with that acid saline quality he speaks of; I think it more rational
to draw part of the infected blood away, that the good chyle mingling with the
rest, may correct what remains; a part of its burden being taken away, then to
suffer the same Chyle, by a continual and daily supply to correct the whole. To
Thonerus I shall only say what a very learned Physician, yet alive, replied to
me, when I told him that Ludovicus Septelius disallowed very much the use of
Rhubarb in purging choler, and asked his opinion. He bad me not give heed to
the opinion of one man against the current of all practisers; this is the ease
with Thorenus, and some few others of his side. I am certain, if we believe
report, that great Wit Des Carts died in Sweden of a Plurisie, because he
refused to make use of that known remedy of letting blood. Neither see I any
reason why the strong Wines, hot Spices and succulent Meats used in cold
countries, may not as easily inflame the blood as in hotter Climates, where the
external heat is much alloyed by their constant use of cooling Fruits, Sallets,
much Water, and little use of Flesh-meats in their diets, we see Fevers do
arise, and are often cured by bleeding.

Touching bleeding in malignant Fevers, when safe, when otherwise, I have
spoken already, nor shall now trouble the Reader, no more then I shall to
answer our Author's own observations, page 416. which must stand or fall upon
the observers authority; so must that fancy of the difference of the Italian
and German blood. After this, page 432, etc. he makes an insinuating digression
to the Apothecaries, Page 419.
wishes for their ease, that the crude, fulsome, ill-conditioned Messes, and
Mixtures, and Liquors may be thrown out of doors, and this out of a supposition
that he has overthrown the trifling notions of Elements, Qualities,
Temperaments, Complexions, etc. toward the confutation whereof he has not made
the least attempt, nor answered any reason alleged for them farther then
reviling their Assertors, and a confident avowing for undoubted truths the wild
fancies of his own brain; but however, the Shops are to be reformed, and all
set upon a new basis of Chemical and experimental Physic, and this, forsooth,
because the Galenists seeing their own old remedies very insufficient, fall
themselves on the Chemical practice, though they do it by stealth, (as Mr. Le
Febvre says) and the quainter practisers become Semi-chymists, dividing their
practice between the Laborator and the Shop. And in this they do well, and want
but little of true conversion, seeing the only thing remains to be done is the
throwing aside the old principles and Methods, etc. and 435. recites out of Mr.
Le Febvre his great charity to them, and his endeavors to advance the dignity
of Pharmacy, viz. the Art of the Apothecary, that now lies bending to its
ruin, etc. Page 437. he tells you, that by these words of Mr. Le Febvre, the
Apothecary Royal; the other Apothecaries are at a stand, inasmuch as the stream
of practice running toward this new way, and the pedantick Galenists and
semi-chymists not knowing how to attempt a cure but by prescribing the old
stuff. The Apothecaries are bound to have it, lest they lose that sort of
practice. His advise therefore is, page 439. for the support of so worthy a
Society as the Apothecaries, that they should be indulged to make use of their
own Medicines at their own discretion among the Sick, seeing the prudent part
of them understand the nature of them, and the old rode of practice belonging
to them as well as (if not better then) the Galenists; and this to continue
till the old Galenick formalities be laid asleep or reformed, etc. If the
Apothecaries shall be misled by this kind of Sophistry, I should much wonder in
which he lays open his design too evidently, which is not at all to benefit
them, but himself and those of his brotherhood, and cause the Apothecaries to
mutiny both among themselves and that body by which they have hitherto been
supported. Why should he otherwise suppose that the stream of practice runs his
way; that the pedantick Galenists and Semi-chymists, nay, the Apothecaries
themselves, were not able to prepare their own Chemical remedies, exclusive to
all other, if the thing he supposes were true, and that they found it so? What
unknown preparation have they made public? what new thing are we beholding to
the Apothecary Roial for in all his course of Chemistry? have we not Books
enough stuffed with Chemical preparations? have we not Libavius, Basilius
Valentinus, Quercetane, Faber, Beguin, Crollius, Hartman, Scroderus,
Minsichius, Angelus Sala, and many others both French and Dutch Writers? What
has the Apothecary Roial which Dr. French has not in the English Tongue,
before him, or Translations, for the substance of the preparation, out of some
of the Books before mentioned? But that it is the nature of this sort of
Operators, if they make the least alteration, (as for the purpose, from
distilled Water to May-dew) to look upon the preparation with such a slight
alteration, as wholly their own, without returning thanks to him from whom they
stole it. Why then must the Apothecaries be indulged a liberty of practice,
till their old stock of Galenick remedies, and their Messes and Mixtures which
they are forced to keep for that sort of practice, are worn out? I tell you
why, to the end that by that time this M. N. and those of his party may have
set up a Laboratory, from which they pretend all preparations after their new
model should be made, and the Apothecaries furnished at easy rates from their
stock: this is clearly their drift, as in another place is expressed by this
Writer. But, pray, how have these men monopolized all Chemical Learning, that
the Semi-chymists, pedantick Galenists and Apothecaries may not be Masters of
that part of Learning as well as they? Away, away, M. N. with this disingenuous
dealing; if you are Master of any new piece of knowledge in this kind, make the
world partakers of it, and for my part I shall be one of the first shall give
you your due praise; otherwise let me tell you, it is beneath a Gentleman,
unworthy a Scholar, unbeseeming a man, to affix unhandsom names and reproaches
upon those you know not, and perhaps such as have labored more, and seen as
much in such as you call Chemical preparations as you have done, viz. in
several sorts of preparations of Vitriol, Salt, Antimony, Mercury, Sulphur,
Saltpeter, and out of every of these made good and appropriate remedies, and
successfully used them in many diseases, yet never found that effect that it
was fit to make use of them only to the exclusion of all the rest of the
Materia Medica. As for the Apothecaries, I shall leave them to their own
judgment, not doubting but the ancient method of Physic will be supported
without any other assistance then its own worth. And to you, M. N. I wish more
temper and consistence of judgment, for though you strike here at the old
Method and Rules, yet in the close of your Book, page 496. you seem to be more
moderate, and will be content to allow some more latitude in the use of Simples
and single Specificks. I should have looked upon this as a little retractation
of what went before, for how can the nature of diseases be changed, and a new
method necessarily introduced, if the old Simples and Specificks will yet in
some cases serve the turn? But the mischief is, you are not long in this mood,
for I find your hand subscribed under an engagement entered into by some of your
company, to endeavor the instituting an Incorporation of Professors of
Physic, Only by Hermetick or Chemical Physic, and in those their endeavors
to be assistant to one another, and never to relinquish that their engagement
for any temporal respects whatsoever. To let pass the danger of these kinds of
engagements, and how the best, nay perhaps all Professions, nay Trades, may be
capable of improvement in the judgment of some rash undertakers; and the
manifest untruth in the supposition upon which all this is built, to wit, That
after sufficient experiment it is found most true, that Chemical Medicines well
prepared, and as well applied, are above all others the safest, pleasantest and
most effectual means, both for conservation of health, and cure of all diseases
whatsoever. I would ask M. N. how he can engage to improve the Science of
Physic Only by Hermetick and Chemical Medicaments, except he understand the
use of them exclusive to all others, whether Simples or Specificks? What ever
is Chymically made, or otherwise, may be called, according to its nature, an
Extraction, a Salt, a Spirit, an Oil, or what you will; but certainly it is not
a Medicament but in its use and application: and I cannot believe M. N. did
intend only to know Chemical preparations, and not in like manner only to
make use of such, and no other at least at that time when he subscribed that
Engagement. But perhaps between the publishing his Book and his subscription he
had changed his mind, or warily considered, that every Clyster, Apozeme, or
distilled Water from any Simple or Specific, may be as well called a Chemical
Medicament, as their Salt, Oils or Spirits, which are all made by the Fire,
some in a close, some in an open one, and therefore the Preparers as deservedly
called Pyrotechnists as any of these. If in this I have mistaken his meaning, I
shall be willing to ask his pardon, when he makes me understand it. But that
the Reader may know where this Engagement is, he shall find it printed at the
end of a Book called, The Poor man's Physician, put out By Thomas Odowde (as he
calls himself) Esquire, one of the Grooms of the Chamber to his Sacred Majesty,
King CHARLES the Second. Now that at the same time you may know the juggling of
these kind of dealers, and how likely this Esquire is to make his Boy do such
strange Cures, which it seems a sworn Physician of the Kings could not, as
appears by a Letter of his, page 75. of his book. Be pleased to understand,
that by the omission of three Letters he has confounded one of the most
honorable employments about the King, with one of the most inferior, I think,
of any above stairs; for had he called himself Groom of the Bedchamber to his
Majesty, it had been one of the most honorable Places about his Person, as it
is Groom of the Chamber, you may understand his Office is to wait in the
Guard-chamber, to go of such errands as any of the Gentlemen-Ushers of the
Presence Chamber, nay, though they be but Quarter-waiters, shall think fit to
employ him in. Now he had this Subtilty to make such Readers as could not
distinguish between Groom of the Chamber and Groom of the Bedchamber believe
he was some great Officer, whereas in truth there is no such matter, nor ^e
likely to take such an employment, were he such a proficient in Physic as he
would have the world believe. I could show the falsehood of most of those Cures
he pretends in that Book to have done, but that is not my task, who am already
weary, but shall close up all this discourse with the words of Mr. Boil, who
speaking of the great difficulties in the Art of Physic, and consequently that
perhaps, without presumption, some innovation might be made in the Methodus
Medendi, goes on: Yet, Exper. Philos. p. 2. cap. 9. page 202.
Pyrophilus, I am much too young, too unlearned and too unexperienced to dare
to be Dogmatical in a matter of so great moment. And the Physicians are a sort
of men, to whose learned Writings on almost all Subjects the Commonwealth of
Learning is so much beholding, that I would not willingly dissent from them
about those Notions in their own Profession, wherein they seem generally to
agree. And do very much disapprove the indiscreet practice of our common
Chemists and Helmontians, that bitterly and indiscriminately rail at the
Methodists, in stead of heartily acquiescing in these manifest Truths their
observations have enriched us with, and civilly and modestly showing them their
errors where they have been mistaken. Let me advise you hereafter, M. N. to
write with such modesty and candor, as this both Learned and Honorable Person
does, and you will quickly learn to have a less esteem for your self, and the
world put a greater value upon your Writings and Endeavors.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 22. dele smattering. page 7. line 9. (...) leg. (...). page 21.
in tit. dele all. page 23. in tit. leg. Natures appearances. page 25. line 8.
leg. (...). ib. line 20. leg. (...). page 40. line 3. leg. could. page 33. tit.
leg. M. N. confident asserting. page 56. line 15. leg. next. page 67. line 4.
leg. popularis. page 70. line 4. after chapter add is* page 79. line 4. leg.
dolosus. page 97. line 3. leg. Pharmacopaeas. page 103. line 23. leg.
Pharmacopaeas. page 106. line 19. after therefore make a period, and let In
begin a line. page 115. line ult. leg. Crat. page 145. line 6. leg. things.
page 161. line 10. leg. which. page 166. line 16. after the word operations,
add and mistake. page 169. line 22. leg. then I to say they are, etc. page
189. line 20. leg. Leo Suavius. page 203. line 5. leg. Laboratory.


