Something written to the MAGISTRATES OF LONDON AND MIDDLESEX, Who sit on the
Seat of Justice, who are as examples to the rest of the Nation; or to
whomsoever this may come, that they may see the fruits of their doings, and
repent thereof.

Wi^h a sound of God's Judgments against Babylon and her Merchants.

Also, A manifestation of God's Love to his People, and an invitation to all
people to turn unto the Lord who waits to be gracious; yea, whose
loving kindness is stretched out to the ends of the Earth.

By one who has been a sufferer for the Truth's sake, JOHN TYSO.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

Something written to the Magistrates of London and Middlesex, etc.
O Ye men of London, who fit as Heads, and are as Leaders to the rest of the
Nation in your proceedings; and to ye the inhabitants of the Subburbs thereof,
do I speak; yea, to you chief men in Middlesex, who sit in the seat of Justice:
What, think ye the Lord has forsaken the earth? Or is it in your hearts the
Holy One of Israel sees you not?

Consider and lay it to heart, slight it not; for God will plead with you for
these things: What, is Truth wholly become a prey amongst you, and Justice and
true Judgment turned backward, that Equity cannot enter? And have you not only
the Names of Justice, and the words thereof painted upon the Walls in your
Courts, and your hearts hardened against God and his Truth where it is made
manifest? And is not this Scripture fulfilled in your generation, That he that
departs from iniquity becomes a prey? And are not the proud counted happy? And
are not them that work wickedness set up.

O ye men in Authority, consider these things, and lay it to heart; for do not
our eyes behold these things in your Courts of Judicatory? And, are not these
things brought forth amongst you, the profane, licentious persons, drunkards
and swearers, whores and whoremongers are set at liberty, and the poor despised
Members of Truth kept in bonds for the exercise of a pure Conscience toward
God and Man; for know this, it is for this very thing we suffer outward bonds
and imprisonments, with the spoiling of our goods, because we fear the Lord,
and cannot run into the same excess with others, but keep our Consciences void
of offense toward God and man.

So consider how cruel and hard-hearted you have been toward us; yea, like
Pharoah's Taskmasters have you oppressed the Seed of Jacob; but know this, the
mighty God of Jacob in whom we trust; will as sure plead our Cause, as ever he
did Israel's of old; who has, and will give us strength and patience to wait
upon him for deliverance in his own time. So think not that pride, cruelty and
oppression and them that delight therein, shall for ever reign, and Truth be
for ever slain in the streets of spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where Christ was,
and is crucified by the generation of Cain, Ismael and Esau, who were
murderers, scoffers and persecutors of all the righteous Seed of God, from Abel
to this very day; but know this, yes assuredly, Plagues, Plagues is prepared,
Vials, Vials of the Wrath of Almighty God is to be poured forth without mixture
upon the seat of the Beast, and upon the inhabitants of the Earth, whereby they
shall gnash their teeth for very pain, and blaspheme the God of Heaven (who
has power over these plagues) that repeat not of their evil deeds, but curse
their God and their King, which is Abaddon the Angel of the bottomless pit.

And so let none glory in their acts of cruelty, nor boast in their own
strength, nor say as it was said in the Revelations, Who is able to make war
with the Beast? For the little stone is cut out of the Mountain, which has and
will smite the great Image; yea, and God's Plough is entered into the fallow
ground, yea and all the briars and brambles, call Cedars and sturdy Oaks shall
not hinder its passage through the Earth, but in the fullness of time they shall
be as stubble fully dried, fit for the fire, and the wrath of the Lord God
Almighty shall kindle upon them, and burn, and not be quenched til Judgment be
brought forth into victory, and Truth and Equity come to reign, and
Righteousness run down our streets; for this is what the Lord requires of every
man, To do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with his God, and to love his
Neighbor as himself, as the Scripture faith; and until then not a blessing, but
a curse is to be expected.

And this is to all you in Authority, in whom the gift of God is not wholly
slain, but some tenderness is left in you, and your Consciences are so far
enlightened, that you cannot join in your hearts with the unjust proceeding of
others, take heed how you join hand in hand with the wicked, neither be silent
for fear of man when unjust Judgment is given against any; for if you do, God
will not hold you guiltless at his Judgment Seat; but as you are faithful to
God, so shall you have your reward; but if you are silent, and wink at the
unjust proceedings of others, whereby Truth and good men come to suffer, God
will require it at your hands, and that which he has given, shall be taken from
you, and ye bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness as well as others,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever.

For know this, God did not set you in places of trust to seek your selves, but
to act for him, and to be an encouragement to good men, and a terror to the
wicked; and as you are faithful thereunto, you will come over all the slavish
fear of man, although they be higher in power then yourselves; and so you will
answer the end for which God has set you, which is not to please men, but to
do the will of God, which cannot be done by you if you seek to save self; but
God will deliver the oppressed by another hand, and ye shall be cast out as dung
upon the face of the Earth.

And what think you, ye Merchants of Babylon, who reign as Kings, and put the
day of the Lord afar off, and push with your horns, and cry, Tush, away, where
is the promise of his coming? does not all things continue as they were since
the Fathers fell asleep? and is not our Kingdom restored again into its
strength and vigor as before? And are net the Towers of Babel rebuilt? And does
not the Whore our Mother sit as a Queen, with her Golden Cup in her hand? And
have not we made Laws and Decrees that all both small and great, shall drink
thereof? And how should she see sorrow, or we have cause to lament her
downfall, which you say is so near?

Why hear this ye Merchants of Babylon who are crept out of your holes and
dens, and are spread like Locusts upon the face of the Earth, and at your
return is the Dragons Chain loosened, and the smoke of the bottomless pit
ascended, whereby the air is darkened, and what are you seeking long life here
in thick darkness? (yea, as in Egypts Land, which may be felt) and are not your
spirits as black as Hell, and as bloody as your Scarlet Robes? And do they not
thirst after the blood of the Saints, to drink thereof, who cannot drink the
Cup of your Fornication? Nay, your day which is in darkness, is short, and the
time is at hand wherein you shall be taken with the Beast and the Dragon, and
cast alive into the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone for ever; for by
your Sorceries is the Earth corrupted? And shall not a devouring fire cleanse
and purify it again? yea, the smoke of your burning shall ascend up for ever,
and for evermore; yea, dry trees twice dead, and plucked up by the roots; yea,
bundles, bundles for the fire are ye prepared both high and low, noble and
ignoble, great and small, even as you would have devoured, so shall you be
overcome; for God Almighty in whose hand ye are, will plead with you, who are
posting on greedily after your prey; but a hook shall you have in your
nostrils, and the prey taken from between your teeth, and ye bound in chains,
and cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of
teeth for ever and for evermore, except ye repent; but if the Lord open the
eyes of any of you, so that you come to see where you are, and be as
firebrarnds plucked out of the burning, should we not rejoice, yea and sing for
joy together to the Lord God and the Lamb for ever, who has redeemed us out of
Kindreds, Tongues and Nations, and put a new song into our mouths; and how can
we but praise and magnify his Name over all for ever, who has done great
things for his people, whose Name is worthy to be blessed, exalted and
magnified over all for ever.

So let not the Merchants of Babylon think it a small thing; for us to return
back again from New- Jerusalem the City of the great King, to their City
Babylon, to sit under their Willows by the Rivers of Babylon; for there we
cannot sing an Hebrew song, but must feed of the broth of their abominable
things, which our souls hate, and has no pleasure therein, but as living
witnesses bear our Testimony for the Lord our God against their abominations as
he calls us thereunto.

And so let none worship the Beast, nor bow to his image, for the everlasting
Gospel is preached again, and the Angel does fly through the midst of Heaven,
and the cry is gone forth, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his
judgments is come; and worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea,
and the fountains of living waters; for Babylon the great is come up in
remembrance, and the Judgment seat is set, and her plagues are begun, which
shall never have end; the mouth of the Lord God Almighty has spoken it. So be
still ye Nations, and keep silent ye Isles afar off; yea, tremble ye Mountains,
melt away ye little Hills, for the Lord our God is risen in power and great
glory, and is come to reign, and the Nations are angry at his appearance, who
is come and coming in ten thousands of his Saints, to judge the world in
righteousness, and to convince them of all their ungodly deeds and hard
speeches they have ungodlily committed; yea, Gog and Magog are gathering
together to the battle of the great Day of God Almighty; yea, and he that rides
on the white Horse is gone forth conquering and to conquer; yea, and the slain
of the Lord shall be many, and the Fowls are gathering together to the Supper
of the Lord God, that they may eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of
Captains, and the flesh of mighty men; for Gogs numberless number has
appeared, and are appearing, and have drunk blood, and do thirst after it, and
they shall be filled; yea, as they have done, so it shall be returned again
into their bosoms; yea double unto her, double, according to her works, (Holy
God of Life) and let thy servants the Prophets sound forth thy praises in the
Earth; yea, let the Law go forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, and let the inhabitants of the Earth hear the sound thereof; for
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and the smoke of her torment ascends
for ever and for ever. Therefore rejoice ye holy Prophets, and sing for joy ye
Saints of the most High; for the Lord our God and the Lamb reigns on Mount
Sion and in Jerusalem, before his Ancients gloriously; and the redeemed of the
Lord are with him, with Palms in their hands, and songs of deliverance in their
mouths; yea sing ye Babes, rejoice ye Lambs, for your King comes riding upon an
Ass Colt, yea upon the Fool of an Ass; yea and his Lambs he carries in his
arms, and gently leads those that be with young. So praises, praises, living
praises be given to his holy Name over all for ever, whose Name is worthy to be
praised, exalted and magnified over all for ever. So praise him O all ye sons
and daughters, and sing aloud of his noble acts; for the horse and his rider
has he thrown into the sea, and the Lion and the Lamb lie down together; and
thou have caused the root of Jesse to spring out of a dry ground; yea of a
little one is there become thousands: O Lord, who can but speak well of thy
Name, yea and tell of thy mavelous works, and speak of thy wonders in days
past, yea and how thy loving kindness extends to the ends of the Earth? for
when we were in our blood, and no eye pityed us, thou had compassion on us,
and washed us, and poured oil into our wounds, and said unto us, Live; and
caused us to rest under the shadow of thy wing when we were distressed on every
side; yea when our Enemies were many; yea when the Floods overwhelmed us, and
our hope was almost gore; yea then did thy secret arm of power uphold us,
although we saw it not; yea thou brokest in upon us with thy living presence,
whereby we were refreshed, and our strength was renewed; and as we grew up in
thy presence, then delightedst in us, and sought to do us good (...) thou girt
us about with the girdle of Truth, and put a Bow into our hands, and in thy
strength has it been bent, and arrews have been sent forth, whereby our
Enemies have been smitten and at the appearance of thy presence have they fell,
yea, holy Lord God Almighty, strong and mighty have thou been in pleading our
cause with our enemies both within us and without us; yea, thou have delivered
us from the paw of the Lion and the Bear, and have caused us to triumph in
victory over our Enemies; yea, thou have done great things for us, and how can
woe but speak well of thy Name, and tell of thy wondrous works, and let the
people know that thou waitest to be gracious unto all: Whose loving kindness is
stretched out to the ends of the earth, who in the secret of your hearts cries,
Come; if you will return, come, and see if there be not balm in Gilead, and
saving-health in Israel, and salvation in the Light of the Lord our God, which
at present in the setret of your hearts condemns you for your sin, and reproves
you in secret when no eye sees you, it condemns you, and sets your sins in
order before you; yea and shows you all that ever you have done, as you hearken
to it, love it and believe in it; yea, love that which condemns you for your
evil deeds, for it is the gift of God which comes from God, and leads to God
again, from whence man is fallen; yea, it will heal your backslidings, and
pardon your iniquities, and blot out your transgressions, that they may be
remembered no more; and so your hearts will become upright before God; for the
cleansing you will come to know, and the purifying of your hearts will ye
witness, yea the new life in the birth of regeneration, will ye know redemption
in out of Egypt 's Land of darkness, into spiritual Canaan the everlasting rest
of all the faithful and believing Israelite, and true Heritage of God.

Yea, let the Isles afar off taste of his goodness, and them that sit in
darkness come away; for Light is sprung forth, and the night is far spent, and
the morning has appeared, and the day star is risen, yea the everlasting day
of the Lord which shall never have an end, is come and coming, and his promises
a fulfilling; yea and truth and righteousness shall cover the earth even as the
waters cover the sea, whereat the Inhabitants of the earth are astonished, and
fearfulness does take hold on the hypocrite, yea and the ungodly men shall
tremble, and cry to the Rocks and to the Mountains to hide them from the wrath
of the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb; For the judgment of the great day is
come, and the Saints do rejoice, and shall for ever sing Halelujah, honors,
blessings and praises be given unto the Lord our God, whose Name is worthy to
be blessed, praised, and exalted over all for ever.

Written the 20. of the 4th. Month, 1663.
THE END.

