Tyrconnel's SPEECH to his Privy Council, Made upon the (Expected) Landing of
the Late King James in Ireland.
With Remarks upon it.
My Lords,
THE Necessity of our Affairs, at present, require your most sedate
Consideration, when Matters of less moment are soon weighed without any great
matter of Debate. We are not only blamed, but Threatened from England, for
continuing the Sword in our Hands; and it is declared, That upon our Refusal to
lay it down, We shall be proceeded against as Traitors to that Government. King
James, whom we shall ever Acknowledge our Royal Master, (nor do we think our
selves oblig^d to own any other Monarch over us) has sent us no such Orders;
but, on the contrary, has laid his Royal Commands upon us, to continue our Men
in Arms, and use all our Industry to increase Discipline, and encourage our
Soldiery, with his Princely Promise to Assist us with Men and Arms from
France; and not only that, but an Assurance of his Royal Presence here; which
will so enliven the hearts of all his Catholic Subjects, that I hope we need
have no Apprehensions, but that we shall be able to Secure our Religion and
Liberties against all Opposers, according to the ancient Custom of this
Kingdom: My Lords, In pursuance of these Commands, we have seized the
Protestant Effects in this Kingdom, for the paying and encouraging our Army;
and have given them such Liberty of Quartering, and otherwise, that we are
afraid the Consequence may prove injurious to Us, as well as the Protestant
People, who are fled from their Lands and Houses; and we begin already to
believe that a Famine threatens us. It is our business therefore to consider of
a Fund to Maintain our Army, (for when Tenants are incapacitated to pay, How
can we expect it?) until we receive Supplies from France, which will not be
wanting with the first opportunity: There is only one way, which is this; We
must borrow from our selves awhile, to Serve the King, and the Catholic Cause,
that it may return to him and us: My Lords, In the first place, I hope we are
all of one Mind, as to keeping up our Army, notwithstanding the Threats from
England. Secondly, We doubt not, but all of us have the same value for our
Royal Master's Person and Religion, as well as the same Sense of his
Misfortunes. Thirdly, The Encouragement we have from France. Fourthly, Our
Royal Master's Commands, and expectation of seeing him here.

Let these Things induce you to consider about a present Fund: I have laid the
way before you, in a former part o^ my Discourse, and shall not be wanting as
to my particular.

REMARQUES.
THE Blackness of Tyrconnel's Cause, and Prosecution of it, is so apparent to
all good men, that Remarks are almost needless. However, with what Face can he
pretend to continue his Allegiance to the late King, when Ireland is a
Dependant on England, by their own Established Laws, and consequently involved
in the same Obedience, and therefore in Allegiance bound to our present
Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary: And notwithstanding the
undeniable Right in the community in Convention late assembled, of fixing the
Crown; and therein the Legality of our present Sovereigns Title, it is
Notoriously known, that by the Laws of the Land, a King even de facto is to be
obeyed: But the World, sees through the cheat, as fair a and pretense of
Loyalty, as is here started; Affairs have been so managed in this Kingdom, that
the very same Scene was most certainly expected there, whenever a Protestant
Prince, even by Descent it self, had come to the Crown. For the Sword and
Administration was put into the Romish hands for that purpose: And the
Catholic cause would have been as impudently asserted by downright Blood and
Rebellion Then, as it is by pretended Loyalty Now.

London, Printed for William Cademan.


