I2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE LORD DEPUTY, Chief Governor and General of His Majesty's Army IN
IRELAND.
A DECLARATION.
TYRCONNEL.

WHEREAS, We find it requisite for His Majesty's Service, that the Forces He is
obliged to maintain, for the preservation of the Peace of this his Kingdom, be
kept in good Order and Discipline: And, that his Subjects may not suffer, by
any Disorder, or Misbehaviour, of any Officer or Soldier, within his Pay and
Entertainment: We have thought fit hereby, to declare His Majesty's Will and
Pleasure; That in what place soever, any of his Forces within this Kingdom
shall pass or remain, they shall duly pay their Quarters, at the usual and
agreed Rates; and shall not, upon any pretense whatsoever, refuse or avoid the
same. And, to the end, that all Disputes, upon this Account, may be avoided; We
do Command all Officers, in their respective Quarters, strictly to charge and
publish, that the Soldiers do not exceed their ordinary weekly Allowance; and
that no In keeper, Suttler, or other person, presume to give them Credit for
more; and that if any shall transgress herein, We shall not hold Our selves
obliged to see them satisfied. And, We do likewise strictly forbid, all
Officers and Soldiers, to use any Violence, or reviling Language, or threatening
Words, to any person whatsoever; or, to give any other offense, or just cause
of Complaint. And, in case any of the said Officers or Soldiers shall presume
to commit any spoil, or disorder, or use any violence, threatening or reviling
words, or otherwise misbehave themselves We do hereby require, all His
Majesty's loving Subjects, forthwith to make known the same to their Superior
Officers, who are to cause Satisfaction to be made immediately to the persons
injured. And if such Officer to whom complaint is made, shall forbear or delay
the causing due satisfaction to be given, as aforesaid; the persons to whom the
wrong is done, are then to present their complaint to Us, that We may order
speedy Justice to be done them, by reparation of the injury. And, by causing
the Officers or Soldiers, so offending, to be forthwith Cashiered, and such
further punishments to be inflicted on them, as the nature and quality of their
Offense shall deserve. And, We do further Declare, that all Officers and
Soldiers in their march, as well as in their Quarters, shall pay for whatever
they have, and shall not demand, or exact Money for Quarters; and that if any
shall dare to do the contrary, they shall be punished by Cashiering, and loss
of their pay: It being His Majesty's Royal Intention and Command, that all
Officers and Soldiers, in His Service, behave themselves orderly in all things.

And whereas we are given to understand, that several Officers of the Army do
frequently absent themselves from their respective Garrisons; We do hereby
strictly Charge and Require all Officers to repair to their Quarters within ten
days, there to reside, and take care from time to time, that the Soldiers
under their Command, do their respective Duties punctually, as well in the
Discipline of War, as in their sober and peaceable demeanor toward the rest of
their fellow Subjects, His Majesty's Liege People of this Kingdom; that all
manner of Profaneness, and the effects of Idleness, Drinking, Whoring,
Swearing, Cursing, and other Debaucheries may be avoided.

And We do further Require and Command, that all Officers and Soldiers from
time to time, be aiding and assisting to the Civil Magistrates, and Officers,
in apprehending all Tories, Breakers of Houses, Highway-Robbers, and other
notorious Malefactors, that have, or shall at any time disturb the peace and
quiet of any of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects. And to the end that none may
plead ignorance of these our Commands and Declaration; We do hereby strictly
charge and require the Officer commanding in Chief in every Garrison, to
publish them by Beat of Drum, to all the Soldiers drawn together.

And We do also Command all Sheriffs, Mayors, Justices of the Peace, and other
Magistrates, to take care to have these our Orders made known to all His
Majesty's other Subjects; it being our full and unalterable Resolution, to
provide, in all things, to the utmost of our power, for the mutual Amity and
good Correspondence of all his Majesty's Loving Subjects whatever, whether
Civil or Military within this Kingdom.

Given at His Majesty's Castle at Dublin, the 24th day of February 1686/7 and
in the third Year of His Majesty's Reign. By His Excellencies Command. THO.
SHERIDAN.

DUBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham, Assigns of Benjamin Took
Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty; and are to be Sold by Andrew Crook
at His Majesty's Printing House on Ormonde-Key, and by Samuel Helsham at the
Colledge-Arms in Castle-street. 1686


