17o Die Maij, 1699.
Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, Orang-Outang, five Homo Sylvestris, etc. Authore
Edvardo Tyson M. D. R. S. S.

John Hoskins V. P. R. S.

Orang-Outang, sive Homo Sylvestris: OR, THE ANATOMY OF A PYGMIE Compared with
that of a Monkey, an Ape, and a Man.

To which is added, A PHILOLOGICAL ESSAY Concerning the Pygmies, the
Cynocephali, the Satyrs, and Sphinges of the ANCIENTS.

Wherein it will appear that they are all either APES or MONKEYS, and not MEN,
as formerly pretended.

By EDWARD TYSON M. D. Fellow of the College of Physicians, and the Royal
Society: Physician to the Hospital of Bethlem, and Reader of Anatomy at
Chirurgeons-Hall.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard;
and Daniel Brown at the Blach Swan and Bible without Temple Bar and are to be
had of Mr. Hunt at the Repository in Gresham-Colledge. ^ DC XCIX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN Lord Summers, Baron of EVESHAM, Lord High
Chancellor OF ENGLAND, One of the Lords of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable PRIVY
COUNCIL, And President of the ROYAL SOCIETY.
SIR,
THE great Variety of weighty and important Affairs, in which your Lordship is
engaged; one would think, did so entirely engross your Time, that you could not
have a Minute left to bestow on the Muses. Your unwearied and succesful
Application to the Business of the State, in the nicest Conjunctions, that
perhaps England ever saw; as well as your inexpressible Labors in distributing
Justice, in your High Station; have been attended with Universal Applause; and
have convinced all the World, how much the Honor of his Majesty's Government,
and the Happiness of his People, depend on the Capacity and Integrity of his
Ministers. You have not suffered, even necessary Refreshments to interrupt your
Constant Cares for the Public. To serve your Country, you have defranded your
self both of Meat, and Rest; which, my Lord, is the only Act of Injustice, that
was ever charged upon you. Your immoderate Labors make daily Encroachments
upon your Health; or at least it is the fear of every good Man, that they
should. And yet your Lordship, notwithstanding all Disswasions, perseveres
inflexible; as if, animated by the Noble Spirit of an Old Roman, you were
resolved to Sacrifice your Life, for the Good of your Country.

And yet, my Lord, amidst such a multiplicity of the greatest Affairs, to which
you pay a constant Attendance; you have not only found Time, to apply your
Thoughts to all kinds of Literature, so as to become a great Master in all; But
you have likewise extended your Care to the Interests of Learning, and to the
Encouraging of those, who study the Advancement of it. Among many other
Instances, your Lordship has lately condescended, to Preside over the Royal
Society; that was instituted, for the Improvement of Natural Experimental
Philosophy; and you have taken care, to Express your great Zeal and Readiness,
to contribute every thing in your Power, to Protect their Interests, and
Promote their Reputation. And under your Lordship's enlivening Influence, there
is all the Reason in the World to expect, that Learning will again flourish
there, as well as among other Orders of Men.

This, my Lord, has so emboldened me, humbly to present this Performance to
your Lordship. For since so Great a Patron of Letters is risen in the midst of
us; we think we have a sort of Right to his Countenance and Protection. I wish
the Present I presume to make you, was more worthy of your Lordship: All that I
can say to recommend it, is, that the Subject is Novel, and that Care has been
taken to give it a just Description; which, I may say, without vanity, never
yet appeared in Public.

It Is a true Remark, which we cannot make without Admiration; That from
Minerals, to Plants; from Plants, to Animals; and from Animals, to Men; the
Transition is so gradual, that there appears a very great Similitude, as well
between the meanest Plant, and some Minerals; as between the lowest Rank of
Men, and the highest kind of Animals. The Animal of which I have given the
Anatomy, coming nearest to Mankind; seems the Nexus of the Animal and Rational,
as your Lordship and those of your High Rank and Order for Knowledge and
Wisdom, approaching nearest to that kind of Beings which is next above us;
Connect the Visible, and Invisible World.

If this Performance shall Promote the Design of the Society, of which I have
the Honor to be a Member, and which your Lordship is pleased to Preside over;
by improving the Natural History of Animals, and affording the Reader any
Delightful and Useful Instructions; I shall look on my Time and Pains, well
rewarded. I am

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient Servant EDWARD TYSON.

THE PREFACE
LEAST this Discourse should be rejected merely for the Title's sake, as if
'twere intended only to divert the Reader, with the Recital of the Fabulous and
Romantic Stories, which have been related on the Subjects I have proposed to
treat of: I think it necessary to premise, that as my chief Design in this
Undertaking is the Improvement of the Natural History of Animals, so I have
made it my Business more, to find out the Truth, than to enlarge in the
Mythology; to inform the Judgment, than to please the Fancy, And the
Orang-Outang (whose Anatomy I here give) being a Creature so very remarkable,
and rare; and not only in its External Shape, but much more in the Conformation
of a great many of the inward Viscera, so much resembling a Man; I thought I
could not be too particular, in my Description of it; though to some, who have
not a Taste of these Matters, I may seem prolix and tedious.

To render this Disquisition more useful, I have made a Comparative Survey of
this Animal, with a Monkey, an Ape, and a Man. By viewing the same Parts of all
those together, we may the better observe Nature's Gradation in the Formation
of Animal Bodies, and the Transitions made from one to another; than which,
nothing can more conduce to the Attainment of the true Knowledge, both of the
Fabric and Uses of the Parts. By following Nature's Clew in this wonderful
Labyrinth of the Creation, we may be more easily admitted into her Secret
Recesses, which Thread if we miss, we must needs err and be bewildered.

In drawing up this Comparison, I have made use of the Anatomy which is given
of Apes and Monkeys by other Authors; and very frequently have quoted their own
words, which has rendered my Discourse much longer: For not having these
Animals by me to dissect and compare, I thought it but just to let the Reader
see, upon what Authorities I went. And though a short Reference might be
esteemed sufficient, without this tedious and unfashionable way of inserting
the whole Text; yet if any one will give himself the trouble of Examining the
Evidences I have produced, I think I have dealt more kindly by him, in making
him a Judge himself; than in leaving him barely to trust to my Report. For
there are none, who have been conversant with Books, but must acknowledge, that
they have been often imposed upon, for want of this fair dealing, as I have my
self Experienced in this present Enquiry. To avoid therefore this Error, my
Caution it may be has lead me into another, which I hope the Reader will
pardon, if he judges it such.

Galen formerly dissected Apes and Monkeys, and recommended to his Scholars the
frequent Anatomizing them, as useful for the attaining the Knowledge of the
Structure of the Parts in Humane Bodies. Had he met with our Animal, it had
served his turn much better: Nor had he been liable to some Mistakes, which
Vesalius charges him with, since in so many Parts, the Orang-Outang imitates a
Man, more than Apes and Monkeys do. Not only Galen, but the greatest Anatomists
we have had in this last Age, have exercised their Pens about them; as plainly
appears in the ensuing Discourse, which sufficiently justifies me for engaging
in this Argument: I wish I had so good an Apology for my Performance.

This great Agreement, which I observed between the Orang-Outang, and a Man,
put me upon considering, whether it might not afford the Occasion to the
Ancients, of inventing the many Relations, which they have given us of several
sorts of Men, which are no where to be met with but in their Writings. For I
could not but think, there might be some Real Foundation for their Mythology;
which made me more strictly enquire into their Records; and examining them, I
always found something new, that insensibly lead me on far beyond what at first
I intended: and if I do not deceive my self, I have at last gained a clearer
Light in these Matters, than any that has hitherto appeared.

For what created the greatest difficulty, was their calling them Men, but yet
with an Epithet for distinction sake; as the (...); so the (...), etc. i. e.
the Wild Men, the Little Men, the Pygmaean Men, the Black Men, the Men with
Dogs Faces, etc. yet at the same time I find that they made them (...), Wild
Beasts; and if so, no doubt but they were of the Quadru-manus kind; i. e.
either Apes or Monkeys. And such were likewise the Satyrs, the Fauni, Pan,
AEgipan, Sylvanus, Silenus, and the Nymphae, as also the Sphinges of the
Ancients.

But so many Romances have been made about them, that not only Strabo formerly,
but the most noted Men of Learning of late, have looked upon them as mere
Fictions of the Poets, and have utterly denied them any real Being. Homer's
Geranomachia therefore, or Fight of the Cranes and Pygmies I have rendered a
probable Story. Aristotle's assertion of the being of Pygmies, I have
vindicated from the false Glosses of others. The Conjectures of other Learned
Men about them, I have examined: And by what I have said in the following
Philological Essay, I think I have fully proved, that there were such Animals
as the Ancients called Pygmies, Cynocephali, Satyrs, and Sphinges; and that
they were only Apes and Monkeys.

Had my Leisure been greater, I had contracted the whole, and taken more care
both in the Method, and Expression. But most of the vacant Hours from the
necessary Attendance on the Business of my Profession, being taken up in
Collecting Materials; to gratisie the Importunity of my Friends, who constantly
urged the Publication, I sent my Papers Sheet by Sheet to the Press, as I had
time to transcribe them; so that I had not a view of them together, till they
were printed. If I have discovered the Truth, 'twas what I aimed at, which
always appears best, when least disguised, and it has been my chief Care in
this Undertaking to pull off those Vails and Masks, wherewith the Poets and
Poetical Historians have hitherto obscured it.

Orang-Outang sive Homo Sylvestris: OR, THE ANATOMY OF A PYGMIE.
THAT the Pygmies of the Ancients were a sort of Apes, and not of Humane Race,
I shall endeavor to prove in the following Essay. And if the Pygmies were only
Apes, then in all probability our Ape may be a Pygmies; a sort of Animal so
much resembling Man, that both the Ancients and the Moderns have reputed it to
be a Puny Race of Mankind, called to this day, Homo Sylvestris, The Wild Man;
Orang-Outang, or a Man of the Woods; by the Africans Quoias Morron; by others
Baris, or Barris, and by the Portugese, the Salvage. But observing that under
these Names, they describe different Animals; for Distinction-sake, and to
avoid Equivocation, I shall call the Subject, of which I am about to give the
Anatomy, a Pygmie, from its Stature; which I find to be just the same with the
Stature of the Pygmies of the Ancients. Tulpius it is true, and Bontius, and
Dapper do call it, Satyrus. And though I am of Opinion, that the Satyrs of the
Ancients were of the Ape, or rather Monkey-kind; yet for the Reasons alleged
in the following Essay, I cannot think our Animal a Satyr. The Baris or Barris,
which they describe to be much taller than our Animal, probably may be what we
call a Drill. But I must confess, there is so great Confusion in the
Description of this sort of Creature, which I find is a very large Family
(there being numerous Species of them) that in Transcribing the Authors that
have wrote about them, it is almost impossible but to make mistakes; from the
want of their well distinguishing them. I shall endeavor therefore in my
Account of this, so to discriminate it, that it may be easily known again,
wherever it is met with. Not that I think in a single Observation I can be so
exact, but that I may be liable to make Errors my self, how careful soever I
have been.

I will not urge any thing more here, why I call it a Pygmie: It Is necessary to
give it a Name; and if what I offer in the ensuing Essay, does not sufficiently
Account for the Denomination, I leave it to others to give it one more proper.
What I shall most of all aim at in the following Discourse, will be to give as
particular an Account as I can, of the formation and structure of all the Parts
of this wonderful Animal; and to make a Comparative Survey of them, with the
same Parts in a Humane Body, as likewise in the Ape and Monkey-kind. For though I
own it to be of the Ape kind, yet, as we shall observe, in the Organization of
abundance of its Parts, it more approaches to the Structure of the same in Men:
But where it differs from a Man, there it resembles plainly the Common Ape,
more than any other Animal.

And though I may seem too tedious in discoursing so long upon a single subject,
yet I have this to offer, that if we had an accurate and particular History of
any one Species of Animal, it might in a great measure serve for the whole
kind. Wherein they differ, might easily be taken notice of, and there would be
no need of repeating any thing, wherein they all agreed. So formerly dissecting
a Young Lion and a Cat at the same time, I wondered to find so very great
Resemblance of all the Parts, both in the one and the other; that the Anatomy
of the one might serve for the other, allowing for the Magnitude of the Parts,
with very little other alteration: And not only for this, but for several other
Animals, that belong to the same Family. I could have wished I had had the like
Opportunity, when I was dissecting our Pygmie, of comparing the same Parts with
those of an Ape and a Monkey: For want of it, I have referred all along to the
Accounts given us of the Anatomy of these Creatures by other Authors; which,
though it renders my Discourse more prolix, yet I thought it would not be
unacceptable to the Curious. But I shall take care to draw up in a shorter
view, wherein our Pygmie more resembled a Man, than an Ape and Monkey, and
wherein it differed.

Now notwithstanding our Pygmie does so much resemble a Man in many of its
Parts, more than any of the Ape-kind, or any other Animal in the World that I
know of: Yet by no means do I look upon it as the Product of a mixed Generation;
it is a Brute-Animal sui generis, and a particular Species of Ape. For when I
was dissecting it, some Sea-Captains and Merchants who came to my House to see
it, assured me, that they had seen a great many of them in Borneo, Sumatra, and
other Parts, though this was brought from Angola in Africa; but was first taken a
great deal higher up in the Country, and in Company with it there was a Female
of the same kind.

I shall have, hereafter occasion to make my Remarks on several Particulars,
relating to it is way of Living, it is Sagacity, Actions, and the like. I shall
now therefore first of all describe its outward shape and figure; then look
within, and observe the Mechanism there. But meeting with a Text in Aristotle,
wherein he gives a general Description of the Ape-kind, I think it not amiss to
Transcribe it; and by Commenting upon it, to show wherein our present Subject
agrees with or differs from it; and what I have besides to Remark, I shall
afterward take notice of, and then proceed to the Anatomy of the Inward Parts.

Aristotle's Aristot. Hist. d^ Animal. lib. 2. cap. 13. Ex Edit. Sealige^.
(...) p. 197, etc.
Text is this, which I shall give with Jul. Caes. Scaliger's Latin Translation:
And as you may observe by the Letters of Reference, I have rendered each
Paragraph into English, adding my Observations thereon.

(...) (...)

(a)INter hominem, quadrupedumque genus natura quaedam media, atque utrique
communis est. Quales, simia, cebus, caniceps. (b) Est autem cebus simia
caudata. (c) Caniceps communem cum simia formam habet: nisi quod and major and
robustior est: faciemque habet caninae propiorem. Tum moribus existunt
efferatioribus. Dentes quoque caniniores, atque firmiores. (d) Simiae parts
quae coelum spectant, ut pilosae sunt: Propterea quod quadrupedum generi
ascribuntur: Ita quae ad terram devergunt quoque: quia hominis speciem
referunt. Nam in homine, and quadrupedibus hoc contrario se habere modo supra
dictum est. Caeterum simiis crassus pilus, ac praedensus utraque in part est.
(e) Fjus vero facies multis modis humanae similis. Quippe tum nares, tum
auriculae: Item dentes tam primores, quam maxillares sunt propemodum tales,
quales and homini. (f) Quinetiam quadrupedes caeterae ^um in utraque gena
neutiquam palpebr^s habeant: ipsa habet, sed tenues admodum: t^ nuiores vero
inferiores, atque perpusillos: quibus carent quadrupedes aliae. (g) Ei sunt in
pectore papillae du^ parvarum mammarum. (h) Ad hae^, hominis brachia, nisi
hirta essent. Quae etiam sicut and crura hominis modo inflectat. Nam and horum,
and illorum curvaluras inter se habet contrarias. (i) Tum manus, digitos,
ungues, quasi humanos. Verum haec omnia ferinam ad naturam potius vergunt. (k)
Suus quidam modus pedibus, ac peculiaris. Etenim quasi manus quaedam magnae
sunt. Quippe and digiti in iis, veluti manuum, medio longissimo. Et planta
manui similis, quanquam porrectior ad extremum usque, sicuti vola. (l) Cujus
postremum callosius est: inepta, atque inexplanata calcanei similitudine. Pedum
usus, and pro manibus, and pro pedibus: flectit enim eos manuum modo. (m)
Superior brachij pars, and coxa, breves: si ad ulnae, and tibiae magnitudinem
referantur. (n) Vmbilicus non prominet: sed durum quiddam ibi invenias. (o)
Superae parts inferis majores: quasi si quinarium cum ternario conferas. Hoc
autem tum ex quadrupedum natura: tum propterea quod pedes and manibus similes
habet, and quasi ex pedum, manuumque constitutione compositos. Nam calcanei
postrema pedem, caeterae parts manum repraesentant. Habent enim digiti id,
quod volam appellamus, (p) Quadrupedis habitu frequentiore est. (q) Proque co
nates non habet: neque caudam, quoniam bipes. Sed perpusillam omnino illam, and
notae tantum gratia, (r) Foeminae genitale muliebri specie est: maribus canina
potius, quam humana. (s) Cebi, sicuti diximus, caudati sunt. Vrtiverso generi
viscera similia humanis.

(a) Arist. Some Animals are of an intermediate Nature, between a Man and
Quadrupeds, as Apes, the Cebi, and Cynocephali.

(...) Theodorus Gaza thus renders this Passage: Sunt quae natura ancipite,
partim hominem, partim Quadrupedem imitentur, sicut simiae, etc. Not that an
Ape is part a Man, and part a Quadruped; inter Hominem and non Hominem non
datur medium; The Terms being contradictory, one must be false. The
Philosopher's meaning must therefore be, that in the formation of the Parts of
the Body, the Ape, the Cebus, and Cynocephalus, are intermediate Species
between a Man and other Quadrupeds, having several Parts of the Body formed
like Brutes; others more resembling those of Men. Scaliger ibid. in Com,
page.201.
Scaliger, a little after, has this Remark; Ad eum namque modum summus Opifex
Rerum seriem concatenavit a Planta ad Hominem; ut quasi sine ullo cohaereant
intervallo, sie (...) cum Plantis Bruta conjungunt; sic cum homine simia
Quadrupedes. Itaque in hominis quoque specie inveniamus Divinos, Humanos,
feros. This Climax or Gradation cannot but be taken notice of, by any that are
curious in observing the Wonders of the Creation; and the more he observes it,
the more venerable Idea's 'twill give him of the great Creator; and it would be
the Perfection of Natural History, could it be attained, to enumerate and
remark all the different Species, and their Gradual Perfections from one to
another. Thus in the Ape and Monkey-kind, Aristotle's Cebus I look upon to be a
degree above his Cynocephalus; and his Pithecus or Ape above his Cebus, and our
Pygmie a higher degree above any of them, we yet know, and more resembling a
Man: But at the same time I take him to be wholly a Brute, though in the
formation of the Body, and in the Sensitive or Brutal Soul, it may be, more
resembling a Man, than any other Animal; so that in this Chain of the Creation,
as an intermediate Link between an Ape and a Man, I would place our Pygmie.

(...), etc. The Philosopher here does not enumerate all the several Species
that are contained under the Ape and Monkey-kind; they are a very numerous and
a large Classis of Animals. Scaliger upon the Place mentions several he had
observed of both kinds; and all our Zoographers, and most Journals of Travels
give a Description of a great many sorts of them. But for want of well
distinguishing them, and ranging them into a Methodical Series, their History
as yet is very confused and perplexed. Mr. Ray Raij Synopsis Animal. page.1^8.
places these Animals under this general Title, Animalia Pede unguiculato
Multisido, (...) and (...) It Is called Pithecus, (...), quia facile ab homine
persuadeatur; and oftentimes this word is taken as a Genus which includes the
whole; when strictly taken, it signisies an Ape without a Tail, and in Latin is
called Simia; that which has a Tail is called Cercopithecus, in English a
Monkey. Thus Material. Epig^^^ lib. 14. Epigr. 202.
Martial. Callidus emissas eludere Simius Hastas,
Si mihi Cauda foret, Cercopithecus eram.


(b) Arist The Cebus is an Ape having a Tail.

Hist. de Quadruped. l. 1. p. 857.
Conradus Gesner thinks, that this Cebus of Aristotle, which he describes only
as having a Tail, must be the Cercopithecus or Common Monkey, since he mentions
not the Cebus any where else, and the Cercopithecus no where. Plinij Hist. Not.
lib. 8. cap. 19. cum Interpret. and Notis Jo. Harduini, p. 167.
Harduinus, in his Notes on Pliny, advises not to mistake the Cepus in Pliny,
for the Cebus in Aristotle. (6) Pliny's words are these; Pompeij Magni primum
Ludi ostenderunt Chama, quem Galli Rusium vocabant, Essigie Lupi, Pardorum
maculis. Iidem ex AEthiopia quas vocant (...) quarum Pedes posteriores, Pedibus
humanis and cruribus, priores manibus suere similes, hoc Animal postea Roma non
vidit. And therefore because it was so uncommon as to be seen at Rome but once,
it could not be the common Monkey. Geograph. lib. 16. P. 533.
Strabo, out of Artemidorus, describes the Cepus thus: (...). That the Cepus
has the Face of a Lion, the rest of the Body like a Panther, and is of the
bigness of a Dorcas or Roe-Buck. Diodor, Sicul. Biblioth. Hist. l. 3. p.m. 168.
Diodorus Siculus has much the same Description, (...). Which Laurentius
Rodomanus thus renders. Cepus, i. e. Hortus (quem vocant) a totius Corporis
decore and staturae venustate nomen accepit, facie Leonem imitatur, and reliquo
Pantheram, praeter magnitudinem, qua Dorcadi par est. AElian. de Animal. lib.
17. cap. 8. p. 474.
AElian has given a Description of the same Animal from Pythagoras, from whom,
it is thought, it first received this Name; and he is more particular. His
Account, though somewhat long; I will give in P. Gillius's Translation, because I
am apt to think this Animal is still in being. Terrenum quoddam Animal
Pythagoras scribit secundum Mare Rubrum procreari and Cepum, hoc est Hortum
apposite idcirco nominari, quod tanquam Hortus variis coloribus distinguatur.
Cum existit confirmata aetate, pari magnitudine est cum Herythriensibus
Canibus. Jam porro ejus Colorum varietatem, sicut ille scribit, animus nobis
est explicare. Ejus caput and posticas parts ad caudam usque prorsus valde
igneo color sunt, tum aurei quidam Pili disseminati spectantur, tum album
rostrum, inde ad Collum aureae vittae pertinent, Colli inferiores parts ad
Pectus, and anteriores Pedes omnino albi, Mammae duae manum implentes caeruleo
color visuntur, venture candidus, Pedes posteriores nigri sunt, Rostri formae
Cynocephalo recte comparari potest. The Cepus therefore of Pliny, Strabo,
Diodorus Siculus, and AElian, in all probability must be different from the
Cebus of Aristotle. Joh. Caius our Countryman sent Gesner a Description of a
Mamomet or Marmoset he had observed, which Gesner thinks might be a sort of
Cepus; but the Colors were different, as likewise the Magnitude.

(c) Arist. The Cynocephali have the same shape with Monkeys, but they are
bigger, and Stronger, and they have a Face liker a Dogs's, and are of a fiercer
Nature, and they have Teeth liker a Dog's, and stronger.

I shall have occasion to Discourse of these Cynocephali in the ensuing Essay.
For though the Philosopher makes them only a sort of Ape or Monkey, yet there
have been those, that would impose them on the World for a Race of Men; and by
AElian. Hist. de Anim. lib. 10. cap. 26. in Edit. P. Gillij. in aliis cap. 25.
AElian they are called (...); though Galen. (...) ministr. Anat. l. 1. cap. 2.
Galen tells us, they are much less like a Man, than an Ape is: For they can
scarce stand upright, much less walk or run so. Philostorgij Hist. Ecclesiast.
lib. 3. cap. 11. p.41.
Philostorgius mentions the Aegopithecus, the Arctopithecus, the
Leontopithecus, as well as the Cynocephalus, and then adds, (...). That there
is the Goat-Ape, the Bear-Ape, the Lion-Ape, the Dog-Ape; and that the Ape-kind
have a resemblance to a great many other Animals; so large and numerous is this
Classis of Animals, that perhaps there is none that is more; and that are so
different from one another. The sierceness of the Cynocephali is taken notice
of by all; our Pygmie was quite of another temper, the most gentle and loving
Creature that could be. Those that he knew a Shipboard he would come and
embrace with the greatest tenderness, opening their Bosoms, and clasping his
Hands about them; and as I was informed, though there were Monkeys aboard, yet
'twas observed he would never associate with them, and as if nothing akin to
them, would always avoid their Company. The Teeth of the Cynocephali are like a
Dog's; those of our Pygmie exactly resembled a Man's, as I shall show in the
Osteology.

(d) Arist. Apes are hairy on their Backs, as they are Quadrupeds, and on their
Bellies, as they are like Men: For in a Man and a Beast this hairiness is quite
contrary, as was said before. So that Apes are very hairy in both Places, their
Hair being strong or course, and thick, set.

The Place that Aristotle refers to, is this. Arist. Hist. de Animal. lib. 2.
c. 5. p. 160. Edit. Scalig.
(...). i. e. That in Brutes the Back or upper Parts are more hairy, the Belly
or under Parts either smooth or less hairy: In a Man is observed the contrary.
But in our Pygmie we observed it different; for here all behind from the Head
downwards, 'twas very hairy, and the Hair so thick, that it covered the Skin
almost from being seen. But in all the Parts before, the Hair was much thinner,
and the Skin every where appeared, and in some places 'twas almost bare. Nature
therefore has clothed it with Hair, as a Brute, to defend it from the Injuries
of the Weather; and when it goes on all four, as a Quadruped, it seems all
hairy: When it goes erect, as a Biped, it appears before less hairy, and more
like a Man. After our Pygmie was taken, and a little used to wear Clothes, it
was fond enough of them; and what it could not put on himself, it would bring
in his Hands to some of the Company to help him to put on. It would lie in a
Bed, place his Head on the Pillow, and pull the Clothes over him, as a Man
would do; but was so careless, and so very a Brute, as to do all Nature's
Occasions there. It was very full of Lice when it came under my Hands, which it
may be it got on Shipboard, for they were exactly like those on Humane Bodies.
Franc. Redi Experimenta circa generat. Insector.
Seignior Redi observes in most Animals a particular sort of Louse, and gives
the Figures of a great many.

The Hair of our Pygmie or Wild Man was of a Coal-black color, and strait; and
much more resembling the Hair of Men than the Furr of Brutes: For in the Furr
of Brutes, besides the longer Hair, there is usually a finer and shorter Pile
intermixed: Here 'twas all of a kind; only about the Pubis the hair was greyish,
seemed longer, and somewhat different; so on the upper Lip and Chin, there were
greyish hairs like a Beard: And I was told by the Owners, that once it held the
Basin it is self, to be trimmed. The Face, Hands, and Soles of the Feet were
bare and without Hair, and so was most part of the Forehead: But down the sides
of the Face 'twas very hairy; the hairs there being about an Inch and half
long, and longer than in most Parts of the Body besides. The tendency of the
Hair of all the Body was downwards; but only from the Wrists to the Elbow 'twas
upwards; so that at the Elbow the Hair of the Shoulder and the Arm ran contrary
to one another. Now in Quadrupeds the Hair in the fore-limbs have usually the
same Inclination downwards, and it being here different, it suggested an
Argument to me, as if Nature did design it as a Biped. But we will lay no more
stress upon it than it will bear: The Hair on the backside of the Hands did
run transverse, inclining to the outside of the Hands; and those of the hinder
sides of the Thighs were transverse likewise.

Man, though not so hairy as Brutes, and (as Aristotle observes) more hairy
before, than behind; yet if exposed to the hardships of the Weather, like them;
no doubt, but he would become hairy on the Body likewise; which might possibly
be the Case of Nebuchadnezzar. Daniel, Cap. 4. 33.
And very Remarkable is that Story of Peter Serrano a Spaniard, who was
castaway, and escaped to a Desert Island, which from him afterward received
it is Name, as it is related by the Inca Garcilasso de la Vega. Royal Commen
(...) of Pe^^. lib. 1. cap.3.
For having with the greatest difficulty sustained a miserable Life for three
Years, The Hairs of his Body grew in that manner, that he was covered all over
with Bristles; the hair of his Head and Beard reaching to his Waste, that he
appeared like some Wild or Savage Creature.

(e) Arist. Their Face has Many Resemblances to a Man's, for they have
Nostrils and Ears alike; and Teeth like a Man's, both the Fore-teeth and the
Grinders.

Pliny Nature. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 44. p.m. 593.
seems to have respect to this Text of Aristotle, and what follows, where he
tells us, Nam simiarum genera perfectam Hominis imitationem continent, facie,
Naribus, Auribus, Palpebris, quas solae Quadrupedum in inferiore habent Gena.
Jam Mammas in Pectore, Brachia and Crura in contrarium similiter flexa. In
manibus, ungues, digitos, longioremque medium. Pedibus paulum differunt, sunt
enim, ut manus, praelongi, sed vestigium Palmae simile faciunt. Pollex quoque
his and Articuli, ut homini; ac praeter Genitale, and hoc in maribus tantum.
Viscera etiam interiora omnia ad exemplar. We will compare both their Accounts,
with our Pygmie; and observe wherein they agree or differ from us.

As for the Iace of our Pygmie, it was liker a Man's, than Ape's and Monkeys
Faces are: For it is Forehead was larger, and more globous, and the upper and
lower Jaw not so long or prominent, and more spread; and it is Head more than as
big again as either of theirs: But why the Philosopher, after his general
Assertion of the likeness of the Face of an Ape to that of a Man's, should
first of all instance in the Nose, which is so much different, may seem
strange: Since in a Man the Nose is protuberant and rising, jutting out much
beyond the whole surface, and herein it is altogether unlike to that of Brutes,
and the Ape-kind too. It Is not therefore on this account that the Comparison is
made, But I rather think, his meaning must be, that an Ape's Nose is like
Man's, in that it is not extended to the length of the Rostrum, or upper Jaw,
as in Dogs and other Brutes, but reaches only to the upper Lip. a simis
Naribus, or this flatness of the Nose, most do derive the word Simia; though
others, as Vossius, would have it, quasi mimia a (...), imitari, from
mimicking. But Scaliger will not allow it. Dicitur autem Simia (says he) non
ab Imitatione, ut Grammatici imperiti, sed a simitate.

The Nose of our Pygmie was flat like an Ape's, not protuberant as a Man's; and
on the outside of each Nostril there was a little slit turning upwards, as in
Apes. It Is observed of the Indian Blacks, that their Nose is much flatter than
the Europeans; which may be thought rather Natural to that Nation, than
occasioned (as some would make us believe) by the Mother's tying the Infant to
her Back, and so when at Work bruising and flatting it against her Shoulders;
because it is so universal in them all.

As to the Ears, none could more resemble those of a Man, than our Pygmie's;
both as to the largeness, color, shape, and structure. Here I observed the
Helix, Ant-Helix, Concha, Alvearium, Tragus, Anti-tragus, and Lobus; only the
Cartilage was very fine and thin, and the Ears did not lie so flat to the Head,
as they do in a Man. But that may be from the Custom of binding; our Heads,
when Infants.

The Teeth of our Pygmie resembled a Man's, more than do those of Apes and
Monkeys; as I shall show in the Ostcology.

(f) Arist. And whereas other Quadrupeds have not Hair on both Eyelids, these
have; But it is very fine, especially that on the lower Eyelid, and very small.
But other Quadrupeds have none there.

In our Pygmie the Cilia or Hair of both Eyelids appeared very fair and plain,
but not so large as in Men. The Supercilia or Hair of the Eyebrows, seemed to
be rubbed off; which might be occasioned by the jutting out of the Cranium in
that place, more than in Men: Which is a Provident Provision of Nature, for the
better safeguard of the Eyes, and their defense from the Injuries they might
otherwise receive in the Woods. But the Philosopher's Assertion, that no
Quadruped has Hair on the under Eyelid besides Man but the Ape-kind, I cannot
justify; or I do not take his meaning aright: Though he has much the same
Opinion a little before. Hist. Animal. lib. 2. p.m. 161.
Where he tells us, (...). Which Scaliger thus renders: Ac Palpebras homo
utraque in Gena habet tum and in Alis, and in Pube Pilos. Caeterae, Animantes
neque in his locis, neque in Gena inferiore: Sed sub Genam and paucos and
paucae. Our Pygmie had Hair in the Armpits, and that in the Pubis seemed
somewhat different from what grew on the rest of the Body; being not so strait,
but somewhat curled; and greyish, not black. But I must here Remark, that Pliny
uses the words Palpebrae and Gena, in his Translating this Text of Aristotle,
different from what commonly they signify now. For by Palpebrae he means, what
Aristotle and Hippocrates call (...), i. e. the Hair on the Rim of the
Eyelids, a palpitatione; and Festus calls Cilia, quia oculos celent and
tueantur: And by Gena, he understands the Eyelid; as appears from that Passage
of Pliny I have just now quoted, Palpebris quas folae Quadrupedum in inferiore
habent Gena. And so Scaliger uses these words in this Translation of Aristotle:
And he makes Cilium to signify, Summum Genae ambitum, and not the Hair there.

(g) Arist. They have two Teats or Nipples of small Breasts on the Sternum.

The Philosopher here observes, That the Ape-kind, common with Humane, have the
Mammae on the Sternum or Breast, which is different from Brutes. And though the
Elephant herein seems somewhat alike, yet he makes this distinction, Arist.
ibid. p. 151.
(...). Juxta Pectus potius, quam in Pectore, as Scaliger renders it; or as
Theodorus Gaza, non in Pectore, sed paulo citra. And a little after, Arist.
ibid. p. 176.
he more particularly expresses himself, (...). Sub Armis, as Gaza renders it;
ad Axillas, as Scaliger, where he further tells us, That the Male as well as
Female Elephant have these Teats; but they are very small, in respect of the
Bulk of it is Body, and so placed that side-ways, you cannot see them. The Bear
(he adds) has four Teats; Sheep have but two, and those between the hinder
Legs; Cows have four Teats there. Other Animals (he says) have these Teats in
the middle of the Belly, and usually more numerous; as the Dog and Swine-kind:
But the Panther has but four in the Belly: The Camel has two Mammae there,
and four Teats, as a Cow; and a Lioness but two there.

But Apes and Monkeys have their Teats upon the Breast, as Women have; and
Albert. de Animal. lib. 22. p. 224.
Albertus Magnus gives this Reason for it, Mammillas autem habet in Pectore
sicut Mulier, eo quod manus dedit ei Natura, quibus ad Pectus potest elevare
partum, sicut Mulier. Our Pygmie was a Male, yet here the two Papillae or Teats
appeared very plain, and were exactly situated as they are in Men. The Mammae
or Breasts were small and thin, and not protuberant. The Female Orang-Outang
of) Jac. Bontij Hist. Not. and Med. lib. 5. cap. 32. p. 84.
Bontius is pictured with pendulous large Breasts, and they are so described by
Nic. Tulpij Observe. Med. l. 3. cap. 56.
Tulpius. And Gassend. de vita Peireskij. lib. 5. p.m. 170.
Gassendus, in the Life of Peiresky, speaking of the Barris, says, Huic Mammae
ad pedis longitudinem.

(h) Arist. They have Arms like a Man, but hairy; and they bend them and the
Legs as a Man does; the flection of the one being contrary to the other.

The Shoulder and Arm of our Pygmie were very hairy outward, not so hairy
inwards. The Contratendency of the Hair here, as that of the Shoulder pointing
downwards, and that of the Arm pointing upwards, like Lucan's Pila minantia
Pilis, I have already noted. This difference I shall here remark of this
fore-limb in our Pygmie, as well as in Apes and Monkeys; that it is longer in
them proportionably, than in Man. I shall examine this Part more particularly
in the Myology and Osteology.

But the Curvature or Flection of the Arms and Legs in our Pygmie, as also in
Apes and Monkeys, is just the same as in Man; the Arms bending forwards, and
the Legs backwards; whereas in other Brutes, the flection of the fore and
hinder Legs is both the same way. Homini Genua and Cubita contraria (says
Plinij Not. Hist. l. 11. cap. 45. p.m. 594.
Pliny) item Vrsis and simiarum generi, ob id minime pernicibus. I shall
examine this Place of Pliny in the Osteology.

(i) Arist. Besides they have Hands, Fingers, and Nails like a Man's, but all
these somewhat ruder.

The Hand of our Pygmie was different from a Man's, in that the Palm was much
longer; so the Thumb too, was less than the other Fingers; whereas in a Man,
the Thumb is usually thicker than the rest of the Fingers: In both these
respects, it more resembled the Ape-kind. But the Fingers of our Pygmie being
so much bigger than those of Apes and Monkeys; and its Nails being broader, and
flatter, on both these Accounts it was liker a Man. Vngues Clausulae Nervorum
summae existimantur (says Plinij Not. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 45. P. 594.
Pliny) omnibus hi, quibus and digiti: sed Simiae imbricati, Hominibus lati.

In the Palms of the Hands of our Pygmie were remarkable those Lines which are
usually taken notice of in Palmestry, and at the ends of the Fingers were those
Spiral Lines, which are usually in a Man's.

(k) Arist. The Feet are particular; for they are like great Hands, and the
Toes like Fingers; the middlemost being the longest; And the Sole of the Foot
like the Palm of the Hand, but more extended, or longer.

Pliny (as I have remarked) renders this Passage thus: Pedibus paulum
differunt, sunt enim, ut manus, praelongi; sed vestigium Palmae simile faciunt.
Now the Palms of the Hands, and the Soles of the Feet of our Pygmie, were
equally long, and longer, proportionably, than in Man; and herein it resembled
more the Ape-kind: As it did likewise in the length of the Toes, which were as
long as the Fingers, as also in having the middlemost Toe longer than the rest.
For in the Hand of a Man, the middle Finger is the longest, but in the Foot,
the middle Toe is not. The Philosopher does very well liken it to a Hand, since
besides the length of the Toes, like Fingers, it had the great Toe, like the
Thumb set off at a distance from the range of the other Toes, as we shall show
hereafter.

(l) Arist. The sole of the Foot in the hinder part was more callous, ill, and
odly imitating a Heel: For they use their Feet in both Capacities, both as a
Hand and Foot, and bend them like Hands.

In the Ape-kind there is a true Os Calcis, besides this Callosity. And in our
Pygmie this Heel-bone was liker that in a Man, than theirs is. The Philosopher
in the former Paragraph showed what resemblance this Part had to a Humane Hand,
in this, by reason of the Os Calcis, how it is like a Foot; and then makes an
Inference from the different structure of this Organ, that it performs the Uses
and Offices of both.

All which is very agreeable to our Pygmie. But this Part, in the Formation and
it is Function too, being liker a Hand, than a Foot; for the distinguishing this
sort of Animals from others, I have thought, whether it might not be reckoned
and called rather Quadru-manus than Quadrupes, i. e. a four-handed, than a
four-footed Animal.

And as it uses it is hinder Feet upon any occasion, as Hands; so likewise I
observed in our Pygmie, that it would make use of it is Hands, to supply the
place of Feet. But when it went as a Quadruped on all four, 'twas awkwardly;
not placing the Palm of the Hand flat to the Ground, but it walked upon it is
Knuckles, as I observed it to do, when weak, and had not strength enough to
support it is Body. So that this Species of Animals has the Advantage of making
use of their Feet as Hands, and their Hands as Feet, as there is occasion.

(m) Arist. The Os Humeri, and the Os Femoris are short, in respect of the Ulna
and Tibia.

In a Humane Skeleton, the Os Humeri, and the Os Femoris are much longer than
the Vlna and Tibia. For in a Skeleton of a Woman I have by me, the Os Humeri
was Twelve Inches and a half, and the Os Femoris Seventeen Inches long; whereas
the Vlna was but Nine Inches and three quarters, and the Tibia Fourteen Inches
long. In our Pygmie, the Os Humeri was Five Inches and a half, and the Os
Femoris Five Inches long. The Vlna was Five Inches and a half, and the Tibia
was Four Inches long. These Bones in the Skeleton of a Monkey, were much of the
same length with our Pygmie's, so that herein both differ from a Man, and our
Pygmie more resembles the Ape-kind.

(n) Arist. They have no prominent Navel, but something hard in this place of
the Navel.

In our Pygmie the Vmbilicus or Navel appeared very fair, and in the exact
Place, as it is in a Man; not prominent nor harder, but in all respect Natural
and alike.

(o) Arist. They have the upper Parts much larger than the lower, as being
Quadrupeds, almost as five to three; and as upon this account, so be because
they have Feet like Hands, as if they were compounded of a Hand and Foot: Of a
Foot, in respect of the Heel behind; and of a Hand, as to the other Parts; for
they have Fingers, and what we call the Palm.

In Quadrupeds usually the Upper or fore-parts are much larger than the Lower
or hinder; and it is so in the Ape and Monkey-kind, as the Philosopher Remarks.
But in our Pygmie I think this Observation will not hold. For though it was much
emaciated, by reason of it is long; illness, so that it seemed very thin and
lank in the Belly; yet behind it looked square enough, and proportionable as a
Man. But the Orang-Outang of Tulpius had a large squob Belly. We shall
presently give the Dimensions of all the Parts, as soon as we have done with
this Text of Aristotle.

We shall hereafter farther consider the structure of the Foot in the
Osteology, where we shall describe the Os Calcis, and show how well it performs
its Office, when this Animal stands erect. But since Nature designed it not
always to live on the Ground, but to get it is Prey in the Trees likewise, it
has very wisely formed this Part like a Hand, by which means it can more
easily climb them; and when there, shift much better by this Contrivance; as I
have shown in my Discourse Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 239.
upon the Carigueya, seu Marsupiale Americanum, or the Anatomy of an Opossum;
which Animal had its hinder Feet formed like Hands

(p) Arist. They live most of their time as Quadrupeds more than as Bipeds, or
erect.

Our Merchants tell me, when first they take Apes or Monkeys, to learn them to
go erect, they usually tie their Hands behind them. And I am of the
Philosopher's Mind, that Naturally they go more on all Four, than erect. But
whether it is so in our Pygmie, I do suspect; since walking on it is Knuckles, as
our Pygmie did, seems no Natural Posture; and it is sufficiently provided in all
respects to walk erect.

(q) Arist. As Quadrupeds they have no Buttocks; as Bipeds, no Tails; or but
very little, like a show of one.

Our Pygmie had Buttocks or Nates, as we shall see in the Myology, but not so
much as in Man. The Os Ischij or Coxendix was very different, as appears in the
Skeleton, and as I shall describe in the Osteology. Our Pygmie had no Tail, but
an Os Coxygis, as is in Man, which outwardly made a little appearance, as in my
Second Figure, and may be what Aristotle Remarks. Scaliger has this Note upon
it: Caudae notam sive vestigium animadvertit, quam vix Oculis deprehendas.
Tactu tamen subesse intelligas, quam si attractare tents, prompta miraque
celeritate sese subtrahit, ridicula indignatione laesum prae se sert.

(r) Arist. The Female has the Privy-parts, like a Woman; but the Male, more
like a Dog's, than a Man's.

Our Subject was a Male, and this Part here was nothing like a Dog's. For in
the Penis of a Dog there is a large Bone, which is not in the Ape and
Monkey-kind. Scaliger's Note here does not make out the Assertion: Caninum
Genitale dixit Simij, non temere; nodos enim quosdam deprehendimus: differt
autem figura Glandis. I did not observe these Nodes here; but of this, more in
the Anatomy of this Part.

(s) Arist. The Cebi (as was said before) have Tails: As to the Viscera they
have them all like a Man's.

So Pliny, Viscera etiam interiora omnia ad Exemplar. But I find this a great
Mistake. For, as we shall show, our Pygmie, who comes much nearer to a Man in
the Structure of the inward Parts, than either Apes or Monkeys, yet in a great
many things is very different; but where it is so, there it resembles an Ape.
But on the other hand, Albertus Magnus is much more mistaken, who will not
allow any likeness at all. For speaking of an Ape, he tells us, Albertus De
Animal. lib. 22. p. 224.
Et sicut in ante habitis diximus, homini in exterioribus simile existens, in
nullo similitudinem habet cum interioribus hominis, and minus fere omnibus
aliis Bestiis. Galen Galen. de Anat. Admini^l. lib. 1. cap. 2. p.m. 26.
is much more in the right, who acknowledges a very great similitude between an
Ape and a Man, both in the outward and inward Parts, where he tells US, (...).
i. e. An Ape is the most like a Man of any Quadruped: In the Viscera and the
Muscles, and in the Arteries, and Veins and Nerves, because it is so in the
structure of the Bones. For it is from their make, that it walks on two Legs,
and uses its fore-limbs as Hands. It has the largest Breast of any Quadruped,
and Clavicles or Collarbones like a Man, and a round Face, and a small or short
Neck.

All which is very agreeable to our Pygmie, whom we shall sind more exactly to
answer this Character, than an Ape. And now having compared our Pygmie with
this general Description that Aristotle gives of the Ape-kind; we shall compare
him with himself, by taking the different Dimensions of the several Parts, as
well as of the whole Body; and shall observe what Proportions they had to one
another.

As from the top of the Head, to the heel of the Foot in a strait Line, it
measured Twenty six Inches. The Girth of the Body in the biggest part about the
Cartilago Ensiformis, was Sixteen Inches; over the Loins 'twas Ten Inches
about. The Compass of the Head over the Eyes and Ears, Thirteen Inches and a
half. The aperture of the Eyelids, three quarters of an Inch. From one corner
of the Mouth, to the other, Two Inches and a quarter. From the middle of the
upper Lip to the Eye-brow, 'twas two Inches three quarters. From the Eye-brow
to the Occiput Seven Inches and a half. The Perpendicular Diameter of the Ear
from the Top to the Lobe, was Two Inches and a half. The Horizontal Diameter of
the Ear was an Inch and half. The Verge or Compass of the Ear about, was near
Five Inches and a half. Where the Ear was fastened to the Head, it measured
above an Inch and half. From the Clavicula or Collar-Bone, to the Penis, Ten
Inches. From the Cartilago Ensiformis to the Navel, Three Inches and a half.
From the Navel to the Penis, Three Inches. The distance between the two Teats,
Three Inches and a quarter. The length of the Arm, from the Shoulder to the end
of the Fingers, Seventeen Inches. The Girth of the Shoulder about the middle,
Four Inches and a quarter; of the Arm near the Elbow, Five Inches. The Hand
from the Wrist to the end of the Middle Finger, measured Five Inches and an
half. The Thumb was an Inch and a quarter long; the Forefinger Two Inches, the
Middle-Finger Two Inches and an half; the Ring-Finger Two Inches and a quarter,
and the Little Finger One Inch and an half long. The Girth of the Thumb and the
Little Finger, was One Inch; the Girth of the other Fingers was an Inch and a
quarter. The Palm of the Hand was Three Inches long, and an Inch and three
quarters broad.

From the head of the Thigh Bone to the Heel, it measured Twelve Inches: From
the Heel to the end of the Middle-Toe (which was the longest) Five Inches three
quarters. The Girth of the Thigh was Six Inches; of the Leg at the Calf, Four
Inches and a quarter; of the Foot at the setting on of the Great Toe, near Five
Inches. The Great Toe was an Inch and half long, the Fore-Toe One Inch, the
Middle-Toe an Inch and half, the Third Toe an Inch and a quarter, the Little
Toe One Inch long. The Sole of the Foot, about the setting on of the Great Toe
(where 'twas broadest) was Two Inches over; but nearer the Heel, 'twas an Inch
and half broad. The Girth of the Great Toe, where biggest, an Inch and half,
the other Toes were an Inch about. These Measures were taken before the Skin
was stripped off, in the Skeleton, or the Skin stuffed, they may prove otherwise.

And having now given these Dimensions of the whole, and of most of the
External Parts; you will the better conceive the exact shape of this wonderful
Animal by the Figures I have caused to be made of it. As the First Figure
represents our Pygmie erect, where you have a view of all the Fore-Parts. Being
weak, the better to support him, I have given him a Stick in his Right Hand.
But our Figure being made after he was dead, the Head seems too much fallen in
between the Shoulders, as if it had a very shore or little or no Neck, which
takes off from the Beauty of the Figure; but this is rectified and mended in
the Figure of the Skeleton, where you will see the Neck proportionate. The Head
here is large and globous; the Ears standing off, not lying close. The face
looks like an Old withered Man's, which without doubt was rendered much more
so, by an Ulcer it had in one of it is Cheeks, occasioned by a Fall it had on
Shipboard upon a Cannon, which forced out one of it is Teeth; and the Jaw Bone
afterward proving carious, it might hasten it is Death. The rising of the
Cranium just under the Eyelids, as I have ramark'd, is different from what is
in a Man, and renders the Face harder; as does likewise it is flat Nose, and the
Upper Jaw being more prominent, and lesser spread, than in a Man; and it is Chin
or Under Jaw being shorter. The Eyes were a little sunk, the Mouth large, the
Teeth perfectly Humane. The Face was without Hair, and the Color a little
tawny; the Skin on the rest of the Body was white.

The Shoulders are spread and large, the Thorax or Breast extended altogether
like a Man's, the Mammae and Teats the same; the Belly was lank and pinched in,
not prominent, by reason of it is illness; but here it held a more
proportionable breadth to a Man's, than a Quadruped's. The Arms were longer
than in a Man, and so were the Palms of the Hands; but the Thumb was much less,
the Nails exactly like a Man's, and the Navel the same. The Penis was
different, as we shall hereafter show. Here was no Scrotum, but the Testes were
contained in the Region of the Pubis under the Skin, which made it here more
protuberant. The Thighs and Legs were somewhat divaricated or stradling, for
want of strength, either from it is illness, or being but young. We observed
Calves in it is Legs; the Feet long, as likewise the Toes, which were liker
Fingers; and the Great Toe exactly like a Thumb, more than that on the Hand.

The Second Figure represents the hinder Parts of this Creature, in an Erect
Posture likewise. Where may be observed, the Globous Figure and largeness of
the Head, with the Ears standing off; the curious snape and straitness of the
Back, and how it spreads. At the Os Coxygis there is a little Protuberance, but
nothing like a Tail.

In this Figure I have represented him with the Fingers of one Hand bended, as
if kneeling upon his Knuckles, to show the Action, when he goes on all four:
For the Palms of his Hands never touch the Ground, but when he malks as a
Quadruped, it is only upon his Knuckles. The other Hand is holding a Rope, to
show his Climbing; for he will nimbly run up the Tackle of a Ship, or climb a
Tree: And having this hold, he is the better supported, to show the Sole of the
left Foot, and the Heel there; on account of which Heel it may be thought a
Foot: But the Great Toe being set off so far from the range of the others, and
they all being so large and long, it more resembles a Hand, as has been
observed.

If we compare our Figures with those given by Tulpius, Bonlius, and Gesner, we
shall find a great difference. That of Tulpius seems the most Natural; but
being made sitting, it does not so well represent the Proportions of the
several Parts. The Chaps or Rostrum is longer, and it is less hairy in the
fore-parts than ours. The Mammae are larger and pendulous, and the Belly more
protuberant, Dapper, Dapper Descript. de l' As^iqu. p. m. 365.
in his Description of Africa, has borrowed this Figure from Tulpius, without
naming him, as likewise his Description, which is the same. For avoiding the
often quoting it, I will here Transcribe Tulpius's Account: But why I think it
not a Satyr, as he and Dapper make it, I will give my Reasons in the following
Essay. Tulpius his words are these: Observat. Med. lib. 3. cap. 56.


Quamvis extra forum Medicum, attexam tamen huic telae, Satyrum Indicum; vostra
memoria, ex Angola delctum: and Frederico Henrico, Arausionensium Principi,
dono datum. Erat autem hic Satyrus quadrupes: sed ab humana specie, quam prae
se fert, vocatur Indis Orang-Outang: sive homo Sylvestris, uti Africanis Quoias
morrou. Exprimens longitudine puerum trimum; ut crassitie sexennem.

Corpore erat nec obeso, nec gracili, sed quadrato: habilissimo tamen, ac
pernicissimo. Artubus vero tam strictis, and musculis adeo vastis: ut quidvis
and anderet, and posset. Anterius undique glaber: at pone hirsutus, ac nigris
crinibus obsitus. Facies mentiebatur hominem: sed nares simae, and aduncae,
rugosam, and edentulam anum.

Aures vero nihil diserepare, ab humana forma. Vti neque pectus; ornatum
utrinque mamma praetumida (erat enim fexus foeminini); venture habebat umbilicum
profundiorem; and artus, cum superiores, tum inferiores, tam exactam cum homine
similitudinem: ut vix ovum ovo videris similius.

Nec cubito defuit requisita commissura: nec manibus digitorum ordo: nedum
pollici figura humana: vel cruribus furae: vel pedi calcis fulcrum. Quae
concinna, ac decens membrorum forma, in caussa fuit, quod multoties incederet
erectus: neque attolleret minus gravate, quam transferret facile, qualecunque,
gravissimi oneris, pondus.

Bibiturus prehendebat canthari ansam, manu altera; alteram vero vasis fundo
supponens, abstergebat deinde madorem labiis relictum, non minus adposit, ac si
delicatissimum vidisses aulicum. Quam eandem dexteritatem observabat utique
cubitum iturus. Inclinans quippe caput in pulvinar, and corpus stragulis
convenienter operiens, velabat se haud aliter, ac si vel mollissimus illic
decubuisset homo.

Quin imo narravit aliquando affini nostro, Samueli Blomartio, Rex Sambacensis,
Satyros hosce, praesertim mares, in Insula Bornaeo, tantam habere animi
considentiam, and tam validam musculorum compagem: ut non semel impetum
fecerint, in viros armatos: nedum in imbellem, foeminarum, puellarumve, sexum.

Quarum interdum tam ardenti flagrant desiderio: ut raptas non semel
constuprarint. Sum quippe in venerem sunt proclives (quod ipsis, cum
libidinosis veterum Satyris commune) imo interdum adeo protervi, ac salaces: ut
mulieres Indicae, propterea vitent, cane pejus and angue, saltus, ac lnstra, in
quibus delitescunt impudica haec animalia.

Dapper, who has transcribed this Account of Tulpius, (as I said) but without
taking any notice of him, makes this Preface to it. The Quoias Morrou (of which
I have spoken in the Kingdom of Quoia) are bred likewise in the Kingdom of
Angola. This Animal, as it has a great deal of a Man, so a great many have
thought it to be the Issue of a Man and an Ape: But the Blacks themselves
reject this Opinion. Now in the Place that Dapper refers to, he seems to give
it as the Opinion of the Blacks, that they are the Issue of Men; but that by
their always living in the Woods, they are become half-Beasts. I shall
transcribe his Words, and so have done with him: Dapper ibid. p.m. 257.
On trouve dans les bois une Espece de Satyr que les Negroes appellent
Quoias-Morrou, and les Portugais, Salvage. Ils ont la ete gross, le Corpse gros
et pesant, les bras nerveux, ils n'ont point de queve, et Marchent tantot tout
droit, et tantot a quatre pieds. Les Animaux se nourrissent de fruits et de
Miel Sauvage, and se battent a tout moment ies uns contre les autres. Ils sont
issu des Hommes, a ce disent les Negroes, mais ils sont devenus ainsi
demi-betes en se tenant toujours dans les Forets. On dit qu'ils forcent les
femmes and les filles, and qu'ils ont le courage d' attaquer des Hommes armez.

We will now examine Jacobus Bontius's Figure, and compare it with ours: And
though he tells us, that he had seen some of both Sexes that went erect,
especially that Female one, whose Effigies he here gives us; yet I cannot but
think, he indulged more his Fancy herein, than copied the true Life; or at
least it was much different from ours. For ours had no such long Hair on the
Head, and all round the Face; the Face of our Pygmie was not so flat and round,
nor the Nose and Vnder-Lip so rising: The large Breasts in his, answers the
Description which is given of it by others; ours being a Male, had but small
ones. But the Arms in our Pygmie (as'tis in the Ape-kind) were much longer
than they are represented in his Figure, and the Feet are altogether different;
for he makes them exactly like Humane Feet, and nothing like Hands, which is so
Remarkable a thing in all these Animals, that this Mistake of it self, is
enough to discountenance the Truth of his Picture, and render it suspected. I
shall not take notice, how ill the Hair is drawn, nor make any further Remarks
upon the structure of the Limbs, since I confess I do mistrust the whole
Representation. But because he has expressed, that this Creature had so much
Modesty, I have added to his Figure what becomes that Character.

That Figure in Conradus Gesner, Hist. de Quadruped. p.m. 859.
which he tells us he had out of a German Book, wrote about the Holy Land, in
some Particulars I think more exact and just: For here he makes the Feet like
Hands, the Legs more divaricated, the Face longer, and the Rostrum more
extended. But the Arms are too short, and I do not know for what reason there
is a Tail clap't on, which sits untowardly enough, which must be surely an
Addition of the Painter; or if there is any such Creature in Nature, it must be
of another Family, different from ours.

However, I have caused all these Figures to be copyed, that they may be the
easier compared: But since they are so disagreeing, as are likewise the
Descriptions they give of them, it sufficiently justifies my Complaint of the
uncertainty we have of the true Animal, that they are discoursing about; since
the same Name probably may be given to different Species of the Ape-kind. Now
Orang-Outang, or Homo Sylvestris, or the Wild Man, being a General Name, I have
given it also to our Subject: Though I confess I am not fully satisfied whether
it be exactly the same with that of Tulpius or Bontius; or even whether that of
Bontius be the same with that of Tulpius. For Bontius his Account is so very
imperfect, that from thence one cannot make a safe Conclusion; and I rather
suspect the contrary: For Bontius describes it with soft, tender Passions;
Tulpius and Dapper make it Warlike and Fighting. Bontious's words are these:
Jac. Bontji, Hist, Not. and Med. lib. 5. cap. 32.
Ast quod majorem meretur admirationem, vidi ego aliquot utriusque sexus erecte
incedentes, imprimis eam (cujus Effigiem hic exhibeo) Satyram femellam, tanta
verecundia ab ignotis sibi hominibus occulentem, tum quoque faciem manibus
(liceat ita dicere) tegentem ubertimque lachrymantem, gemitus cientem, and
caetcros humanos actus exprimentem, ut nihil ei humani deesse diceres, praeter
loquelam. Loqui vero eos easque posse, Javani aiunt, sed non velle, ne ad
labores cogerentur: ridicule mehercules. Nomen ei indunt Ourang Outang, quod
Hominem Sylvae significat, cosque nasci affirmant e Libidine Mulierum Indarum,
quae se Simiis and Cercopithecis detestanda libidine miscent: Nec pueri
credunt, nisi qui nondum aere lavantur.

And then adds, that in Borneo there are these Wild Men, and with Tails, but
much shorter than that pictured in Gesner. Porro in Insula Borneo ( says
Bontius) in Regno Succodana dicto, a nostris Mercatoribus propter Oryzam and
Adamantes frequentato, Homines montani Caudati in interioribus Regni
inveniuntur, quos multi e nostris in Aula Regis Succodanae viderent. Cauda
autem illis est prominentia quaedam ossis Coccygos, ad quatuor, aut paulo
amplius, digitos excrescens, eodem modo, quo truncata cauda (quos nos
Spligiones vocamus) sed depilis.

It Is for this Reason therefore, that I might more particularly distinguish our
Animal, that I have called it a Pygmie; a Name that was formerly given to a
sort of Ape, as I shall prove. But the Poets and Historians too of former Ages
have invented so many improbable Stories about them, that they have rendered the
whole History concerning them ridiculous, and not to be believed. We shall
therefore endeavor to distinguish the Truth from the Fables in the following
Essay.

The Barisor Barrislikewise seems to be an Ourang Outang,or a Wild Man; but
whether exactly the same with ours, I will not determine, but leave to farther
Enquiry. For all the Accounts concerning it that I have at present met with,
relate rather it is Docility and Actions, and the Servile Offices it is capable
of performing in a Family, than any thing particular as to the Description of
the Body; only in general that it is an Ape like a Man. Thus Peter Gassendus
Lib. 5. p.m. 71.
in the Life of Peiresky tells us, that in Java Major were observed by the
Sieur de Saint-Amant, Animalia quae forent Naturae homines inter and simias
mediae; which being doubted of,Peireskyproduced a Letter from Natalis or Noel,
a Physician who lived in Africa, which gave him this Account. Esse in Guinea
Simias, barba procera, canaque, and pexa propemodum venerabileis, incedere
ipsos lent, ac videri sibi prae caeteris sapere: qui maximi sunt, and Barris
dicuntur, pollere maxim judicio; semel duntaxat quidpiam docendos; vest
indutos illico bipedes incedere; site ludere fistula, Cithara, aliisque id
genus (nam quod everrant domum, convertant veru, pinsant in mortario, aliaque
ratione famulatum praestant, haud reputari admodum) foeminas denique in iis
pati menstrua, and mares mulierum esse appetentissimos. He likewise produced
other Letters from Arcosius or d' Arcos, which related what happened to one of
Ferraria when he was at Angola, the Country from whence our Animal, as likewise
that of Tulpius came. I will give it in Gassendus's words: Incidit nempe quadam
die in Nigritam Canibus venantem Homines ut visum, Sylvestreis. Capto, caesoque
i^orum uno, inhumanitatem Nigritae increpuit, qui in suum genus ita saeviret.
Ille vero, falleris, inquit, nam hic non est homo, sed bellua homini
persimilis, Quippe sola pascitur herba, intestinaque Ovina habet, quod ut
credas melius, rem ecce; simulque abdomen aperuit. Sequenti die rursus venatum,
captique mas and foemina: huic Mammae ad pedis longitudinem: caetera mulieri
simillima fuit; nisi quod Intestina quoque herbis oppleta, and cujusmodi Ovis,
habuit. Totum utique pilosum Corpus, sed pilo brevi, ac satis leni.

Our Animal was not so bearded, as that of Natalis; and what Arcosius relates
of his Wild Man, or Barris; as it is feeding upon Grass, and having it is
Intestines like a Sheep's, all this is far different from ours; though as to it is
docility and capacity of performing those Actions mentioned, I cannot but think
our Subject might easily have been taught to do them; and, it may be, others
too of the Ape-kind, though different: As there are wonderful Instances of this
kind given of them by Nierembergius Hist. Not. lib. 9. cap. 44.
and others. Dapper's Dapper Descript. de^ A^^ue. p. 249.
Description is much the same. There is a sort of Ape (says he) called Baris,
which they take when young, and breed them up, and make them so tame, that they
will do almost all the Work of a Slave: For they go ordinarily upright as Men
do; they will beat Rice in a Mortar, carry Water in a Pitcher, and show such
pretty Actions of Address, that they extremely divert their Masters. And in
Nierembergius Hist. Not. l. 9. cap. 45.
there is much the same Account. In Guinea scribit P. Jarricus existere Simias,
quae instar famuli in Pila tundant quaecunque in eam imponuntur, quae aquam a
fluviis in Hydriis capite domum deferant, ita tamen ut ubi primum domus fores
attigerint, illico Hydriis exonerandae sint, alioqui eas excidere, casuque isto
frangi, atque tum clamoribus ac fletu compleri universa. Neque ista modo, sed
plurima item alia obire de domesticis ministeriis dicuntur hi Simij Baris.
Torosi sunt and robusti.

But all this does not sufficiently inform us of the particular shape,
structure, and make of the Body and the several Parts of this Animal, so as to
be fully certain whether it be the same, or a different-Creature from the
Ourang-Outang. And though I have mentioned it, as a Conjecture that probably the
Baris might be, what we call a Drill, yet I own it as an uncertainty, since I
have not met with what can justify, or fully satisfy me herein.

The Pongo likewise which is described by Purchase, as a sort of Wild Man, is
different from our Subject; as it may be also from the rest hitherto mentioned.
The Reason, therefore, why I insert the Description of this, as likewise of the
others, I own to be, that hereby I might excite some Inquisitive Observers to
give us a truer Account of this large and noble Species of Animals. It Is an
Enquiry that would recompense their Curiosity with abundance of Satisfaction,
by the many and useful Discoveries that they would make, and extremely enrich
the Natural History of Animals, whose enlargement, I think, in this Inquisitive
Age, has not advanced so much as that of Botanie. For how great Diligence has
been used of late, to ransack both the Indies, to pry into all the Corners of
the World, both inhabited, and uninhabited, to find out a new Plant, not before
described? And with what great Expense, and how magnificently are their Figures
Printed? And how little has been done in the Improvement of the History of
Animals? Not that I any ways dislike the former, but the latter being a Nobler
Subject, I cannot but recommend it, as deserving the Labors of the Curious
likewise; and if any, this kind, I think, which comes so near to a Man, may be
speak the preference.

But I beg the Reader's Pardon for this Digression. Purchas's Purchase Pilgrims,
Part. 2. l. 7, cap. 3.. 7.
words are these: This Pongo is in all Proportions like a Man, but that he is
more like a Giant-Creature, then a Man: For he is very tall, and has a Man's
Face, hollow-eyed, with long Hair upon his brows. His Face and Ears are without
Hair and his Hands also. His Body is full of Hair, but not very thick, and it
is of a dunnish color. He differs not from a Man, but in his Legs, for he
has no Calf. He goes always on his Legs, and carries his Hands clasped on the
Nape of his Neck, when he goes upon the Ground. They sleep in the Trees, and
build shelters for the Rain. They feed upon Fruits that they find in the Woods,
and upon Nuts; for they eat no kind of Flesh. They cannot speak, and have no
Understanding, no more than a Beast. The People of the Country, when they
Travel in the Woods, make Fires, where they sleep in the Night: And in the
Morning when they are gone, the Pongoes will come and sit about the Fire, till
it goes out; for they have no Understanding to lay the Wood together. They go
many together, and kill many Negroes that Travel in the Woods. Many times they
fall upon Elephants, which come to feed where they be, and so beat them with
their clubbed Fists, and pieces of Wood, that they will run away roaring from
them. These Pongoes are never taken alive, because they are so strong, that Ten
Men cannot hold one of them: But yet they take many of their Young Ones with
poisoned Arrows. The Young Pongo hangs on his Mother;s Belly, with his Hands
fast clasped about her; so that when any of the Country People kill any of the
Females, they take the Young one which hangs fast upon his Mother. When they
die among themselves, they cover the Dead with great heaps of Boughs and Wood,
which is commonly found in the Forests.

Our Pygmie had Calves in his Legs, though not large, being emaciated; and it
being young, I am uncertain to what height in time it might have grown; though I
cannot think to the just Stature (if there be any such) of a Man. For different
Nations extremely vary herein, and even those of the same. Nor did our Pygmie
seem so dull a Creature as these Pongoes, but on the contrary, very
apprehensive, though nothing so robust and strong as they are represented to be.

I shall only further add what le Compte, a Modern Writer, tells us of the
Savage Man, and so I think I shall have done: For this Argument is so Fruitful,
that one does not know when to conclude. Page m. 510.
Lewis le Compte therefore in his Memoirs and Observations upon China, tells
us, That what is to be seen in the Isle of Borneo, is yet more Remarkable, and
surpasses all that ever the History of Animals has hitherio related to be the
most admirable, the People of the Country assure us, as a thing notoriously
known to be true: That they find in the Woods a sort of Beast, called the
Savage Man; whose Shape, Stature, Countenance, Arms, Legs, and other Members of
the Body, are so like ours, that excepting the Voice only, ons should have much
ado not to reckon them equally Men with certain Barbarians in Africa, who do
not much differ from Beasts.

This Wild or Savage Man, of whom I speak, is endued with extraordinary
strength, and notwithstanding he walks but upon two Legs; yet is he so swift of
Foot, that they have much ado to outrun him. People of Quality Course him, as
we do Stags here, and this sort of Hunting is the King's usual Divertisement.
His Skin is all hairy, his Eyes sunk in his Head, a stern Countenance, tanned
Face; but all his Lineaments are pretty proportionable, although harsh, and
thickened by the Sun. I learned all these Particulars from one of our French
Merchants, who has remained some time upon the Island. Nevertheless, I do not
believe a Man ought to give much Credit to such sort of Relations, neither must
we altogether reject them as fabulous; but wait till the unanimous Testimonies
of several Travelers may more particularly acquaint us with the Truth of it.

Passing upon a time from China to the Coast of Coramandel, I did my self see
in the Straits of Molucca a kind of Ape, that might make pretty credible that
which I just now related concerning the Savage Man.

It marches naturally upon it is two hind Feet, which it bends a little, like a
Dog's, that has been taught to Dance, it makes use of it is two Arms as we do;
it is Visage is in a manner as well favored, as theirs of the Cape of Good
Hope; but the Body is all covered with a white, black, or gray Wool: As to the
rest, it cries exactly like a Child; the whole outward Action is so Humane, and
the Passions so lively and significant, that dumb Men can scarce express better
their Conceptions and Appetites. They do especially appear to be of a very kind
Nature; and to show their Affections to Persons they know and love, they
embrace them, and kiss them with transports that surprise a Man. They have also
a certain motion, that we meet not with in any Beast, very proper to Children,
that is, to make a noise with their Feet, for joy or spite, when one gives, or
refuses them what they pa^sionately long for.

Although they be very big, (for that I saw was at least four Foot high) their
nimbleness and slight is incredible; it is Pleasure beyond expression to see
them run up the Tackling of a Ship, where they sometimes play, as if they had a
particular knack of Vaulting to themselves, or as if they had been paid, like
our Rope-Dancers, to divert the Company.

Sometimes suspended by one Arm, they poise themselves for some time
negligently to try themselves, and then turn, all on the sudden, round about a
Rope, with as much quickness as a Wheel, or a Sling that is once put in motion;
sometimes holding the Rope successively with their long Fingers, and living
their whole Body fall into the Air, they run full speed from one to the other,
and come back again with the same swiftness. There is no Posture but they
imitate, nor Motion but they perform; bending themselves like a Row, rolling
like a Bowl, hanging by the Hands, Feet, and Teeth, according to the different
Fancies which their whimsical Imagination supplies them with, which they Act in
the most diverting manner imaginable; but their Agility to sting themselves from
one Rope to another, at Thirty and Fifty Foot distance, is yet more surprising.

In this Character there are several things I could take notice of, and I may
hereafter have occasion to refer to some of the Particulars; But what is
mentioned of it is Cry, like a Child's; and it is expressing the Passions of Joy
and Grief, by making a Noise with it is Feet, is agreeable enough to the
Relation I had of our Pygmie: For I heard it Cry my self like a Child; and he
has been often seen to kick with his Feet, as Children do, when either he was
pleased or angered.

We shall now proceed to the Anatomy, which in a History of Animals, is
certainly the most Necessary, most Significant, and Instructive Part. Nor can I
see, how an History of Animals can be well wrote without giving the Dissection
of the Inward Parts: It Is as if one should undertake to describe a Watch, and
at the same time, take notice only of the Case or Cover, and tell what fine
Garniture there is about it; but inform us nothing of the admirable
Contrivances of the Wheels and Springs within, which gives it Life and Motion.
Galen De Anat. Administr. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. m. 27.z
thought the Dissection of Apes very useful for the understanding the Structure
of the Parts in Humane Bodies; and recommends it to his Scholars to Practice
themselves herein. Not that he only dissected Apes, (as Vesalius oftentimes
charges him with) or preferred it before the Dissection of Humane Body: But
where that could not be had, he advises them to get Apes, and dissect them;
especially those that come nearest to a Man. Had he known our Pygmie, no doubt
but he would have preferred it, for this purpose, as much beyond the Ape, as he
does the Ape beyond the Cynoceph^^^^, and all other Animals. For, as we shall
observe, there is no (...), I have ^i^herto met with, or heard of, that so
exactly rese^^^^^ Man, in the Structure of the Inward Parts, as our Pygmie: But
w^^^^^t differs, (as I have remarked) there it resembles an Ape; being
different both from a Man and an Ape: And in many things agreeing with both of
them.

The Skin of the whole Body of our Pygmie was whitish; but that on the Head was
tawny, and of a darker color. 'Twas thin, but strong, and adhered pretty
firmly, and more than usually to the Flesh; it is greatest adhaesion was at the
Linea alba, and in the Palms of the Hands, and the Soles of the Feet, and in
the Fingers and Toes; as it is in Men. In the Skin of the Armpits, I observed
those Glandulae Cutaneae Axillares, which secret that Orange-coloured Liquor,
which in some Men stains the Shift here, with that color. I call them
Cutaneae, to distinguish them from those larger Glands, that lie bedded under
in the Fat, and are called Glandulae Axillares. For these I have observed to be
Lymphatic Glands; and have traced the Lymphaducts thence to the head of the
Ductus Thoracicus, where they empty themselves.

Together with the Skin, we took off the Mammae or Breasts, which stuck close
to it: And in our Subject, being a Male, they were but small and thin; yet I
could plainly perceive they were made up of abundance of small Glands. I have
already mentioned, how large the Breasts are in the Female Orang-Outang, and
the Baris, so that no Woman's are larger. As to their Situation, and their
being placed upon the Pectoral Muscles, this I find is common to the Ape-kind:
And they are so described by the Parisians Memoirs for a Natural History of
Animals, p. 162, etc. English Translation.
in the Monkeys they dissected; as also in the Apes dissected by Drelincourt:
Apud Ger. Bla^^, An^^. Animal. cap. 33. page 109, etc.
And because I shall have frequent occasion of referring to these Authors,
unless I signify otherwise, I shall always mean the Places here quoted,
without mentioning them any more.

In Brutes, next under the Skin, lies a Musculous Membrane, which therefore is
called Panniculus Carnosus, which gives a motion to it, whereby they can shove
off what offends them. In Man it is otherwise; for next to the Skin, lies the
Membrana Adiposa; or the Fat, and under that, the Membrana Carnosa: And the
same I observed in our Pygmie; for the Fat here lay next to the Skin.
Drelincourt, in the Apes he dissected, observed the Panniculus Carnosus next to
the Skin, as it is in Brutes. For in the Male Ape, he tells us, Adeps nullus
inter Panniculum Carnosum and Cutim; and in the Female, Panniculus Carnosus
cuti cohaerens, nullo adipe interjecto, Adiposus nullus. So that in this
Particular, our Pygmie is like to a Man, and different from the Ape-kind.

Having separated the Skin and Membrana Adiposa, which in our Subject was not
very thick, it being emaciated by it is illness, we come now to the Muscles. But
I shall reserve my self to treat of them in the Myology. Next under the Muscles
was the Peritonaeum, a Common Membrane, that lines all the inside of the
Abdomen, and sends a common outward Membrane to all the Viscera contained
therein, and so secures their Situation. In this Membrane in Quadrupeds there
is in the Groin of each side, a Perforation, or rather a Processus, by which
the Seminal Vessels pass down to the Testes in the Scrotum, as is very plain in
Dogs and other Animals. But in Man, whose Posture is erect, it is otherwise. For
here these Vessels pass between the two Coats, that make up this Membrane, the
Peritonaeum; so that the inward Coat, that respects the Cavity of the Abdomen,
is altogether entire, and continued, and it is only the outward Coat that is
protruded into this Process; and this for a very good Reason. For otherwise, a
Man, whose Posture is erect, would be constantly liable to an Hernia, or a
Rupture; which happens when this inward Coat is protruded down likewise; and if
there be a descent of the Intestines, it is then called Entero-cele: If of the
Omentum, Epiploocele. In our Pygmie I observed the Peritonaeum, in this
respect, to be formed exactly as it is in Man; and to be entire, and not
protruded; as if Nature did design it to go erect. In Apes and Monkeys it is
otherwise. So Blasius Ger. Blasij Miscellan. Anat. Hominis Brutorumque
variorum, etc. in Octa^^. p. m 253.
observed in the Ape he dissected, Processus Peritonaei (says he) eodem modo
hic se habet, ac in Cane. Datur and hic facilis via stylo ex ventre in
Processum dictum inserendo. And the Parisians have remarked the same in the
Monkeys they dissected, which is a notable difference of our Pygmie's from the
Ape-kind, and an agreement with the Humane. Hereafter, whenever I mention
Blasius, unless I specify otherwise, be pleased to take notice, that I refer
to this Quotation.

The Omentum or Caul in our Pygmie was very thin and large, falling over and
covering most parts of the Guts. 'Twas fastened a Little to the Peritonaeum in
the Left Side. It had but little Fat, and was tinged in many places with a deep
Yellow Color, by the Bladder of the Gall, as was likewise part of the
Duodenum. It had numerous Blood Vessels, and it is adhaesion to the Stomach,
Colon, and other Parts, as in Man. The Remarks the Parisians make upon the
Epiploon or Omentum of the Monkeys they dissected, were different from our
Subject. For they tell us, That the Epiploon was different from that of a Man,
in several things. First, It was not fastened to the Colon in so many places,
having no connection with the left part of this Intestine. Ours I found was
fastened just as it is in Man. Secondly, It had another Ligature, which is not
found in Man, viz. to the Muscles of the Abdomen, by means of the Peritonaeum,
which formed a Ligament; which we have observed in the Hind of Canada. Ours
adhered to the Left side: Drelincourt observed it in an Ape, to be fastened to
the Right Side. Both I believe to be accidental, as I have frequently seen it
in Humane Bodies. And in one Patient I found it fixed to the Peritonaeum in the
Groin, which gave him a great deal of Pain and Trouble, especially when his
Bowels were any thing extended with Wind. Thirdly, The Parisians say, The
Vessels of the Epiploon, which in Man proceed only from the Vena Porta, did
nevertheless In one of our Subjects come from the Cava, having there one of the
Branches of the Hypogastrica, which was united to the Branches of the Porta. In
our Animal these Vessels came all from the Porta, or rather emptied themselves
into it. But they observing it only in one Subject, and it being different in
all other Animals, it must be accidental. Fourthly, In fine, the whole Epiploon
was without Comparison greater than it generally is in Man; because, that it
did not only cover all the Intestines, which is rarely seen in Man, (whatever
Galen says) but it even enveloped them underneath, as it does in several other
Brutes; where it is frequently seen, that the Epiploon is larger than in Man,
especially in Animals that do run, and leap with a great deal of Agility: As if
it were so redoubled under the Inley ^ward^ to defend them, with the rest of
the Bowels, against the rude jolts which these Parts do receive in running. It
is true, that the Membranes of the Epiploon were entire and continued, as in
Man, and not perforated like a Net, as they are in the generality of Brutes.
The Epiploon or Caul in our Pygmie was very large, yet I have seen the same
frequently in Humane Bodies; but when they are diseased, it is often less and
wasted; so that Galen's Observation may be true. But methinks the Reason they
give, why it should be so large in Brutes, may be doubted of; for it being so
tender a Part, it would be in danger, upon those violent motions, of being
broken, had not Nature made it loose below, and free from any adhaesion; and it
being so, it cannot perform the Office they assign it. Drelincourt's Account of
the Epiploon, as he observed it in the Female Ape, I like better. Epiploon
macrum (says he) vasis turgidis involvens Intestina omnia, usque ad pubem,
adhaerens Extremo Hypochondrio dextro, qua part Colon substratum jecoris
limbis. Idem adhaeret ventriculi fundo and Colo, ut in homine. And in the Male
Ape he dissected 'twas tinged yellow, as ours was.

We shall proceed now to the Ductus Alimentalis, at least those parts of it
that are contained in the Abdomen, viz. the Stomach and Intestines; which I
make to be the true Characterisk of an Animal, and a Proprium quarto modo. For
all Animals have these Parts; and all that have them, are Animals. The Senses,
or some of them, are wanting in a great many Animals, and in some we perceive
none but that Universal one, Tactus, yet here we find a Ventricle and
Intestines. By these Parts it is, that the Animal Kingdom is principally
distinguished both from the Vegetable and Angelick. Vegetables, it is true,
receive constantly Nourishment, and without it, they perish and decay; but it is
in a far different manner; it is not received into such an Organick Body, where
the Food is prepared and digested, and so the Nutritive parts thereof dispensed
afterward into all the Body, and the rest ejected, as Excrementitious; this is
only to be met with in Animals, and in all of them. But yet I find there are
intermediate Species of Beings between Vegetables and Animals, as the Zoophyta:
the History of which I could extremely desire might be given us; and cannot but
think that regularly in compiling a History of Animals, one should commence
from them; and amongst these, no doubt, but that there are several degrees of
Perfection, till we come to what might be properly called an Animal. I have had
no Opportunity of observing any of them, but only one; wherein I could perceive
a sensible Motion and Contraction of some of the Parts, but could not
distinguish any thing like the Structure of any of the Parts in an Animal, or
the Organs that belong to them. An Accident disappointed me of perfecting my
Observations, otherwise I should have communicated what I had discovered. But
am sensible that there are great Curiosities here to be met with, if diligently
enquired into; and that they might be, was the occasion of this Digression.

This Canalis Alimentalis therefore, or Inductory Vessel (as I call it, for the
Reasons I have often mentioned in my Anatomical Lectures at Chirurgeon's Hall)
is commonly distingished into three Parts; The Gula, the Ventricle, and
Intestines: The two latter do lie in the Cavity of the Abdomen, the former, in
the Thorax and Neck; but being but one continued Canalis, I shall treat of the
whole here.

The Gula or Gullet, by M. T. Cicero de Not. Deorum, lib. 2.. 54. p. m. 42.
Tully (in that excellent Anatomical Lecture he gives us, where he is proving a
Providence) is called Stomachus. As it is also by Celsus Cornel. Celsus, de re
Med. lib. 4. cap. 1.
so likewise in A. Gellius, A. Gellij. Noct. Attic. lib. 17. cap. 11.
and frequently by Hippocrates. Fid. Anut. Foesii Occonom. Hi^p. in verb^.
And Aristotle Arist. Hist. An^m. lib. 1. cap. 10.. 108. p. m. 89. and ^assim
^lit.
and Galen Galen de licis assectis. lib. 5. cap. 5. p.m. 490.
expressly tell us, that that Part between the Fauces and the Ventricle, which
the Ancients called Oesophagus, after Aristotle's time, was wont to be called
Stomachus, though now this word is more appropriated to the Ventricle it self,
which Tully in the same place calls Alvus. So true is that of Horace, Horace de
Arts Poetic. verse. 60.
Vt Sylvae foliis pronos mutantur in annos
Prima cadunt: it a verborum vetus interit aet^s.
However I shall follow Horace's Rule, since Custom now has appropriated the
word Stomach, to the Ventricle, especially our English Tongue, I shall do so
too. Multa renascentur, quae jam cecidere: cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula: si volet usus:
Quem penes arbitrium est, and vis and norma loquendi. Horace. Ibid. ^. ^^.



This Gula or Gullet is a Hollow Muscle, and fitly enough compared to a Funnel;
where the Mouth, which may be thought a Part belonging to it, being more
capacious, first receives the Food, and prepares it, by chewing, and then
forces it down into this Stem or Pipe, to convey it to the Ventricle. I did not
observe, upon the Dissection, any difference of this Part in our Pygmie, from
that of a Man. For as in a Man, (and so conformable too in other Circumstances)
it passed under the lower Muscle of the Diaphragm, which by that slant running
of it is fleshy Fibers over it, may perform to it the Office of a Valve, and
prevent the Regurgitation of the Food that way. Which may be the more necessary
in our Subject, because being used to climb Trees, and in coming down, to be
prono Capite, it might be the more liable to this Accident. But for the better
preventing this, I find here, that the Passage of the Gula, a little above
where it empties it self into the Ventricle, was straiter, and the inward
Membrane here more rugous than in a Man; so that it seemed somewhat Analogous
to a Valve. Drelincourt describes it, in the Female Ape he diffected, thus.
Orificium ejus superius, nulla Valvula clausum; sed interceptum duplici
portione Diaphragmatis carnosa, ab ejus tendinibus oriunda.

The Ventricle or Stomach, as we shall call this Part, in our Pygmie, as to
it is Situation and Figure, exactly represented a Humane Stomach. When inflated,
from the entrance of the Gula along the upper part to the Pylorus, it measured
Two Inches and three quarters. Measuring with a Thread from the Pylorus along
under the Fundus, up again to the entrance of the Gula, I found it to be
Fifteen Inches; in all, near Eighteen Inches. The length of the Stomach in a
strait Line, was Six Inches and an half; and it is breadth in a strait Line,
where broadest, near Four Inches. The Girth of the Stomach in the middle, was
near Twelve Inches. So that I thought the Stomach large, in Proportion to the
bulk of the Body. It had numerous Blood Vessels, spreading themselves all over,
as in a Man's; and I could plainly perceive the Inosculations of large Trunks
of the Coronary Branches, with those that descended from the upper Parts.

The Parisians observed in their Monkeys, That the Ventricle did likewise
differ from a Man's, it is inferior Orifice being very large and low; for it
was not elevated so high as the superior, as it is in a Man. I did not observe
this in our Pygmie. So Drelincourt tells us in the Female Ape, Ventriculus
rugis interius nullis gaudet; and some other Particulars he takes notice of.
But there was nothing in ours, that I observed, different from a Man's.

As to their Food, I find it very different in the Ape-kind; as in part appears
by what I have already mentioned of the Ourang Outang, the Baris, the Pongo,
etc. So that I cannot but think, (like a Man) that they are omnivorous. What
chiefly our Pygmie affected, when Wild, I was not informed of; after it was
taken, and made tame, it would readily eat any thing that was brought to the
Table; and very orderly bring it is Plate thither, to receive what they would
give him. Once it was made Drunk with Punch, (and they are fond enough of
strong Liquors) But it was observed, that after that time, it would never drink
above one Cup, and refused the offer of more than what he found agreed with
him. Thus we see Instinct of Nature teaches Brutes Temperance; and Intemperance
is a Crime not only against the Laws of Morality, but of Nature too.

Jacobus Bontius Jac. B^ntii. Hst. N.^. and Md. lib. 4. in Animada. in Garciae
ab Orto, Cap. 45. p.m. 48.
tells us, that the Bezoar-stone is bred in the Stomachs of Apes, as well as
Goats, and he prefers it as the best. Porro vidi (says he) and Lapides
Pa-zahar natos in ventriculis Simiorum, qui teretes sunt and longitudinem
digiti aliquando excedunt, qui praestantissimi omnium censentur. Pa-zahar, he
tells us a little before, signifies in the Persian, contra veneuum, whence may
come the word Bezoar. Joh. Georg. Volchamerus Mi^cell. Curi^^a German. De(...)
an.1583. ^^erv. 189. p.420.
takes notice of one he had from Grimmius out of the Baboon-kind, as big as a
Wallnut. And in the Scholium on that Observation, Joh. Bapt. Tavernier's Jo.
Bapt. Tavern. lib. 2. ^tin. Indic. c.p.24.
Travels are quoted, where he prefers two Grains of this, before six of the
Goat-Bezoar. Though Philip. Baldaeus, in his Description of Malabar and
Cormandel, does esteem it much cheaper, Casper Bauhinus has wrote a distinct
Treatise of the Bezoar-stone, to whom I refer my Reader; and shall only farther
observe of it, that I think this Medicine ought not to be despised, because in
Health a Man may take a large Quantity of it, without any Injury; for I have
evidently seen in the greatest Weaknesses, most Remarkable Effects from it, and
have had Success beyond expectation; it supporting the Spirits, and relieving
them, where a more active Medicine might overpower them, and yet not have done
that Service.

But this Stone in Goats and Monkeys is a Disease, and not Natural; as well as
the Stone in the Bladder or Kidneys of a Man. Bontius Bontius (...) in c.p. 46.
p.m. ^8.
therefore observing the good Effects of the Bezoar-stones bred in these
Animals, argues with himself, why those in Men, which he finds laminated in the
same manner, might not be of as great an Efficacy; and upon Trial, he assures
us, that they are so. Hoc cerie compertum habeo, Lapidem in vesica hominis
repertum, urinam and sudores probe ciere, quod tempore ingentis illius pestis
quae Anno 1624 and 1625. Leydam, Patriam means and reliquas Hollandiae
Civitates, miserandum in modum vastabat, in penuria Lapidis Basaartici, nos
exhibuisse memini, and Sudorificum (ausim dicere) melius and excellentius
invenisse, cum admixta Theriaca aut Mithridatio, cum Olco Succini aut Juniperi
guttis aliquot.

We come now to the Third Stage of the Ductus Alimentalis, the Intestines;
which serve for the separating the Chyle from the Facaes, and so transmitting
it into the Vasa Chylifera, or Venae Lacteae;, as they are called, which
conveys it into the Blood, for the recruiting the constant waste that is made
there, and repairing it is loffes; as also for the Nourishment and Augmentation
of the Parts: And for the doing this, it is requisite that the Intes^ines should
be long; and they being so, that they should be coyled and winding; that this
Separation might be the better performed, and so we find the Guls in our
Pygmie. For from the Pylorus to the Anus, they measured Thirteen Feet and three
Inches, viz. from the Pylorus to the Caecum or beginning of the Colon, was Nine
Foot Ten Inches; and the Colon and Rectum were Three Feet and Five Inches long.
The Caecum here, or Appendicula vermiformis, was Four Inches and three quarters
long. So that the length of the Guts here, in proportion to tne length of the
Body, is much the same as it is in a Man. But in two of the Sapajous diffected
by the Parisians, the whole Intestines were but Five Foot two Inches; and in
the other two Monkeys, Eight Foot long. So that herein our Pygmie more
resembles a Man, than their Monkeys did.

And as in the length, so likewise in other Circumstances, the Intestines of
our Pygmie were liker to those of a Man, than those of the Monkey and Ape-kind
are. For the Parisians tell us, that in their Monkeys, the Intestines were
almost all of the same bigness, and that the Ileon was in proportion a great
deal bigger, than in a Man. In our Subject we found a sensible difference. For
the small Guts, which were much of a bigness, being a little extended, measured
in Compass about Two Inches and three quarters. The Colon was Three Inches and
three quarters about; and the Appendicula Vermiformis (which was in our Pygmie
as 'ris in a Man, and is not to be met with in Apes and Monkeys) was about the
bigness of a Goose-quill. It Is length I have mentioned before.

Into the Duodenum of our Pygmie, a little below the Pylorus, were inserted the
Ductus Communis of the Gall, and the Ductus Pancreaticus; they both emptying
themselves into the Gut at the same Orifice as is usual in Man. And the same is
observed likewise by Drelincourt in the Male Ape he diffected, where he tells
us, a Pyloro qui videtur suggrunda ^sse circularis and carnosa principio
Ecphyseos praeposita, ad foramen usque intra candem Ecphysin Commune Ductui
Bilario and Wirzungiano, praecise pollex est Mathematicus; ab illo autem
foramine intra duplicem Ecphyseos tunicam stilus gracillimus intrusus est in
praedictam Vesiculae felleae recurvitatem, rursusque ab eodem Intestinali
foramine idem stilus compulsus est in Ductum Wirzungianum. But the Parisians
observed in the Monkeys, that the Insertion of the Ductus Pancreaticus into the
Intestine, (which in Man is always near the Porus Bilarius) was Two Inches
distant therefrom. So that in this Particular the Monkey does not so much
resemble a Man, as Apes and our Pygmie do.

The Convolutions and Windings of the small Guts in our Pygmie, and their
Situation, were much the same, as in a Man: And they were all plentifully
irrigated with Blood Vessels. In the inward Coat of the Intestines I could
observe the Miliary Glands, described by Dr. Willis; as also those larger
clusters of Glands, mentioned by Joh. Conrad. Peyerus. The Colon I thought
proportionably longer, than it is in a Man. It had the same Ligaments and Cells,
and leaves of Fat hanging to it, as a Man's has; and the situation, was the
same: but it being so long, it had more windings than usually. The Parisians
observed in their Monkeys, that the Colon was not redoubled like an S. as in
Man, being quite strait. Drelincourt's Ape was more like ours, for speaking of
the Colon, he says, retorquetur vary antequam producat Rectum; cellulas habet
ut in Homine. For the length of the Colon in the Monkeys diffected by the
Parisians, was but thirteen Inches; and an Inch in Diameter; whereas, the Colon
of our Pygmie with the Rectum, was three Foot five Inches, as I have mentioned;
and therefore liker to a Man's, and requiring these convolutions the more.

In a Man the Intestines are commonly distinguished into Intestina Tenuia and
Crassa: The Tenuia are subdivided into the Duodenum, Jejunum, and Ileon; The
Crassa, into the Caecum, Colon and Rectum: and the Caecum commonly is reputed
that Appendicula Vermiformis, which is placed at the beginning of the Colon,
where the Ileon empties it self into it. Now this Part in a Man, being so
small; and being observed never to contain any Excrement; I cannot think, that
it deserves the Name of an Intestine, much less to be reputed one of the
Crassa. It Is true, in Brutes, this part is often sound to be very large and
capacious; and to be filled with faces; and in such, it may be justly esteemed
an Intestine. As in a Rabit, it is very long and has a Cochlear Valve; so in an
Ostridge, there are two Caecums; each a yard long, with a like Valve, But in
Man, it is far different. Many therefore do not think this Processus
Vermiformis, to be the Caecum; but rather take for is, that bunching out of the
beginning of the Colon; which is projected beyond the entrance of the Ileon;
which in the Common Ape and Monkey is more, than in a Man. However, I think it
not enough, as to make it a distinct: Intestine; and the number of the
Intestines in a Man, ought to be made fewer.

Our Pygmie therefore having this Processus Vermiformis in all Circumstances,
so like to that in a Man; and Monkeys and Apes having nothing like it: it is a
remarkable difference of our Subject from them, and an agreement to the
Structure of a Humane Body. So the Parisians tell us in their Monkeys, the
Caecum had no Vermiform Appendix. So in the Ape dissected by Blasius, he ^aith,
Processus Vermiformis in totum hic desideratur. And so Drelincourt, Caecum
caret Epiphysi Vermiformi, qualem homines habent. We will see therefore, what
kind of Caecum it is, that they describe in the Monkeys and Apes.

The Parisians tell us, in the Diffection of their Monkeys; That the Caecum was
very large, containing two Inches and half in length; and an Inch Diameter at
the beginning: it went pointing, and was fortified by three Ligaments, like as
the Colon is in Man; there to form little Cells; this Conformation is wholly
different from that of a Man's Caecum. It Is true, it is more projected, than in
a Man; So Blasius in his Ape, makes it jutting out beyond the Insertion of the
Ileon, Manus transversae, seu trium digitorum spatium. And Drelincourt tells
us, duarum unciarum est. But since it has those Ligaments of the Colon, it is
plain, that it is only a part of it, and not a distinct Intestine; or as Blasius
more truly calls it, Principium Coli. He has given a figure of it, but not
very exact; and in another figure he represents the Valve of the Ileon at the
Colon, or rather Valves; for he makes more than one. His Description, as it is
faultily printed; so I am afraid, it is not very accurately drawn up, and
therefore do omit it.

But what is different from a Man, as also from the Ape and Monkey too, or any
other Animal I yet know of; is a sort of Valve I observed at the other Extreme
of the Colon in our Pygmie, where it passes into the Rectum. For the turn of
the Colon here, is very short; and in the inside I observed a Membranous
Extension like a Valve, an Inch in length, which divided the Cavity half way.
The Rectum did not much differ from the Colon in the magnitude of it is fistula,
but was much the same; and in other respects, as it is in a Man.

This great length of the Intestines in our Pygmie was orderly colligated and
fastened to the Mesenterie, which kept them in a due situation; and so, as to
make in them, several windings or convolutions; that hereby they might the
better make a distribution of the Chyle; and the whole was, as it is in a Man.
But I observed here, the Membranes of the Mesenterie, to be more loosly joined
together, than usually. For by moving them by my fingers, I found the blood
vessels which were fastened to the upper Membrane, would easily shove over
those, that were fixed in the under Membrane of the Mesenterie; and run on
either side of one another, as I would draw them. I have sometimes seen the
same in Humane Bodies.

The Mesaraic Vessels here, were very numerous; as they approach the
Intestines, they form several Arches, whereby they communicate with one
another; and from these Arches, they send out numerous Branches to the
Intestines of each side, which run clasping them; afterward they subdivide,
and inosculate with one another in infinite Ramuli: so that by injecting these
Vessels with Mercury, they appeared so numerous; as almost wholly to cover the
Trunk of the Intestines. And the same is in Man.

I have likewise seen, by injecting the Mesenterick Vessels; that the Mercury
has passed into the Lymphaeducts; and so into the Venae or Vasa Lactea. Which
is a great contrivance of Nature. For the Motion of all fluids being Pulsion,
without this advantage, part of the Chyle, must necessarily stagnate in some of
the Vessels; till a fresh distribution of Chyle comes; to protrude it on; and
so it would be apt to coagulate and cause Obstructions. But by the Lympha thus
passing into them; the Chyle is still forced forwards, and the vessels washed
clean of it; and being thus often moistened, they are preserved from becoming
over dry, or closed or obstructed. So Provident therefore is Nature, that in
the whole Via lactea, not only in the Mesenterie; but into the Receptaculum
Chyli, and Ductus Thoracicus likewise; abundance of Lymphaeducts are emptied.
Which gives us one good Reason; that Nature does not act in vain, in making
such a separation of a Liquor from the Mass of Blood; which is so soon to be
returned to it again; since hereby she performs so great an Office.

In the Mesenterie of our Pygmie I observed several small Glands scattered up
and down, as in a Man; but not so regularly amassed together in the middle; as
the Pancreas Asellij is in Brutes. And Drelincourt observed much the same in
the Male Ape. Glandulae ad radicem Mesenterij, and passim in ambitu, numerosae
and planae, magnitudinem Lentulae, sed Ovales. Anastomoses frequentissimae
Venarum cum Venis and Arteriarum cum Arteriis in universo Mesenterij circulo.
And as that part of the Mesenterie which fastens the Colon is called Mesocolon;
so for the same reason, that slip of it represented in our figure, that runs
down to the Processus vermiformis, may be called the Meso-caecum.

We shall next proceed to the Liver, in which part our Pygmie very remarkably
imitated a Man, more than our common Monkeys or Apes do. For the Liver here was
not divided into Lebes as it is in Brutes; but entire as it is in a Man. It had
the same shape; it is situation in the body was the same; and it is Color, and
Ligaments, the same, It measured in it is greatest length about five Inches and
an half; where broadest, 'twas about three Inches; and about an Inch and three
quarters in thickness. Toward the Diaphragm 'twas unequal: it is under part was
Con^ave, where it receives and emits the Vessels, having a little Lole here, as
it is in a Man.

The Parisians remark in the Monkeys they diffected, that the Livermas very
different from the Liver of a Man, having five Lobes as in a Dog; viz. two on
the right side; and two on the left; and a fifth laid upon the right part of
the body of the Vertebrae. This last was divided, making as it were two leaves.
So Drelincourt in the Male Ape observes, Je^^ris I (...) duo juxta umbilicalem
venam, quorum secundo incuneata crat ves^^ula f^llis, duo alij ventriculum
amplectebantur, cum lobulo quinto se insercute in spatium ventriculi intra
orificium utrumque. So likewise in the Female Ape he tells us, Jecur opplet
regionem Epigastricam quint uplici lobo, uno sexto minimo opplens cavitatem
lunarem ventriculi. But Blasius in the Ape he dissected says, Epar cum humano
minimo, optime cum Canino convenit, manif^stissime in lobos VII divisum, tantae
magnitudinis ut etiam utrumque Hypoclondrium occupet. Vesalius Vesalij de
fabrica corporis humani, lib. 5. cap. 7. p.m.619.
therefore is in the right, where he says, Quae enim Dissectionum Professores
de Jecoris forma, ac penulis seu fibris (quos (...) Graeci vocant)
commentantur; e Canum potius, and simiarum sectionibus, quam hominum
didicerunt. Humanum enim Jecur in fibras, Porcini, ac multo adhuc minus Canini
Jecoris modo, non discinditur. And that he hints here at Galen, is plain, from
what he expresses in his Epistle ad Joachim Roelants, Andr Vesalij Epistola,
etc. p.m. 81.
where he farther enlarges upon it. And Galen Galen. de Anat. Administrat. lib.
6.cap. 8.
himself tells us, that Herophilus was of this Opinion. So Theophilus
Protospatarius Theophilus de Corporis humani fabrica, lib. 2. cap. 2.
says, that the Liver is divided into four Lobes; and gives us there a
distinct Name for each. Aristotle, Arist. Hist. Animal, lib. 1. cap. 17. p. m.
595.
it is certain, was much more in the right, where he says, (...). Rotundum
Jecur hominis est, ac simile bubulo. For the Liver of a Bullock, like a Man's
is entire; and not divided into Lobes. However Franciscus Puteus Franc. Putei
Apologia pro Galeno in Anatomicis contra Andr. Vesalium, lib. 5. p. m. 153.
in his Apology, having named several Physicians and Chirurgians, that were
with him at the opening of Charles the Ninth, Duke of Savoy, says, hi omnes
per Jovem mihi possunt esse Testes, quod observatum est Epar habuisse quatuor
pinnulas. Jacobus Sylvius Vaesani cujusdam Calumniarum in Hipp. Galenique rem
Anat. depulsio. per Jac. Syivium. vid. Depuls. 26. p. m. 150.
likewise justifies Galen, against Vesalius; and tells us, Quin and Hippocrates
Lobos Epatis humani quinque connumerat libro suo de ossibus, Rufus autem
quatuor vel quinque. But Renatus Henerus Renat. Henerus adversus Jacobi Sylvij
Depulsionum Anat. Calumnias. pro Andrea Vesalio Apologia, p.m. 55.
has answered Sylvius as to this matter; and there needs no farther dispute
about it, if one will but believe his own Eyes, he may fully satisfy himself,
that, in an Humane Liver there are none of those Lobes, but that it is one
entire Body; as it was also in our Pygmie. But in Apes and Monkeys the Liver is
divided into Lobes.

The great use of the Liver is for to make a separation of the Gall from the
Mass of Blood. We will therefore here examine the Biliary Vessels; nor do I
find them any thing different from those in a Man; only the Bladder of Gall
here in our Pygmie seemed longer, being four Inches in length. It Is adhaesion
to the Liver was not so much as it is in a Man; for at the fundus or end, it
juts beyond the Liver about half an Inch. For about three quarters of an Inch,
it is more closely joined to the Liver; afterward it is fastened to it only by
a Membrane, as is also the Ductus Cysticus. So that the Vesica fellea when
inflated with wind, seemed more to represent an Intestine by it is anfractus and
length, than the usual shape of the Bladder of Gall; which commonly is more
bellying out.

The Parisians observed in their Monkeys, that the Bladder was fastened to the
first of the two Lobes which were on the right side. That it was an Inch long,
and half an inch broad; it had a great Ductus, which was immediately inserted
underneath the Pylorus. This Ductus received three others, which instead of
that, which in Man is single, and which is called Hepaticus; these three
Ductus's had their Branches dispersed like Roots into all the Lobes of the
Liver, so that the first had four roots, viz. one in each of the three right
Lobes, and one in the first of the left; the second and third Ductus had both
their roots in the second of the left Lobes, these branches did not run under
the Tunicle of the Liver, so that they were apparent, and not hid in the
Parenchyma, as they generally are. But in our Subject the distribution of the
Ductus Hepaticus was altogether the same as it is in Man. In the Male Ape,
Drelincourt describing the Bladder of Gall, says, Vesicula fellea longa 22/3
pollicibus a fundo ad cervicem, ubi recurvitatem habet maximam, dimidiate
haeret mersa substantiae Jecoris.

The Ductus Hepaticus in our Pygmie issued out of the Liver with two branches;
one arising from the right, the other from the left part of the Liver; and
after a short space, joined into one Trunk; and that, after a little way,
joining with the Ductus Cysticus, do form the Ductus Communis, which empties it
self into the Duodenum a little below the Pylorus, at the same Orifice with the
Ductus Pancreaticus, exactly as it is in Man, as I have mentioned.

At the Simous part of the Liver I observed the Vena Porta to enter, as
likewise the Epatic Arteries and Nerves, And here in the Membrane about these
Vessels, I observed a pretty large whitish Gland. The Vena Vmbilicalis entered
the Liver at the fissure. It seemed large, but I found it is fistula or pipe was
closed. The Vena Cava issued out of the Liver at the Unequal part, where 'twas
joined to the Diaphragm.

In the Spleen of our Pygmie I did not observe any thing extraordinary, or
different from a Humane Spleen. It was of a lead Color, and of the shape
represented in our figure; 'twas fastened by Membranes to the Peritonaeum; and
by the Omentum and Vasa brevia to the Stomach, so that upon inflating the
Stomach, the Spleen would be brought to lie close on the Stomach, as if it was
fastened immediately there. The Spleen here was two Inches and an half long;
and one Inch and a quarter broad; and seated as usually in the left Hypochondre
under the Bastard Ribs. The Ramus Splenicus was very remarkable, sending it is
Trunk along the Pancreas, as in Man, and having numerous branches near the
Spleen.

The Parisians tell us, that in their Monkeys the Spleen was seated along the
Ventricle as in Man; but it is figure was different, in one of our Subjects
being made as the Heart is represented in Blazonry; it is Basis containing an
Inch. They give a figure of it, but nothing like that of ours, which more
represented the figure of an Humane Spleen; though in Man it is figure is often
observed very different. Blasius in the Ape he dissected, observes that the
Spleen triangularis figurae est, exiguus admodum respectu corporis; coloris
nigricantis, laeve equidem molleque valde corpus, ast exterius inaequale quasi
ex globulis variis confectum, adeo ut etiam conglomeratis Glandulis Substantiam
Lienis annumerare velle, tali in subjecto fundamentum aliquod agnoscat. Ex Ramo
Splenico numerosos eosque insignes Ventriculo suppeditat ramos, magnitudinem
and figuram externam Fig. 3a. Tab. XI. exhibet. But his figure of the Spleen
was nothing like to that of ours. For I did not observe those inequalities in
the superfice which he represents in his, to exhibit the conglomerate Glands.
It Is true, having injected the Spleen of our Pygmie the Mercury filling the
cellulated body of the Spleen, did make an appearance on the surface somewhat
like those inequalities in his figure. But Frederic. de Rusch Epist^la
Anatomica Pr^bl^matica qua^ta.
is very positive, that neither those Glands, nor Cells mentioned by
Malpighius, are to be met with in a Humane Spleen: though he grants, that they
are in the Spleen of Brutes. Drelincourt in the Female Ape says, Lien Scalenum
figura refert, cohaeret Reni sinistro and liber est ^ Diaphragmate. And in the
Male Ape he observes, Lien triangularis and crassior quam in foemina, Pancreas
excipiens.

We shall therefore now proceed to the Pancreas, which in our Pygmie was
situated, just as it is in a Humane Body; lying under the Stomach, transverse
to ihe Spine, from the Spleen toward the Liver. It was about two Inches long,
about half an Inch broad, of a white yellowish Color; it is surface uneven,
being made up of abundance of Glands; it is Secretory Duct emptied it self into
the Duodenum, just where the Ductus Communis of the Gall does, as I have
mentioned before.

The Parisians in their Monkeys observed, that the Pancreas had only it is
secure, which made it to resemble that of Man; it is connection, and insertion
being wholly particular. For it was strongly fastened to the Spleen; and the
insertion of it is Ductus into ihe Intestine (which in Man is always near the
Porus Bilarius) was two Inches distant therefrom. Blasius in his Ape describes
it thus; Pancreas ventriculo substratum, solidoe admodum substantiae est, nec
adco molle, quam in Canibus aliisque Animalibus notatur. Longum itidim
insigniter, ast latitudinis cjus, q^aene minimi digiti latitudini respondeat.
He takes no notice here, how the Ductus Pancreaticus was inserted; which
Drelincourt tells us in the Female Ape was eight lines above the Porus
Bilarius. Pancreas connalum I ^enali Caudae, and extremo Reni sinistro. Fjus
ductus inseritur o^to lineis supra Porum Bilarium, contra ac Canibus,
substernitur immediate Ventricilo, and supersternitur brevi Intestino. Though in
the Male Ape he tells us. it is inserted into the Duodenum at the same Orisice
with the Duct of the Gall, as I have already mentioned and quoted before.

The Glandulae Renales in our Pygmie were very large, and placed a little above
the Kidneys as they are in Man. That on the right side, was of a triangular;
that on the left of an oblong figure. They were about three quarters of an Inch
long: and almost half an Inch broad. They had the same Vessels, as there are in
a Man.

The Parisians in their Monkeys, observe that the Gland called Capsula
Atrabilaria, was very visible, by reason that the Kidney was without fat. This
Gland was white, and the Kidney of a bright red; it is figure was triangular.
Blasius in his Ape tells us, Glandula Renalis triangularis sere figuraeest,
notabilis valde pro ratione Corporis, and gives us a figure of it, which was
nothing like ours. What Drelincourt remarks in the Male Ape, is, Capsulae
Atrabilariae triplicem Scrobiculum habent, quarum liquor expressus linguam non
it a constringit, uti in Capsulis foemineis. And in the Female Ape he tells us,
Ren Succenturiatus sinister ab Emulgente venam habet; idem major Dextro. This I
observed in our Pygmie; but he says nothing farther here of their Liquor, nor
did I taste it in ours.

We shall now proceed to the Kidneys. In our Pygmie I did observe very little
or no fat in the common or outward Membrane, usually called Adiposa:
Drelincourt observed the same, nullus hic Adeps in Tunica communi vel propria,
as he tells us of his Ape. The Kidneys of our Pygmie were two Inches and a
quarter long, an Inch and an half broad; and about an Inch in depth. They had
not altogether so large a Sinus at the Entrance of the Emulgent Vessels, as
there is in a Man's; and the whole appeared somewhat rounder; but their
situation was the same, as were likewise the Emulgents. Having divided the
right Kidney length-ways, I observed the Cortical or Glandulous Part to appear
like a distinct Substance, being a of tawny or yellowish color; and different
from the Inward or Tubulary Part; which was more entire and compacted together,
than in a Man's; and was of a red color, by means of the blood vessels which
run between the Tubuli Vrinarij or Secretory Ducts, which make up this part of
the Kidneys. Which Vessels when inflamed and overextended, by making a
Compression on these Tubuli Vrinarij, may cause a Suppression of Urine; in
which case Phlebotomy or Bleeding is very necessary. And without doubt was the
Cause of the Success Riverius Riverij Observe. Med. Cent.I. Obj. 1.
met with in a Patient, who had a Suppression of Urine for three days; for upon
bleeding freely, he was presently relieved, and in a short time rendered a
large quantity of Urine. In this Tubulary Part of a Humane Kidney I always
observe these Blood Vessels: but here usually the Cortical or Glandulous Part
makes a deeper descent between the heads of this Tubulary, and divides it into
several Bodies; and as many of them as appear, so many lesser Kidneys may be
reckoned to make up the Body of each Kidney. In Infants the Kidney externally
appears more divided than in Adult Persons; but most remarkably they are so, in
a Bear, the Porpois and an Ostrich; where there are abundance of distinct small
Kidneys amassed together to make up each.

The Parisians in the Kidneys of their Monkeys observe, that they were round
and flat; their situation was more unequal, than in a Man; the right being much
lower than the left, viz. half it is bigness. Drelincourt in the Female Ape
remarks, Renes globost, dexter intra Hypochondrium incumbit Costae 11. and 12.
Sinister locum habet intra Costam ultimam. Altitudo Renis dimidiae unciae.
Renalium venarum dextra long elatior sinistra. Rene aperto Carnis discrimen ut
in homine, exterior quidem nigricans lineis quatuor crassa, interior albicans
lineis duabus.

The Pelvis of the Kidney in our Pygmie was as it is usually in a Man; and the
Vreters had nothing remarkably different in their Structure, from the common
make. They were about the bigness of a Wheat straw; and were inserted into the
neck of the Bladder, as represented in our figure; rather somewhat nearer the
neck, than in an Humane Bladder.

The Parisians and Blasius have no remarks upon the Vreters. Drelincourt in the
Male Ape says, Vreteres supra Psoas Musculo and Iliaco, atque subtus vasis
Spermaticis, quibus decussa^im substrati sunt etiam quibus vascula admittunt,
sese reflectunt in Hypogastricam, decussantes ramos Iliacos and Ejaculatorios.
And in the Female, Vreteris expansiones arcuatim reflexae ut in homine. Vasa
habent superne a Renalibus, inferne a Musculis.

The Bladder of Urine in our Pygmie was of an Oblong figure, not so globous as
commonly in Man, for being moderately blown up it measured four Inches in
length; and two Inches and half in breadth. In other Circumstances 'twas
agreeable enough with an Humane Bladder.

The Parisians tell us, that in the Female Monkey, the Neck of the Bladder had
it is hole otherwise than in Women, being very far in the Neck of the Matrix,
viz. toward the middle, at the place where it is roughness began, which were
seen only toward the Extremity of the Ductus, near the internal Orifice.
Blasius says nothing of it in his Ape; and all that Drelincourt tells us is,
Vesica Peritonaeo suspensa ut in aliis Brutis.

Before we proceed to the Parts of Generation (which remain besides to be here
described) we shall a little take notice of those large Canales of the Blood,
the Arteria Aorta and the Vena Cava, and the Rivulets they emit or do receive;
all which I find in our Pygmie to be just the same, as they are in a Man. For
from the Aorta arises here, the Arteria Caeliaca; the Arteria Mesenterica
superior; then the Emulgent Arteries; below them, the Spermatick Arteries; then
the Arteria Mesenterica inferior; then the Trunk divides into the Iliac
Branches. So the Vena Cava too in our Pygmie exactly imitated that in a Man.

How the Structure of these Vessels are in Monkeys, the Parisians do not tell
us, and their figure is very imperfect; as is likewise that in Blasius, which
seems altogether fictitious. What he writes, is this; Arteria magna circa Renem
dextrum succumbit Venae Cavae, and ubi Iliacos Ramos constituit eandem
supergreditur; contra ac in Homine, Cane, aliisque animalibus fieri reperimus,
ubi sinistra occupat, hinc a sinistra ad dextram progreditur supra Arteriam. So
Drelincourt tells us in the Male Ape, Aorta descendens mox atque bifurcatur
equitat, and adscendenti Cavae incumbit.

We come now to the Parts of Generation; and shall begin with the Vasa
Praeparantia; The Arteries and Veins. The Spermatic Arteries in our Pygmie do
both arise out of the Trunk of the Aorta, a little below the Emulgent Arteries,
as in our figure; and after having ran a little way, they meet with the
Spermatic Vein; and are both included in a common Capsula, and so do descend to
the Testes. These Arteries do carry the blood to the Testes, from whence the
Semen is afterward separated; the residue of the Blood is returned from the
Testes by the Spermatic Veins; whereof that on the right side enters into the
Trunk of the Vena Cava, a little below the right Emulgent Vein; and that of the
left, is emptied into the left Emulgent Vein, just all one as it is in a Humane
Body. Having injected the Spermatic Vein with Mercury, it discovered abundance
of Vessels, running waving; which otherwise did not appear: and a great many of
them were extremely fine and small.

The Parisians give no description of the Spermatic Vessels in their Monkeys;
and in their figure the left Spermatic Vein is omitted, or left out. Thomas
Bartholine Thom. Bartholin. Acta Medica and Philos. Hasniens. an. 1691. and
1672. Obs. 36.
in his Anatomy of a Mamomet (which he describes, as not having a Tail; and
therefore it must be of the Ape-kind, and not a Cercopithecus, or a Monkey, as
he calls it) in his figure of these parts, represents the left Spermatic Vein,
emptying it self into the left Emulgent, as it is in our Creature. Blasius
therefore in the account of the Ape he dissected, must be mistaken; both in his
figure and description too; for in the former, he represents the left Spermatic
Vein running into the Trunk of the Cava; and justifies it in the latter; in
telling us, Vasa Spermatica utroque latere ex Trunco Cavae and Aortae oriuntur,
and quidem altiori loco ea quae sunt lateris dextri, inferiore quae sinistri.
But Drelincourt certainly is more in the right, who informs us, that in the
Male Ape he dissected, Vena Spermatica dextra crassa, and ab interiori trunco
Cavae adscendentis pollice infra Emulgentem sinistram enascitur, surculosque
emittit sinistros in Membranas vicinas. Arteria Spermatica dextra a trunco
anteriori Aortae paulo infra Emulgentem sinistram enascens sub Vena Emulgente
intercruciat Cavam ascendentem, quae superinequitat, and conjungitur Venae
Consociali eo praecise loci ubi Vena inseritur suum in truncum. Sinistra Vena
Spermatica inseriturin Emulgentem juxta truncum Cavae, and consocialem Arteriam
admittit eo praecise loci, in quo enascitur dextra. So in the Female Ape he
says, Spermatica Vena sinistra ab Emulgente sinistra, dextra e Trunci part
anteriore, pollice infra Emulgentem sinistram.

We come now to describe the Testes, which in our Pygmie were not contained in
a pendulous Scrotum, as they are in Man, but more contracted and pursed up by
the outward Skin, nearer to the Os Pubis, and were seated by the sides of the
Penis, without the Os Pubis; and I observed them bunching out there, before the
Dissection; so that it seemed to want a Scrotum; or at least the Skin which
enclosed them, was not so dilated, as to hang down like a Cod; but contracted
them up nearer to the Body of the Penis which to me seems a wise Contrivance of
Nature. For hereby these Parts are less exposed to the injuries, they might
otherwise receive in climbing Trees, or other accidents in the Woods. However,
the outward Skin here that incloses them, performs altogether the office of a
Scrotum. And if I mistake not, I observed that Sepimentum, as in a Humane
Scrotum; which is made by a descent of a Membrane there, which divides each
Testicle from one another.

But whether the Testes being thus closely pursed up to the Body, might
contribute to that great salaciousness this Species of Animals are noted for, I
will not determine: Though it is said, that these Animals, that have their
Testicles contained within the Body, are more inclined to it, than others. That
the whole Ape-kind is extremely given to Venery, appears by insinite Stories
related of them. And not only so, but different from other Brutes, they covet
not only their own Species, but to an Excess are inclined and sollicitous to
those of a different, and are most amorous of fair Women. Besides what I have
already mentioned, Gabriel Clauderus Miscell. Curiosa German. Decur. 2. Ann. 5.
Obs. 187.
tells us of an Ape, which grew so amorous of one of the Maids of Honor, who
was a celebrated Beauty, that no Chains, nor Consinement, nor Beating, could
keep him within Bounds; so that the Lady was forced to petition to have him
banished the Court. But that Story of Castanenda in his Annals of Portugal (if
true) is very remarkable; of a Woman who had two Children by an Ape. I shall
give it in Latin, as it is related by Licetus; and it is quoted too by Anton.
Deusingius Ant. Deusingij Fassicul. Dissertat. select. de Ratione and Loquela
Brutorum, p.m. 196.
and others.

In hanc Sententiam faciunt (says Fort. Licetus Fortun. Licetus de Monstrorum
Causis, lib. 2. cap. 68. p.m. 217.
) quae Castanenda retulit in Annalibus. Lusitaniae de filiis ex muliere, ac
simio natis, mulierem nempe ob quoddam crimen in insulam desertam navi
deportatam, quum ibi exposita fuisset, eam simiorum, quibus fertilis locus er
at, agmen circumstetisse fremebundum; supervenisse unum grandiorem, cui reliqui
loco cesserint: hunc mulierem blande manu captam in antrum ingens abduxisse,
eique cum ipsum tum ceteros copiam pomorum, nucum, radicumque variarum
apposuisse; and nutu ut vesceretur invitasse; tandem a fer a coactam ad
stuprum; facinus hoc multis diebus continuatum adeo, ut duos ex fera liberos
pepererit: ita miseram (quanto mors optabilior!) vict itasse per annos aliquot;
donec Deus misertus navim eo Lusitanam detulisset; quumque milites in terram
aquatum ex proximo ad antrum font exscendissent: abessetque forte fortuna
simius; feminam ad invisos diu mortales accurrisse, and occidentem ad pedes
supplicasse, uti se facinore, and calamitosissima servitute irent ereptum,
adsentientibusque, and casum miserantibus illis, eam cum ipsis navim
adscendisse. Sed ecce tibi simium supervenientem inconditis gestibus, and
fremitibus conjugem non conjugem revocantem: ut vidit vela ventis data, concito
cursu de liberis unum matri ostentat, minatur, ni redeat, in mare
praecipitaturum; nec segniter fecit, quod minatus: tum recurrit ad antrum, and
eadem velocitate ad littus rediens ostentat alterum, minatur, and demergit:
subsequitur, donec undae natantem vicere. Rem totam Lusitania test notissimam,
and a Rege mulierem Ulytsipone addictam ignibus, quorundam precibus vita
impetrata, lethum cum claustro perpetuo commutasse.

But to return to our Business. Our Pygmie in this Particular of the Scrotum,
more resembles the Ape- kind, than a Man. For the Parisians tell us, that the
Parts of Generation in three of our Subjects, which were Males, were different
from those of Man, there being no Scrotum in two of these Subjects, and the
Testicles not appearing, by reason that they were hid in the fold of the
Groyne. It is true that the third, which was one of the Sapajous, had a
Scrotum, but it was so shrunk, that it did not appear. Or, as they afterward
express it, The Testicles were shut up in a Scrotum, which joined them close up
to the Penis. So in the Ape Blasius describes, Testes insignes satis, sacculo
suo inclusi, non dependent extra abdomen, ad modum eum quo in Homine, Canibus,
similibusque Animalibus aliis, sed vicini adeo sunt tendinibus musculorum
Abdominis, quos vasa Spermatica transeunt, ac si iis uniti essent, sic ut
potius in Inguine utroque collocatos eos dicerem, quam ultra ossa Pubis a
Corpore pendulos, And so Drelincourt to the same purpose; Scrotum pendulum
nullum est, sest Testiculi utrinque juxta Ossis Pubis summa latera, vel Spinam
summam ejus decumbunt extra prorsus Abdominis cavum, and proinde extra
Musculorum Epigastrij Aponeuroses.

In the other Parts I am here to describe, I find our Pygmie more conformable
to the Structure of the same in a Man. For the Testes were included in a Tunica
Vaginalis, and had a Cremaster Muscle: which being separated, I observed the
Epididymis large, and the Body of the Testis to be about the bigness of a
Filbird; and it is compounding Parts nothing at all different from those of a
Man. Jacobus Sylvins Jac, Sylvij Variorum Corporum dissect. Operum, p. m. 130.
in the Ape he diffected, observed, the Testes humanis majores.

The Parisians tell us, that in some of their Subjects the Testicles were long
and strait, and but one line in breadth, and eight in length. In one of their
Sapajous they were found of a figure quite contrary, and almost as remote from
the figure of those of Man, being perfectly round. Drelincourt's account in his
Ape is, Tunica Elytroides fibris carneis a Cremaster conspersa, ut in homine.
Arteria Spermatica miro lusu, spiratim revolvitur super Testiculi dorsum.
Testiculus autem Ventri Epididymidum adhaeret, nisi fibrillis paucis and laxis,
capite suo, quo Spermatica Deferentia admittit, separatur illaesus, cauda autem
sua, qua ejaculatoria vasa emittit, tot punctula candicantia exhibet, divulsus
ab Epididymide, quot a Testiculo canaliculi protenduntur.

From the Epididymis in our Pygmie (as it is in a Man) was continued the Vas
Deferens; a slender Ductus, which conveys the Semen from the Testicle to the
Vesiculae Seminales. These Vesiculae were two cellulated Bladders placed under
the neck of the Bladder of Urine; which on the outside, did seem (as it were)
nothing else but the Vas Deferens dilated, and placed in a waving figure there.
And as the Body of the Testes was made up of a curious convoluted Contexture of
Seminal Vessels, which running into fewer, form at last the Body of the
Epididymis; and these Vessels afterward passing all into one Duct, do make up
the Vas Deferens: so this Vas Deferens here, being dilated and enlarged, does
form the Vesiculae Seminales. And the same is in a Man.

The Parisians here do take notice of that Passage in Aristotle I have already
quoted, where he likens the Parts of Generation in the Male Ape to those of a
Dog, more than a Man. But the Philosopher herein, is under a Mistake; for, as
they instance, in the Penis of a Dog, there is a Bone, which is not in the
Monkey's; so likewise in Monkeys, there are Vesiculae Seminales, which are not
to be met with in a Dog. They describe them in their Monkeys thus: The
Glandulous Prostatoe were small; the Parastatae Cyrsoides were in requital very
large; they contained an Inch in length; their breadth was unequal, being four
lines toward the neck of the Bladder, and a line and an half at the other end,
differing herein from those of Man, who has them slenderest near the neck of
the Bladder. They were composed of several little Baggs, which opened into one
another. The Caruncle of the Urethra was small, but very like to that of a Man.
Blasius has given us a figure of these Parts, which I do not like as neither
that of the Parisians. He describes them thus: Vesiculae Seminales hic valde
amplae, quae immisso flatu per ductum Seminalem Ejaculatorium insigniter
intumescunt, Quod si premantur, manifestissimee observamus Materiam iis
contentam moveri in Meatum Vrinarium, Vesicae continuum, and quidem per foramen
singular, quod in unoquoque latere unicum est, quae res occasionem videtur
dedisse Jacobo Sylvio duos ductus Seminales in simia constituendi. All that
Drelincourt says of them is, Vasa ejaculatoria retro Vesicam tendunt in
Corpuscula proedura mire anfractuosa, ut and ipsum initium Epididymidis. Which
is very conformable to what I observed in our Pygmie.

Between the root of the Penis, and neck of the Bladder, is seated the Corpus
Glandulosum, or the Prostatae, which in our Pygmie appeared the same as in Man.
The Parisians tell us in their Monkeys that they were small. Blasius in his
figure, besides the Prostates, which he says are Glandula vesicis adstans,
albidior solidiorque represents another, at the Letters (H. H.) viz. Glandula
alia, major, rubicunda and plexu Nervorum, aliorumque vasorum praedita; which
is no Gland, but the Bulb of the Penis. Drelincourt in his Ape tells us,
Corpora Glandulosa duos velut Nates circa vesicae cervicem supra Sphincterem
exhibent.

We come now to the Penis, which in our Pygmie was two Inches long; the girth
of it at the root was an Inch and a quarter; but it grew taperer toward the
end. It had no fraenum, so that the Praepuce could be retracted wholly down;
and herein our Pygmie is different from a Man. The Slit of the Penis here was
perpendicular as in a Man. In the figure the Parisians give us, it seems to be
horizontal, as it is plainly represented by Bartholine in his third and fourth
figure of his Mamomet, although by his second figure one would think otherwise.
Whether there was any Balanus or Glans in the Penis of our Pygmie, or what it
was, I am uncertain: I do not remember I observed any. In my third figure the
Penis is represented decurtated at the end, and without the Praeputium, which
was left entire to the Skin. Dreclincourt's account of it in the Ape is this;
Genitale prorsus expers est fraenuli ac proinde Praeputium devolvitur ad
radicem usque Penis, and denudatur Glans ipsa, atque Penis integer. Balanus
consimilis virili, excepto fraenulo, atque praeterea hiatum maximum exhibet,
qua part Ligamenta Cavernosa desinant, and Glans utrinque prominet. At the
root of the Penis of our Pygmie, we observed the Musculi Erectores to be short,
and thicker proportionably than in a Man and the Ligamentum Suspensorium
larger: The Musculus accelerator Vrinae was large, covering the Bulb of the
Cavernous body of the Vrethra. The Corpora Nervosa, or the two Cavernous bodies
of the Penis were divided length-ways by a Sepimentum in the middle, as in Man.
In the Vrethra likewise there was a Cavernous body. The Vessels of the Penis
answered exactly to those of a Man.

Blasius in his Ape faith, Penis Nervosum Corpus unicum tantum habere videtur,
sepimento notabili destitutum. But I am apt to think he might be mistaken; for
in our Subject 'twas very plainly divided, but more remarkably toward the root
than forwards. What he adds afterward, Circa radicem Penis Tuberculum exile
occurrit, exterius carnosae naturae, interius reticulari vasorum plexu
refertum, interstitia ipsius materia rubicunda occupante, by this I suppose he
means the Bulb of the Penis. Drelincourt expresses it better, where he says,
Totus Penis duobus Ligamentis Cavernosis a tuberibus Ischij gaudet. In our
Subject these two bodies were very large and cavernous within. But what
Drelincourt adds, Vrethra, plane carnosa; This was different in our Pygmie; for
as I have mentioned, the sides of the Vrethra, here were Cavernous too, though
not much.

How the Organs of Generation are in the Female of this Species of Animals, I
have had no opportunity of informing my self. But by Analogy I cannot but think,
they must be very like to those of a Woman, since they are so even in Monkeys
and Apes in several respect; though in some, they imitate the Structure of these
Parts in Brutes. Thus the Parisians observe, The generative Parts of the Female
had also a great many things which rendered them different from those of
Bitches, herein resembling those of Women; there were some of them likewise
which were as in Bitches, and after another manner than in Woman; for the
exterior Orifice was round and strait, as in Bitches, and the generality of
other Brutes, and had neither Nymphae nor Carunculae. The Neck of the Bladder
had it is hole otherwise than in Woman, being very far in the Neck of the
Matrix, viz. toward the middle, at the place where it is roughness began, which
were seen only toward the extremity of the Ductus near the Internal Orifice.
The Trunks of the Matrix were also different from those of Women, and
resembling those of Brutes in that they were proportionably longer, and more
redoubled by various turnings. The Clitoris had something more conformable to
that which is seen in other Brutes that have it, than in that of Women, being
proportionably greater, and more visible than it is in Women. It was composed
of two Nervous and Spongious Ligaments, which proceeding from the lower part of
the Os Pubis, and obliquely advancing to the sides of these Bones, did unite to
form a third Body, which was ten lines in length. It was formed by uniting of
the two first, which a very strong Membrane joined together, going from one of
the Ligaments to the other, besides a hard and nervous Membrane which inveloped
them. They terminated at a Gland like to that of the Penis of the Male. The
little Muscles, which were fastened to these Ligaments, proceeded as usual from
the tuberosities of the Ischium. These Ligaments were of Substance so thin and
spongious, that the wind penetrated, and made them easily to swell, when blown
into the Network, of the Veins and Arteries which is in this place. This
Network was visible in this Subject, being composed of larger Vessels than they
proportionably are in Women. It was situated as usually under the second pair
of Muscles of the Clitoris. It Is figure was Pyramidal, ending from a very large
Basis in a point, which run along the third Ligament to it is extremity toward
the Gland.

The rest of the Parts of Generation were like to those of Women. The Neck of
the Bladder had it is Muscles as in Women: For there were a great number of
fleshy Fibers, which proceeding from the Sphincter of the Anus, were fastened
to the sides of the Neck of the Uterus, and other such like Fibers which did
come from the Sphincter of the Bladder to insert them selves at the same place.
The Body of the Uterus, it is Membranes, internal Orifice, it is Ligaments as
well the round as broad, and all it is Vessels had a conformation entirely like
to that, which these same Parts have in Women. The Testicles, which were ten
lines long, and two broad, were as in Women, composed of a great number of
small Bladders, and fastened near the Membranes which are at the extremity of
the Tubae, and which is called their Fringe.

Drelincourt has very little on this Subject, all he says is, Vrethra
rubicunda solida and brevis. Vagina admodum rugosa, monticulum habens in medio,
Papillis extuberans ut in Palato, Pollicem longa, transversim scissa, Pollicem
lata. Orificium interius valde solidum. Cervix interior admodum dura, and paulo
intra osculum internum duritie cartilaginosa.

We shall proceed now to the Parts of the Middle Venture, the Thorax; and here,
as the Parts are fewer, so my Remarks will be also: and the rather, because in
our Pygmie we observed so very little difference from the Structure of the same
Parts in a Man. I must confess I cannot be so particular in all Circumstances,
as I would, because for the preserving the Sceleton more entire, I did not take
off the Sternum. However, I observed enough to satisfy my self with what I
thought most material.

This Cavity was divided from the Abdomen by the Diaphragm, whose Aponeurosis
or Tendon seemed rather larger than in a Man: and the second Muscle which
encompassed the Gula, as it passes through it, was very fair.

I made no Remarks upon the Pleura, and Mediastinum: The Thymus in our Pygmie
was about an Inch long, and placed as it is in Man; downwards 'twas divided, but
upwards 'twas joined together. So in a Man I have often observed it divided.
Generally this part is larger in Infants and Embrios than in grown Persons, for
the Reasons I have frequently mentioned in my Anatomical Lectures. The
Parisians observed in their Monkeys that the Thymus was large. Blasius and
Drelincour^ have no Remarks about it.

The Lungs in our Pygmie had three Lobes on one side, and but two on the other;
five in all. Their Color, Substance, Situation, and all Circumstances exactly
resemble a Man's. The Parisians tell us, that in their Monkeys the Lungs had
seven Lobes, three on the right side, and as many on the left, the seventh was
in the Cavity of the Mediastine, as in the generality of Brutes. This again
makes a notable difference between the internal parts of the Ape, and those of
Man, whose Lungs have generally at the most but five Lobes, oftener but four,
and sometimes but two. Vesalius affirms that he never saw in Man this fifth
Lobe, which he reports to be in Apes, supposing that they have but five. The
Passage that the Parisians hint at in Vesalius is this, Lobum autem qui in
Canbus, simiisque Venae Cavae Caudicem suffulcit, nunquam in homine observavi,
and hunc illo destitui certo certius scio, quamvis interim Galeni locus in
septimo de administrandis Dissectionibus mihi memoria non exciderit, quo
inquit, quintum hunc Pulmonis Lobum eos non latere, qui recte sectionem
administrant; innuens Herophilo and Marino ejusmodi Lobum fuisse incognitum,
uti sane fuit, cum illi Hominum Cadavera, non autem cum ipso, simiarum ac Canum
duntaxat aggrederentur, in quibus praesenti Lobo nihil est manifestius. Andr.
Vesalij de Corporis humani fabrica, lib. 6. cap. 7. p. 724.
Tho Galen be herein mistaken, Vesalius certainly is too severe in his Censure,
in charging him, that he never dissected any thing but Apes and Dogs; for the
contrary evidently appears in abundance of Instances, that might be produced.
And one would think he had not dissected Apes and Monkeys in making but five
Lobes in their Lungs, whereas in either there are more. In what he argues, that
this fifth Lobe in a Man could not lie upon the Vena Cava; because in a Man the
Pericardium is fastened to the Diaphragm, and the Vana Cava enters there, and
so immediately passes to the Heart; this is true, and the same I observed in
our Paymie. So that in the formation of this Part, our Pygmie exactly resembles
a Man; and is different from both the Mankey and Ape- kind. The former we have
seen; as to the latter, Drelincourt tells us in the Male Ape; Pulmo dexter
quadrifidus, Lobus insimus omnium crassissimus, superior minus crassus,
intermedius reapse medius silu and magnitudine. Quarius demum crenam insculptam
habet, qua part Cavae fulcrum praebet. Pulmo sinister bisidus, and Lobus ejus
superior bifurcatus. So in the Female Ape, Lobi Pulmonis dextri totaliter
divisi IV, quorum superior, bisidus totus, adeo ut sint quinque in ea part:
siuister Pulmo bisidus totus, and Lobus superior ultra dimidium sui divisus.

The Trachaea or windpipe in our Pygmie was altogether the same as in a Man;
consisting of a regular order of Cartilaginous Annuali, which were not
perfectly continued round; but toward the Spine, were joined by a strong
Membrane. Drelincourt says of it, Trachaeae annuli se habent uti Intestinourm
spirae, nervosis Membranis colliguntur. The Comparison, I think, is not so well
made.

For the present we will leave following the Duct of the Trachaea up to the
Larynx, (the Part according to the Method of Nature, we should have began with)
and make some farther Observations, on those under our present view. In the
Cavity of the Thorax therefore, (as I have remarked) the Pericardium or that
Bag that incloses the Heart in our Pygmie, was fastened to the Diaphragm, just
it is in Man. I must confess, when I first observed it, I was surprised, because
I had not seen it so in Brutes before. And Vesalius and others make it as a
peculiarity to a Man. I will quote Vesalius's words, and make an Inference from
our observation, and so proceed.

Vesalius Andr. Vesalij de Corporis Humani f^brica, lib. 6. cap. 8. p.m. 728.
therefore tells us, Caeterum Involucri mucro, and dextri ipsius lateris
egregia portio Septi transversi nerveo circulo validissime, amploque admodum
spatio connascitur, quod Hominibus est peculiare. Simiis quoque and Canibus and
Porcis involucrum a septo mullum distat. Tantum abest ut ipsi magna sui
portione connecteretur, adeo sane ut and hinc luce clarius constet, Galenum
hominis viscera aut oscitanter, aut neutiquam spectasse, Simiasque and Canes
nobis describentem, immerito veteres arguisse. He cannot forbear at all turns to
have a fling at Galen: But he is here in the right, and Galen mistaken. So
Blancardus Stephn Blanca^ai Anatom. reformat. cap. 2. p. 8.
tells us, Homo prae caeteris Animalibus hoc peculiare habet, quod ejus
Pericardium Septi transversi medio semper accrescat, cum idem in Quadrupedum
genere liberum, and aliquanto spatio ab ipso remotum sit.

Now our Pygmie having the Pericardium thus fastened to the Diaphragm, it seems
to me, as if Nature designed it to be a Biped and to go erect. For therefore in
a Man is the Pericardium thus fastened, that in Expiration it might assist the
Diastole of the Diaphragm: for otherwise the Liver and Stomach being so
weighty, they would draw it down too much toward the Abdomen; so that upon the
relaxation of it is Fibers in it is Diastole, it would not ascend sufficiently
into the Thorax, so as to cause a Subsidence of the Lungs by lessening the
Cavity there. In Quadrupeds there is no need of this adhaesion of the
Pericardium to the Diaphragm: For in them, in Expiration, when the Fibers of
the Diaphragm are relaxed, the weight of the Viscera of the Abdomen will easily
press the Diaphragm up, into the Cavity of the Thorax, and so perform that
Service. Besides, was the Pericardium fastened to the Diaphragm in Quadrupeds,
it would hinder it is Systole in Inspiration; or it is descent downwards upon the
contraction of it is Muscular Fibers; and the more, because the Diaphragm being
thus tied up, it could not then so freely force down the weight of the Viscera,
which are always pressing upon it, and consequently not sufficiently dilate the
Cavity of the Thorax, and therefore must hinder their Inspiration. Thus we see
how necessary it is, that in a Man the Pericardium should be fastened to the
Diaphragm, and in Quadrupeds how inconvenient it would be; that from hence I
think we may safely conclude, that Nature designed our Pygmie to go erect,
since in this particular it is so like a Man; which the common Apes and Monkeys
are not; and though they are taught to go erect, yet it is no more than what Dogs
may be taught to do.

We proceed now to the Heart; where we observed that in our Pygmie, its
Auricles, Ventricles, Valves and Vessels were much the same as they are in a
Man's. It Is Cone was not so pointed, as in some Animals, but rather more obtuse
and blunt, even more than a Man's. What Avicenna Avicennae lib. 3. Fen. 2.
Tract. 1. p.m. 670
remarks of the Heart of an Ape, having a double Cone, must be accidental and
extraordinary: for he tells us, Et jam repertum est Cor cujusdam Simij habens
duo Capita. And a little after, he denies the Heart to be a Muscle; Jam autem
erravit (says he) qai existimavit, quod sit Lacertus, quamvis sit similium
rerum in co, verum motus ejus non est voluntarius. The person he hints at, I
suppose, is Hippocrates, who so long ago asserted this; (...) (says Hipp. de
Cora^, p.m. 270
Hippocrates) (...). Cor musculus est validus admodum non Nervo, verum Carnis
spissamento. And Steno and Dr. Lower since have showed us the way of dissecting
it, and have made it most evident that it is Muscular; and it is motion is such;
but as Avicenne observes,'it is not a voluntary motion, but involuntary. It Is
pity we had not a better Translation of his Works; for unless it be some
particular Pieces, the rest is most barbarously done, as appears from that
little I have quoted of him. But to return to our Pygmie; the magnitude and
figure of the Heart here, was exactly the same as represented in our Scheme,
where part of the Pericardium is left lying on it. Both in the right and left
Auricle and Ventricle, I observed two Polypous Concretions, which plainly
represented the Valves both in the Arteria Pulmonalis, and Aorta. I must
confess by what I have hitherto observed of them, (and I have very frequently
met with such Concretions in Humane Bodies) I cannot think these Polypus's to
be any thing else, than the Size of the Blood, or the Serum coagulated after
Death. The Observation I formerly gave Vide Tho. Barthelini Acta Med. and
Philos. Hafniens. Vol. 5. Obs. 30. p. 94.
of a Polypus in the Trachaea and Bronchiae of a Patient troubled with an
Haemoptoe, in it is kind I think remarkable.

The Parisians Observe that the Heart of their Monkey was a great deal more
pointed, than it usually is in Man; which is likewise a Character of Brutes.
Yet in the interior Superficies of it is Ventricles, it had that great number
of Fibers and fleshy Columns, which are seen in Men. Drelincourt in his Ape
observes, Cor solidum in ventriculo sinistro, laxum in dextro; praedurus Conus
ejus: Serum in Pericardio salsum. Vasa Coronaria tumida, Praesertim circa
Ventriculum. Adeps circa ca nullus.

There was nothing farther, I think, that I observed peculiar in the Thorax of
our Pygmie. I shall now therefore follow the Duct of the Trachaea up to the
Throat. And here as in Man, I observed placed the Glandula Thyroidea, upon the
Cartilago Scutiformis of the Larynx; 'twas red and spungy, full of Blood
vessels, not much unlike the inward Part of the Spleen, but somewhat firmer. In
a Man I have always observed this part to be red. Drelincourt's Account of it
in the Ape is, Glandulae Thyroideae and Cricoideae crassae sunt, and
subnigricantes; and illas permeant surculi Corotidis Arteriae and Jugular is
venae externae; cum surculis Nervi Recurrentis. There is no sensible account
yet given of the use of this part, as I have met with: And I think that from a
Comparative Survey of it in other Animals, and a strict Observation of it is
Structure, and the Vessels that compound it, it were not difficult to assign
other uses of it more satisfactory.

As to the Larynx in our Pygmie, unless I enumerate all the Cartilages that go
to form it, and the Muscles that serve to give them their Motion, and the
Vessels that run to and from it, and the Membranes and Glands, there is nothing
that I can further add, but only say, that I found the whole Structure of this
Part exactly as it is in Man. And the same too I must say of the Os Hyoides. The
Reflection that the Parisians make upon the observation of this, and it is
neighboring Parts in the Dissection of their Monkey's, I think is very just
and valuable. And if there was any further advantage for the forming of Speech,
I cannot but think our Pygmie had it. But upon the best Enquiry, I was never
informed, that it attempted any thing that way. Though Birds have been taught to
imitate Humane Voice, and to pronounce Words and Sentences, yet Quadrupeds
never; neither has this Quadru-manous Species of Animals, that so nearly
app^oaches the Structure of Mankind, abating the Romances of Antiquity
concerning them.

The Parisians therefore tell us, That the Muscles of the Os Hyoides. Tongue,
Larynx, and Pharynx, which do most serve to articulate a word, were wholly like
to those of Man; and a great deal more than those of the Hand; which
nevertheless the Ape, which speaks not, uses almost with as much perfection as
a Man. Which demonstrates, that Speech is an Action. more peculiar to Man, and
which more distinguishes him from Brutes than the Hand; which Anaxagoras,
Aristotle, and Galen have thought to be the Organ which Nature has given to
Man, as to the wisest of all Animals; for want perhaps of this Reflection: For
the Ape is found provided by Nature of all those mavelous Organs of Speech
with so much exactness, that the very three small Muscles, which do take their
rise from the Apophyses Styloides, are not wanting, although this Apophysis be
extremely small. This particularity does likewise show, that there is no reason
to think, that Agents do perform such and such actions, because they are found
with Organs proper thereunto; for, according to these Philosophers, Apes should
speak, seeing that they have the Instruments necessary for Speech.

I shall not engage in this Argument here, because it would be too great a
digression; hereafter, it may be, I may take an occasion to do it; for this is
not the only Instance in our Subject, that will justify such an Inference:
though I think it so strong an one, as the Atheists can never answer.

We shall take notice next of the Uvula, a Part of some use too in forming the
Voice; for where it is missing or vitiated, it much alters the sound; and even
this I found in our Pygmie to be altogether alike as in Man. It had those two
Muscles which are in a Man, the Musculus Sphaeno-Palatinus, and the
Pterigo-Palatinus seu Sphaeno-Pterigo-Palatinus; the Tendon of which last,
passed over the Pterigoidal Process, which was to it like a Trochlea or Pully,
and was afterward inserted as in a Man.

The Parisians tell us that the Uvula, which is in no other Brutes, was found
in our Apes ( it should be Monkeys) wholly resembling that of Man. And so
Blasius, Uvula in Animalibus aliis praeter hominem and simiam numquam a me
observata. All that Drelincourt says of it is, Vvnla firma est and carnosa.

The Tongue of our Pygmie in all respectts, as I know of, resembled a Humane
Tongue; only because 'twas somewhat narrower, it seemed longer: And under the
Tongue in our Pygmie we observed the Glandulae Sublinguales as in Man.

Drelincourt observes in the Ape, Linguae basis non tantum incumbit Hyoidi
superno, sed amplectitur ejus tuber inferius postice: Papillas habet Bovinis
similes, and tunicam propriam permeantes.

At the Root of the Tongue of each side were placed the Tonsillae in our
Pygmie, as they are in a Man. They were protuberant and hard, and not so
foraminulous, as usually in Man; very probably being vitiated by the Ulcer in
the Cheek. For Drelincourt tells us in the Ape, Amygdalae cavae, pertusae and
Scrobiculos habentes.

The Parotides under each Ear in our Pygmie were large, and of the same Figure
as in Man. Parotis glandula contegit Musculum Sterno-Mastoideum, articulationem
Maxillae and Musculi Pectroalis portionem, says Drelincourt.

The Maxillary Gland of the left side (where the Ulcer in our Pygmie was) had
two of it is Lobes, globous and protuberant, above the Surface of the other
Part, being insected and tumefied by the Ulcerous Matter. These Glands were
about an Inch long, and about half an Inch broad; and there were two other
small Glands a little distant from the head of the Maxillary. Glandulae
salivales ad angulum Maxillae Inferioris oblongae, laxae, molles, albicantes,
says Drelincourt.

But before I leave these Parts, there are some others I must here take notice
of, in this Comparative Survey; which though they are not to be met with, either
in our Pygmie or in Man; yet are very remarkable, both in the Monkey and
Ape-kind, viz. those Pouches the Monkeys and Apes have in their Chaps, which
serve them as Repositories for to hoard up, upon occasion, food in; when they
are not disposed for the present to devour it; but when there Stomachs serve
them, they then take it out thence and so eat it. That the Ape-kind has these
Pouches, Drelincourt does inform us; where he tells us, Musculus latissimus
Mentum universum and buccas obtegit, qua parts simiae saccum formant, intra
quem Esculenta recondunt. Pliny is very express, That both Satyrs and Sphinges
( which I make to be of the Monkey kind) have them likewise, Plinij Hist. Not.
lib. x. cap. 72 p.m. 466.
Condit in Thesauros Maxillarum Cibum Sphingiorum and Satyrorurn Genus. Mox
inde sensim ad mandendum manibus expromit; and quod formicis in annum solenne
est, his in dies vel horas. The account the Parisians give us of this Pouch in
the Mouth of the Monkeys they dissected, is this; That it was composed of
Membranes and Glands, and of a great many Musculous and Car nous Fibers. It Is
situation was on the outside of each Jaw, reaching obliquely from the middle of
the Jaw to the under part of it is Angle, passing under a part of the Muscle
called Longissimus. It was an Inch and an half long, and almost as broad
toward it is bottom. It opened into the Mouth between the Jaw and the bottom of
the Gum. It Is into this Pouch that Apes use to put what they would keep; and it
is probable that the Musculous Fibers which it has, do serve to shut and open
it, to receive and put out what these Animals do there lay up in reserve. Now
our Pygmie having none of these Pouches in it is Chaps, nor nothing like them;
it is a notable difference both from the Monkey and Ape-kind, and an Agreement
with the Humane.

We should now come to discourse of the five Senses: But there is little I have
at present to remark of them. For in the Organs of those of Tactus, and Gustus,
there was no difference I could observe between our Pygmie and a Man. As to
those of Hearing and Smelling, I shall make my Observations upon them, in the
Ostcology. Here therefore I shall only remark some things of the Eyes, the
Organs of Seeing; and so proceed to the Brain.

The Bony Orbit of the Eye in our Pygmie was large, conical, and deep. Here we
observed the Glandula Lachrymalls, and Innominate. The Bulb of the Eye in
proportion to the Bulk of the Body, was rather larger than in a Man. The Iris
was of a light hazel Color: The Pupil round and large: The Crystalline Humor
Sphaerical or Lentiformis, and almost as large as in a Man. The Optic Nerve was
inserted exactly as in a Man. The Tunica Choroides rather blacker than in a
Man. And whereas in Brutes, that are prono Capite, there is usually a Musculus
Septimus, which from it is use is called Suspensorius; in our Pygmie there was
none of this Muscle. All the other Muscles of the Eye, were exactly the same as
in Man. This seventh Muscle is also wanting in the Ape, as appears by the
figures Casserius Jul. Casseri^ Pla^ni^ni Pentaesthe^e^on, h. e. de quinque
sensib^s, Vide de Organ^ vi^us. Tab. 3. fig. 12, 13.
has given us of the Eye of an Ape. Neither the Parisians nor Blasius, nor
Drelincourt do give us any Remarks upon this Part.

We proceed now to the upper Venture, the Head, where at present we shall
examine the Brain; that Part, which if we had proceeded according to the Method
of Nature in forming the Parts, we must have began with. For I cannot but think,
as it is the first Part we observe formed, so that the whole of the Body, i. e.
all the Containing Parts, have their rise from it. But I shall not enlarge upon
this Argument here; it would be too great a digression, to give my Reasons for
such an Hypothesis. From what is generally received, viz. That the Brain is
reputed the more immediate Seat of the Soul it self; one would be apt to think,
that since there is so great a disparity between the Soul of a Man, and a
Brute, the Organ likewise in which it is placed should be very different too.
Yet by comparing the Brain of our Pygmie with that of a Man; and, with the
greatest exactness, observing each Part in both; it was very surprising to me
to find so great a resemblance of the one to the other, that nothing could be
more. So that when I am describing the Brain of our Pygmie, you may justly
suspect I am describing that of a Man, or may think that I might very well omit
it wholly, by referring you to the accounts already given of the Anatomy of an
Humane Brain, for that will indifferently serve for our Pygmie, by allowing
only for the magnitude of the Parts in Man. Though at the same time I must
observe, that proportionably to the Bulk of the Body, the Brain in our Pygmie,
was extremely large; for it weighed (the greatest part of the Dura Matter being
taken off) twelve Ounces, wanting only a Dram. The Parisians remark, that in
their Monkeys the Brain was large in proportion to the Body, it weighing ^^o
Ounces and a half: which nevertheless was inconsiderable to ours; since our
Pygmie exceeded not the Stature and Bulk of the Common Monkey or Ape; so that
herein, as in a great many other Circumstances, our Pygmie is different from
the Common Monkey and Ape, and more resembles a Man.

I cannot agree with Vesalius, that the Structure of the Brain of all
Quadrupeds, my all Birds, and of some Fishes too, is the same as in Man. There
is a vast difference to be observed in the formation of the Parts, that serve
to compose the Brain in these various Animals. And though the Brain of a Man, in
respect of his Body, be much larger than what is to be met with in any other
Animal (for Vesalius makes the Brain of a Man to be as big as those of three
Oxen) yet I think we cannot safely conclude with him, that Animals, as they
excel in the largeness of the Brain, so they do likewise in the Principal
Faculties of the Soul: For if this be true, then our Pygmie must equal a Man,
or come very near him, since his Brain in proportion to his Body, was as large
as a Man's. Vesalius And. Vesalij de C^rp^ris H^man^s fa^^ca, lib. ^. cap. ^.
p. 773. 774.
his words are these; Cerebri nimirum constructione Simia, Canis, Equus, Felis,
and Quadrupeda quae hactenus vidi omnia, and Aves etiam universae, plurimaque
Piscium genera, omni propemodum ex part Homini correspondeant: neque ullum
secanti occurr at discrimen, quod secus de Hominis, quam illorum Animalium
functionibus statuendum esse prae scribat. Nisi forte quis merito dicat Cerebri
molem Homini, Perfectissimo sane quod novimus Animali, obtigisse maximam,
ejusque Cerebrum etiam tribus Boum Cerelris grandius reperiri: and dein
secundum Corporis proportionem mox Simiae dein Cani magnum quoque non secus
obtingere Cerebrum, quam si Animalia Cerebri tantum praestarent mole, quanto
Principis Animae viribus apertius viciniusve donata videntur.

Since therefore in all respects the Brain of our Pygmie does so exactly
resemble a Man's, I might here make the same Reflection the Parisians did upon
the Organs of Speech, That there is no reason to think, that Agents do perform
such and such Actions, because they are found with Organs proper thereunto: for
then our Pygmie might be really a Man. The Organs in Animal Bodies are only a
regular Compages of Pipes and Vessels, for the Fluids to pass through, and are
passive. What actuates them, are the Humors and Fluids: and Animal Life
consists in their due and regular motion in this Organical Body. But those
Nobler Faculties in the Mind of Man, must certainly have a higher Principle;
and Matter organized could never produce them; for why else, where the Organ is
the same, should not the Actions be the same too? and if all depended on the
Organ, not only our Pygmie, but other Brutes likewise, would be too near akin
to us. This Difference I cannot but remark, that the Ancients were fond of
making Brutes to be Men: on the contrary now, most unphilosophically, the
Humor is, to make Men but mere Brutes and Matter. Whereas in truth Man is part
a Brute, part an Angel; and is that Link in the Creation, that joins them both
together.

This Digressim may be the more pardonable, because I have so little to say
here, besides just naming the Parts; and to tell you (what I have already) that
they were all like to those in a Man: For the Dura Matter, as a Common Membrane,
firmiy secured the situation of the whole Brain strictly adhering to the
Sutures of the Cranium above; before to the Crista Galli; and at the basis so
strongly, that it was not easily to be separated. By it is anterior Process of
the Falx, it divided the two Hemispheres of the Cerebrum; by it is transverse
Process, which descended deep, just as in a Man, it separated the Cerebrum and
Cerebellum: it enjoyed the same Sinus's, and in all Particulars 'twas
conformable to what is in a Man.

The Pia Matter in our Pygmie was a fine thin Membrane which more immediately
covered the Substance of the Brain, and may be reckoned it is proper Membrane;
insinuating it is self all along between the Anfractus of the Cerebrum and the
Circilli of the Cerebellum; being copiously furnished with numerous Branches of
Blood Vessels, but they appeared more on the Unequal Part, then at the Basis.

The figure of the whole Brain in our Pygmie was globous; but by means of a
greater jutting in of the Bones of the Orbit of the Eye, there was occasioned a
deeper depression on the Anterior Lobes of the Brain in this place, than in a
Man. As to other Circumstances here, I observed all Parts the same. The
Anfractus of the Cerebrum were alike; as also the Substantia Corticalis and
Medullaris. On the basis of the Brain, we may view all the Ten pair of Nerves
exactly situated and placed as in a Humane Brain; nor did I find their
Originations different, or any Particularity that was so. I shall therefore
refer to the figures I have caused to be made of the Brain, and their
Descriptions; where we may observe the Arteriae Carotides, Vertebrales, and
Communicans, and the whole of the Blood Vessels in our Pygmie to be the same as
in a Man. Here was the Infundibulum, the Glandulae duae albae pone
Infundibulum, the Medulla Oblongata with it is Annular Protuberance, and the
beginning of the Medulla, Spinalis, just as in Man. I am here only a
Nomenclator, for want of Matter to make particular Remarks upon. And the
Authorrs that have hitherto furnished me with Notes, how the same Parts are in
Apes and Monkeys, do fail me now; it may be, finding here nothing new or
different, they are therefore silent. All the Parisians do tell us of the Brain
in their Monkeys is this:

The Brain was large in proportion to the Body: It weighed two Ounces and an
half. The Dura Matter entered very far to form the Falx. The Ansractuosities of
the External part of the Brain were very like those of Man in the Anteriour
part; but in the inward parts before the Cerebellum, there was hardly any: they
in requital were much deeper in proportion. The Apophyses, which are called
Mamillares, which are great Nerves that do serve to the smelling, were not
soft, as in Man, but hard and membranous. The Optic Nerves were also of a
Substance harder and firmer than ordinary. The Glandula Pinealis was of a
Conical figure, and it is point was turned toward the binder part of the Head.
There was no Rete Mirabile: for the Carotides being entered into the Brain,
went by one single Trunk on each side of the edge of the seat of the Sphenoides
to pierce the Dura Matter, and to be distributed into the basis of the Brain. In
our Subject I thought the Anfractus of the Brain much the same, both in the
anteriour and hinder part. Nor did I observe any difference in the Mamillary
Processes or Optic Nerves, or Rete Mirabile, but all, as in a Man.

The Cerebellum in our Pygmie was divided by Circilli, as in Man. It had
likewise the Processus Vermiformes, Dr. Willis Willis Cerebri Anat. cap. 3. p.
22.
makes this Remark upon this Part: Cerebellum autem ipsum, in quibusvis fere
Animalibus, ejusdem figurae and proportionis, nec non ex ejusmodi lamellis
conflatum reperitur. Quae Cerebrum diversimode ab homine configuratum habent,
uti Volucres and Pisces, item inter Quadrupedes Cuniculi and Mures, quorum
Cerebra gyris seu convolutionibus carent; his Cerebelli species eadem, similis
plicarum dispositio and Partium caeterarum compositurae existunt. It Is from
hence he forms his noted Hypothesis, How that the Animal Spirits that are bred
in the Cerebrum, do serve for Voluntary Motions; and those in the Cerebellum
for involuntary.

If we survey the inward Parts of the Brain in our Pygmie, we shall here
likewise find all exactly as in a Humane Body; viz. The Medullary Substance
running up between the Cortical; The Concameration, the Corpus Callosum, the
Fornix and it is Crura the same. The Ventricles large and spacious. The Corpora
Striata, the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum all alike. The Plexus Choroides the
same; as were also the three Foramina as in Man; The Glandula Pinealis
proportionably large. The Protuberantiae Orbiculares; i.e. The Nates and Testes
in our Pygmie were the same as in Man; whereas in Brutes (as Dr. Willis well
observes) the Nates are always proportionably larger than in Man; but it was
not so in our Pygmie. The Valvula major here was very plain. The Cerebellum
being divided, the Medullary Parts represented the Branches of Trees, as a
Man's does. The Medulla Oblongata and Medulla Spinalis the same as the Humane;
and all Parts being so conformable here to a Humane Brain, I thought it
sufficient just to name them, since I have caused to be made two figures of the
Brain in our Pygmie from the Life, and in its Natural Bigness, where all the
Parts are plainly represented to the Eye.

THE OSTEOLOGY, OR DESCRIPTION OF THE BONES.
WE come now to the Osteology, to give a Description of the Sceleton of our
Pygmie, by comparing which, with that of a Man, an Ape and a Monkey we may
observe (as we have already of the other Parts) that here too, our Pygmie more
resembles a Man than Apes and Monkey's do; but where it differs, there it is
like the Ape-kind. Galen (as I have already quoted him, vid. p. 15.) tells us
that an Ape of all Creatures is the most like to a Man in the Viscera, Muscles,
Arteries, Veins and Nerves, because it is so in the Structure of the Bones. But
it may be questioned, Whether even the Structure of the Bones themselves, does
not depend upon that of the Muscles: since in their first Formation, they are
soft and vascular; then Cartilaginous, and in time at last are hardened into
Bones. In Ricketty Children too, we find, that even the Bones are rendered
crooked, by the Contraction of the Muscles, how much more, when they are tender
and soft, might they be bended any way by them. But by understanding exactly
the Structure of the Bones, we shall the better apprehend the Rise and
Insertions of the Muscles. And for the better attaining this, Galen in the same
Chaper Galen. de Anat. administr. lib. 1. cap. 3. p. m. 29, 30
recommends to his Students, when they cannot have an opportunity of Consulting
an Humane Sceleton, then to make use of those of Apes; not that he thinks them
both alike, but the most like: and tells them, that it was worth their while on
this account to go to Alexandria, where the Physicians taught their Scholars
the Doctrine of the Bones from the Inspection of Humane Sceletons themselves,
which he much prefers before Books. But since in his time Humane Sceletons were
not to be had but at Alexandria, for the supplying this Defect, they might
observe the Bones of Apes; and after that, they might read his Book De Ossium
Natura, and to do as he did, visit the Sepulchers and Graves, and to observe
there the Humane Bones themselves: And he tells us of two Sceletons he made use
of; One that the River had washed out of a Tomb, where the Flesh was corrupted
and washed away, yet the Bones held together. The other was of a Thief that was
Executed, who was so much hated, that none would bury him; but the Birds picked
off his Flesh, and left his Bones as a Sceleton. But says he, (...), etc. i.e.
If yon cannot happen to see any of these, dissect an Ape, carefully view each
Bone, etc. Then he advises what sort of Apes to make choice of, as most
resembling a Man: And concludes, (...), i. e. One ought to know the Structure
of all the Bones either in a Humane Body, or in an Ape's; it is best in both;
and then to go to the Anatomy of the Muscles.

What Galen advised, no doubt he practiced himself, and observed both. But
Andreas Vesalius will not allow him this: For in his great and excellent Book
De Corporis Humani Fabrica, he all along tell's us, that Galen gives us rather
the Anatomy of Apes than of a Man: And in his Epistola ad Joachimum Roelants de
Radice Chynae, his chief Design is to prove, that Galen never dissected a
Humane Body: and that he is often mistaken in the History of the Parts, as also
in their Uses; and that his Reasonings are frequently unconclusive.

Upon the coming out of Vesalius his first Book, he was warmly opposed by
Jacobus Sylvius a Physician at Paris, who had formerly been Vesalius his Master
in Anatomy; in a Treatise styled Depulsio Vesani cujusdane Calumniarum in
Hippocratis and Galeni Rem Anatomicam. This was answered not long after by
Renatus Henerus, who published another Treatise, viz. Adversus Jacobi Sylvij
Depulsionum Anatomicarum Calumnias pro Andrea Vesalio Apologia. Sylvius
afterward procures a Disciple of his to write against Vesalius, who puts out,
but unsuccessfully, Apologia pro Galeno contra Andream Vesalium Bruxellensem,
Francisco Puteo Medico Vercellensi Authore. A Scholar of Vesalius, Gabriel
Cunaeus, makes a Reply to Puteus in his Apologiae Francisci Putei pro Galeno in
Anatome examen. Upon Vesalius his leaving Rome, a Disciple of his, Realdus
Columbus, grew very famous for Anatomy, but ungrateful to his Master, as
Vesalius complains in his Book De Radice Chynae, and his Examen Observationum
Falloppij. But Gabriel Falloppius was always kinder to him, and mentions him
with the greatest Honor, and calls him Divine; though in several things he
dissents from him, which occasioned Vesalius his putting out his Observationum
Falloppij Examen.

Realdus Columbus was succeeded at Rome by Bartholomaeus Eustachius; a Man very
knowing and curious in Anatomy, but extremely devoted to Galen, as one may see
by this Passage; Vt uno verbo me expediam, talem eum esse (sc. Galenum)
asseverem, qualem opinor neminem in posterum futurum, fuisse nunquam plane
confirmo. Quare dubiis in rebus dissentire ab eo honest non possumus, sed
magis expedire, decereque putandum est, illo Duce crrare, quam his illisve
Magistris hodie erudiri, ne dicam cum iis vera sentire Barthol. Eustachij
Ossium Examen, p. m. 189.
. Too great a Partiality for so ingenious a Man. And it may be, this was one
Reason why Vesalius so much endeavored to lessen Galen's Authority; because
the Humor of the Age was such, that nothing then was to be received, but what
was to be met with in him. But certainly they are in the wrong, who, because
Galen is mistaken in some things, do now wholly reject him, and lay him aside
as good for nothing. The wisest and most experienced in the Art may read his
Works, and in reading him, if just and not prejudiced, will acknowledge, a
Satisfaction and an Advantage they have received from him.

The Design of Bartholomaeus Eustachius in writing that Discourse of his,
Ossium Examen, is to justify Galen, that he did not only dissect Apes, but
Humane Bodies likewise; and that his Descriptions are conformable to the Parts
in Man, and not to Apes and Monkeys. He therefore draws a Comparison between
the Sceleton of an Ape and a Man; and shows wherein they differ; and how far
Galen's Descriptions of those Parts are different from those in an Ape.
Volcherus Coiter has likewise made the same Comparative Survey, in his Analogia
Ossium Humanorum, Simiae and verae and caudatae, quae Cynocephali similis est,
atque Vulpis. In most things I find Coiter to follow Eustachius, but Eustachius
I think is to be preferred, because in his Annotationes de Ossibus, he quotes
the Texts of Galen at large. Johannes Riolanus the Son has wrote upon the same
Argument likewise; viz. Simiae Osteologia five Ossium Simiae and Hominis
Comparatio; and he being later than either of the former, and having made use
of all before him, he may be thought to be the most exact.

In giving therefore an Account of the Osteology of our Pygmie, and the better
to compare it is Sceleton with that of a Man, and an Ape, and a Monkey, I
thought I could not do better, than to insert this Discourse of Riolanus; and
by Commenting upon it, to show wherein our Pygmie agrees or differs. This I
thought the most compendious way, and what other Observations I have, that
conveniently I cannot insert in my Comment, I shall add at the close of this
Discourse. And though I may be censured by some for discoursing so largely upon
an Ape, yet this Apology I have to make, That it is an Argument that has
exercised the Pens of the greatest Anatomists we have had; and ours being one
of a higher degree than the Common sort, and in so many Particulars nearer
approaching the Structure of Man, than any of the Apekind, and it being so rare
and uncommon, it may the more excuse me, if I endeavor to be as particular as
I can. But in some measure to avoid this Fault, I shall omit Riolan's first
Chapter, which is but Praefatory, and begin with the second.

CAP. II.
De Capitis and Faciei Ossibus.
SImiae Caput (a) rotundum est, humano simile, cynocephali vero caput
oblongius. Vtriusque (b) Suturae adeo sunt obscurae, ut earum nullum appareat
vestigium. Propterea potius harmoniae dici merentur, quam suturae, quia rerum
consutarum figuram non aemulantur. Attamen Volcherus Coiter suturas attribuit
simiis, parum ab humanis discrepantes. In cercopitheco squammiformes
desiderantur. (c) Frontis Os in calvariae basis sede, ad conjunctionem Ossis
sphenoidis, transvers a potius linea quam sutura distinguitur: ampla oblongaque
scissura homines divisum obtinent, in quam aliud Os instar cribri perforatum
conjicitur, arctissimeque constringitur. At (d) Simiae Os Frontale ea in part
omnino continuum existit, and qua nasus principium sumit, non long ab ea sede,
quae frontem constituit, alto and rotundo foramine parumper a lateribus
compresso, illo foramine quod nervum visorium emittit, nonnihil ampliori,
excavatum est. In ejus humiliori profundiorique sede, quatuor aut quinque alia
foramina recta and lata cernuntur. In simia caudat a (e) Os Ethmoides admodum
profunde in nares descendit, paulo infra eam regionem ex qua nasus exoritur.
Harmonia per medium dividitur, and utrimque ab Osse frontis, quod etiam
profunder descendit effingi videtur. (f) Superficies fellae Sphenoidis ad
narium principium in Osse frontis non est plana and aequalis ut in homine, sed
est eminentissima. In posteriori sellae eminentia glandulam excipiente,
reperitur for a men exsculptum. In sellae (g) hujus substantia nulla latet
cavitas ut homine. (h) Cavitates illae quae in apophysibus pterygoideis
exsculptae sunt, maximae and profundae apparent, (i) Ossa, Bregmatis, and
Temporum, nec intus, nec foris, ullam demonstrant divisionem, quasi ex unico
continuatoque Osse constarent. (k) In Osse temporum apophysis Mastoidis deest,
Styloidis exigua est. (l) Cavitas auris videtur unica, orbiculatim in plures
gyros striata, nec tria Ossicula Malleolus, Incus, and Stapes reperiuntur,
quibus aliorum animantium aures instructae sunt, si credimus Casserio, sed ego
semper observavi.

Os Zygoma (m), qua part ab Osse orbitario procedit, crassum and robustum est,
atque ejus in medium linea potius quam sutura distinguitur. In homine verotenue
existit, and sutura dirimitur.

Simiae Facies (n) rotunda est, cynocephali oblonga and antrorsum protuberans.
Ossa vero Maxillae superioris respondent humanis. (o) Suturae sunt harmoniis,
sive rimis similes, potissimum ea quae medium palatum intersecat. Sed
pecutliaris sutura notatur, ab inferiore orbita incipiens, secundum
longitudinem maxillae ad caninum dentem cujusque lateris prorepit, ipsumque
palatum dirimit.

Maxilla inferior (p) integra est, nulla linea in mento dissecta, brevissima
est corporis proportione, ita ut ex omni animantium genere nullum breviorem
habeat, excepto homine. Extremitas quae cavitati temporum articulatur, est
condylodis, ut in homine. Quare non est gynglymoides haec articulatio, ut
scripsit Volcherus Coiter.

(q) Simia in dentibus caninis and molaribus differt ab homine. Caninos quidem
habet dentes humanis similes, in unaquaque maxilla binos, qui utrimque assident
and accumbunt incisoribus. Singulas radices ut incisores habent, sed altius
infixas robustioresque, minus etiam ex anteriore part, quam posteriore pressas
and angustas. Ac simia cynocephalos dentes caninos longiores prominentioresque,
qiam vera simia obtinet. Molarium dentium numerus in homine incertus est,
authore Galeno: saepius enim in utraque maxilla sunt sexdecim, interdum
viginti, nonnunquam viginti quatuor. At simiae semper certus ac definitus
molarium numerus. Differunt quoque Maxillares simiae ab humanis, in figura
externa, and radicum numero, quamvis enim priores duo molares simiae, ab
humanis, aut nihil, aut certe parum discrepent, quia in simia primus inferior
unum tantum apicem obtinet: Attamen in posteriorum dentium mensis, secundum
longitudinem maxillarum, profunda admodum linea exsculpta est. Quant lineam
altera etiam transversa, quae in quinto dente simiae non caudatae gemina est,
intrinsecus and extrinsecus ad gingivam usque protractata intersecat. Quo fit,
ut singuli ejusmodi dentes eminentias, ut plurimum quatuor in angulis (nam
quinto six sunt) tres vero foveas in medio habentes, duarum serrarum mutuo sibi
occurrentium modo committantur: quod profecto accuratissius Author Galenus
explicare minime praetermisisset, si molares simiarum descripsisset.

Os Hyoides (r) humano firm simillimum existit, praeterquam quod medium ipsius
ossiculum amplius est, quam in homine, and posteriore sede insigniorem ostendit
cavitatem, gibbis ipsius laryngis partibus invehitur, fitque propugnaculum
cartilaginis scutiformis. In illa enim lata oblongaque apophysi, interiores
parts Ossis hyoidis efformat, quae deorsum adeo producitur, ut instar clypei
cartilagini thyroidi obtendatur.

(a) The Cranium of our Pygmie was round and globous, and it seemed to be three
times as big as the Head of a Common Monkey; for, that I might the better
compare them, I procured the Sceleton of a Monkey, which I found was exactly
the length or that of our Pygmie: though at the same time we shall see, that in
several of the Parts, 'twas vastly different. For measuring the Head of our
Pygmie by a Line drawn round from the Nose, over the Orbit of the Eyes, to the
Occiput or hinder part of the Head, and so to the Nose again, I observed 'twas
Thirteen Inches. The Cranium of the Monkey measured there only Nine Inches and
a quarter. The girth of the Head of the Pygmie, from the Vertix round by the
Ears to the Vertix again, was Eleven Inches and an half: in the Monkey 'twas
only Seven Inches and an half. The longitudinal Diameter of the Cranium of the
Pygmie was Four Inches, of the Monkey Two Inches and a quarter. The latitudinal
Diameter of the Cranium of the Pygmie was Three Inches and above a quarter; of
the Monkey a little above Two Inches. The profundity of the Cranium of the
Pygmie, from the Vertix to the Foramen where the Medulla Spinalis passes out,
was about Three Inches and a quarter; in the Monkey Two Inches. So that in the
largeness of the Cranium, the Pygmie much exceeds the Monkey, as also Apes, and
more resembles a Man.

(b) The Sutures in our Pygmie perfectly resembled those in an Humane Cranium;
The Sutura Coronalis Sagittalis, and Lambdoides being all serrated or indented
very curiously, as in Man. In the Lambdoidal Suture I observed Nine Ossa
triquetra Wormiana. In the Cranium of a Monkey I found the Coronary Suture for
the most part to be Harmonia, and only for a little space to be serrated
toward the middle, where it meets the Sagittal Suture. The Sagittal Suture
here was indented throughout. The Lambdoidal Suture, as extended from the
Sagittal of each side for about half an Inch, was serrated; then the Suture
disappeared, and there was formed here a rising ridge of the Cranium, which was
continued to that Apophysis which makes the hinder part of the Os Zygomaticum.
There was no such bony ridge in the Cranium of the Pygmie. In the Monkey too I
saw the Squammous Sutures very plain, though Riolan denies them; which likewise
in our Pygmie was very apparent. Our Pygmie therefore in the Structure of the
Sutures exactly resembled a Humane Cranium, and more than Apes and Monkeys do:
For in them the Coronary and Lambdoidal Sutures were only in part serrated; and
they had no Ossa triquetra Wormiana.

(c) In our Pygmie there was an Os Cribriforme, as in Man; 'twas about half an
Inch long, and a quarter of an Inch broad; in it I numbered about Thirty
Foramina; here was likewise that long ridge, (which is called Crista Galli) as
in a Man, to which the Dura Matter was fastened.

(d) In the Cranium of the Monkey there was no Crista Galli; and where the Os
Cribriforme should have been, there was a hollow Passage which led toward the
beginning of the Nostrils, at the end of which there might be a small Os
Cribriforme perforated with four or five holes. But this Part appeared very
different from the Structure of a Humane Skull, as likewise from our Pygmie;
which was occasioned chiefly by the great bunching in of the Bones of the Orbit
of the Eye, though our Pygmie too had these Bones more protruded in, than they
are in a Humane Cranium.

(e) This appeared more in the Cranium of a Monkey than in our Pygmie; though
here too 'twas somewhat more than in a Man's Skull.

(f) The Sella Equina in our Pygmie was exactly like a Man's. In a Monkey I
observed it more rising and higher. In the middle of the Sella Turcica seu
Equina of our Pygmie, I observed a Foramen; and the same I found in a Humane
Cranium I have by me.

(g) In our Pygmie I did not observe those two Cavities under the Sella Turcica
which are to be met with in a Humane Skull. But the Bone here was very spungy
and cavernous, and might answer the same end, though not formed perfectly alike.

(h) These Cavities in our Pygmie, were nothing so large as they are in a
Monkey, but conformable to the Structure of this Part in an Humane Skull. And
in our Pygmie too, I observed the Pterigoidal Processes as they are in Man, but
I did not find them in the Monkey.

(i) The Ossa Bragmatis and Temporum in our Pygmie were very plainly
distinguished by an indented Suture. In the Cranium of the Monkey these Bones
were divided by a lineal Suture called Harmonia.

(k) The Mastoid and Styloforme Process in our Pygmie were very little, yet
more than in the Monkey; but herein our Pygmie rather imitates the Ape-kind.

(l) Because I would not spoil the Sceleton, I did not examine the Organ of the
Inward Ear: But am wholly inclined to Riolan, who tells us he always found
those Three little Bones, the Malleolus, Incus, and Stapes there; and no doubt
but they are to be met with in our Pygmie. Though Casserius therefore thinks
Galen does not mention them, and never observed them, because they are not to
be found in Apes: But Riolan tells us the contrary.

(m) The Os Zygomaticum in our Pygmie was not half so big or large as in the
Cranium of the Monkey; herein therefore our Pygmie more resembles a Man.

(n) Though the Face of our Pygmie was rounder than an Ape's, as that is than a
Monkey, and a Monkey's more than the Cynocephalus, yet 'twas not altogether so
much as a Man's; the upper Jaw being proportionably longer and somewhat more
protuberant. The Bones of the Nose too in our Pygmie more resembled the
Ape-kind, than the Humane, being flat and simous; hence simia; and not
protuberant and rising as in Man.

(o) The Suture of the Palate in our Pygmie was just the same as in a Man. In a
Monkey I observed that peculiar Suture Riolan mentions, but did not find it in
the Pygmie: Only in the Palate of the Pygmie I observed a Suture, not from the
Dens Caninus, as was in the Monkey, but from the Second of the Dentes Incisores.

(p) In our Pygmie the under Jaw was perfectly closed at the Mentum, as 'twas
in the Monkey; and it is so in a Man. Galen Galen de Anat. Admini ^^. lib. 4.
cap. 3. p. 94.
tells us, (...). i. e. That of all Animals a Man has the shortest Chin, or
under Jaw, in proportion to his Body; then next to a Man, an Ape, then a Lynx,
then Satyrs, and after these the Cynocephali. And I may add, of all Apes, our
Pygmie has the shortest. The Articulation of the under Jaw in our Pygmie was
Condyloides, as it is in Man; and not Gynglymoides, as Volcherus Coiter and
Barthol. Eustachius observe.

(q) Our Pygmie had in each Jaw before, four Dentes Incisorcs; then following
them, of each side a Dens Caninus; then after them of each side, Four Dentes
Molares, in all Fourteen Teeth in each Jaw, in both Twenty eight. But our
Subject being young, I observed that all the Teeth were not perfectly grown out
of the Jaw Bone, and could perceive some of the Molares, that still lay hid
there, or were not much exerted. In a Monkey in each Jaw there were two Dentes
Incisores before; then four Dentes Canini, two of each side; then eight Dentes
Molares, four of each side. The Number of the Teeth in each Jaw, and in the
whole the same as in the Pygmie: only the Monkey had four Dentes Canini in each
Jaw, the Pygmie had but two, as in a Man: Or at least in the Monkey, the two
first of the Canini seemed to be Amphibious, between an Incisor and Caninus;
being not so broad as the two first Incisores, nor so much exerted or extended
as the two other Canini were. In the number of the Teeth our Pygmie imitated
more the Ape-kind than the Humane: But in the Structure of them, more the
Humane than the Ape-kind; for the Mensa or Supersicies of the Melares, was not
so serrated as the Monkey's, but liker Humane Teeth.

I have omitted the Printing the next Paragraph in Ri^lan, because I would not
be tedious: And for the same reason, do not here particularly describe each
Bone in the Head and Jaws of our Pygmie; for where I do not remark otherwise,
it is to be understood, that all those Parts are the same in a Man, our Pygmie
and the Ape-kind.

(r) There was nothing particular that I observed in the Os Hyoides of our
Pygmie that was different from that of a Man's.

CAP. III.
De Spina and Ossibus and Adnexis.
SIMIAE (a) Cervix brevis est, septem vertebris extructa, corpora vertebrarum
anteriori part non sunt rotunda ut homini, sed plana. Posticae apophyses
spinosae non sunt longae, and bifidae, sed breves, simplices, and acutae. In
prima (b) vertebra, nullum spinae vestigium apparet, imo nulla sentitur
asperitas, in anteriore part corporis primae vertebrae humanae obtusa quaedam
eminentia apparet, quae in simia magis extuberat, and in mucronem producitur.
Quod si vertebras and spinas breves habet simia, (c) apophyses transversas
obtinuit longiores, atque ad anteriora magis, quam in homine reftexas. Imprimis
vero sexta colli vertebra, quae hunc processum prae caeteris insignem adepta
est, eumque bifidum, magisque recurvum and aduncum, quam in aliis vertebris.
Hic autem spondylus sextus maximus est, propter illas transversas apophyses
grandiores, in simia caudata minor est. Septimi spondyli transversae apophyses
simplices and tenues, in caudata simia bifidae, and satis longae existunt, quae
licet in homine simplices appareant, sexto tamen crassitie non

(d) Prima simiae vertebra ad finem processus transversi ascendentis utrimque
foramen habet, ad nervum transmittendum, quo humana caret vertebra, septima
colli vertebra in homine saepius est perforata: Vnde evenit, quod transversi
processus hujus vertebrae non sunt similes apophysibus tranversis colli, sed
potius thoracis apophysibus transversis assimilantur. (e) Vertebrarum dorsi
corpora parum ab humanis differunt, neque apophyses multum dissimiles sunt,
exceptis rectis ultimarum duarum vertebrarum, quae rectiores sunt in simiis,
paulum deorsum inclinat in hominibus. In (f) postremis vertebris dorsi
reperiuntur quatuor infernae apophyses articuli gratia constructae. In humanis
vertebris duae tantum notantur, quas etiam in lumborum vertebris observabis.
(g) In simia decima dorsi vertebra, infra suprave suscipitur, at in homine est
duodecima.

(h) Lumbi, inquit Galenus, in simiis sunt longiores quam in hominibus, si pro
ratione reliquarum partium hoc aestimare velis, nam in homine quinque vertebrae
lumbos efsormant, in simiis non secus, quam in aliis quadrupedibus sex adsunt.
(i) Harum vertebrarum processus ab humanis differunt. Siquidem transversi in
homine teretes sunt and oblongi, nonnihil in exteriora conversi, costularum
vicem gerentes. In simia sunt ampli, intro spectantes, and instar squammae
tenues: figura caudam hirundinis referunt, aut cornu retortum, quod oblongo
acutoque mucrone erigitur, ac sursum vergit. Ac tertia lumbi vertebra primo
incepit transversum consequi processum, qui brevis est. Reliqui subsequentes
longiores existunt. (k) Posteriores processus spinosi non sunt recti, sed
superne spectant, atque excipiuntur a supernis incumbentibus vertebris, quae
hiatu sive scissura triangulari inter duos transversales processus existente,
dum in posteriora simia spinam inflectit, eosdem transversales excipiunt.

(l) Observandum venit in homine circa radices infernas transversarum
apophysewn lumbarium, atque etiam duarum infirmarum thoracis, quaedam tubercula
magnitudine figuraque mespilorum nucleos referentia saepius reperiri, quae cum
in canibus and simiis non habeantur, suspicari posset aliquis vicem illarum
quas paulo ante descripsi proceritatum in homine tenere.

(m) Os Sacrum spinae fundamentum in homine, ex tribus vertebris conflatur: In
simiis ex duabus tantum componitur, quibus ilium Ossa copulantur.

(n) Simiae longior est Coccyx, quam homini, pluribus ideo constructus Ossibus,
quae juxta commissuram Ossis Sacri perforata sunt, medullamque continent, atque
nervos antrorsum and retrorsum emittunt, quae omnia desunt in coccyge hominis:
cur autem simia vero coccyge caruerit, rationem reddit Fallopius, in Observat.
Anatomicis.

(o) Homo, inquit Galenus, ex omnibus animalibus Costas curvissimas habet,
propterea latissimum pectius obtinuit. Simiae latius caeteris pectus datum, sed
humano angustius.

(p) Porro simia, tam caudata, quam non caudata, costas viginti sex prae se
fert, cum in homine tantum viginti quatuor reperiantur. Harum utrimque sunt
octo verae costae, in homine septem, quae per articulum sterno committuntur.
Quinque vero nothae costae non desinunt in perfectam cartilaginem versus
sternum invicem constrictae, ut in homine, sed osseae magis quam
cartilaginosae, a se mutuo disjunguutur. Costae in simia, tam caudata, quam non
caudata, spatiis vertebrarum intermediis inseruntur: at in hominibus magis
corporibus vertebrarum attexuntur.

(q) Sternum octo constat Ossibus rotundis, quorum primum aliquantisper
preminet, supra cartilaginum duarum primarum conjunctionem, quae duae
cartilagines videntur amplexari supericre parle primum os sterni. Cartilagines
^^tarum commissuris Ossium sterni accrescunt, duae ultimae concurrunt simul in
articulationem ultimi and penultimi ossis sterni. Vltimum os sterni xiphoidem
^artilaginem referens, impense longum est, and teres.

(r) Simia quoad scapulas and claviculas homini maxim similis est, authore
Oaleno. Clavicula incipiens a primo sterni osse ad medium costae recta
procedit, inde ad acromion usque multum curvata intumescit: huic articulationi
interjectum est ossiculum, quod in homine ad decimum octavum annum and ultra,
appendix existit: at in simia, nec istud ossiculum, nec illius vestigium ullum
apparet, imo pars illa robustissima est.

(a) In our Pygmie there were seven Vertebrae of the Neck, as there are in a
Man, and an Ape too; but they were short, making in length about two Inches;
and seemed more to imitate those in Apes, being flatter before, and not so
round as in Man. And their Spines, though they were longer, and more obtuse, and
not so acute as in Monkeys; yet they were not biside, as they are in Man.

(b) In the first Vertebra of the Neck in the Pygmie there was no Spine, but an
Asperity; in a Man there is a small Spine. And before, 'twas like to the
Humane, having an Obtuse Eminence, and not running to a Mucro, as in the Ape
and Monkey. The Dens of the second Vertebra in the Pygmie was partly
Cartilaginous.

(c) I did not observe in the Pygmie the Transverse Apophyses to be longer, nor
to be reflected more forward, nor the sixth Vertebra to be larger than the
others; nor the seventh Vertebra, to be any thing different from the same in
Man; but in all these Circumstances, our Pygmie seemed to imitate the Structure
of the same Parts in Man, more than does the Ape-kind.

(d) Those Foramina observed in the Vertebrae of the Neck of Apes, were wanting
in our Pygmie, who herein imitated the Humane Sceleton.

(e) I did not observe any difference between the Vertebrae of the Back of our
Pygmie and those of a Man's; nor what Riolan remarks of the Apophyses rectae of
the two last Vertebrae.

(f) In the lower Vertebrae of the Back of the Pygmie, I observed but two
Apophyses infernae, as it is in a Humane Sceleton: in a Monkey there are four
Apophyses there.

(g) Our Pygmie if Riolan's account be true, is different both from the Ape and
Man too; for here 'twas the thirteenth Vertebra, quae infra, suprave suscipitur.

(h) The Vertebrae of the Loins in our Pygmie were about two Inches long; and
their number the same, as in Man, viz. five; and not six, as are in Apes and
Monkeys: But the Os Ilium of each side does ascend so high, as to include the
two lower Vertebrae; which is not so in Man.

(i) The Transverse Processes of the Lumbal Vertebrae in the Pygmie, were round
and thick, as in Man; and not thin and slat, or broad, as in the Monkey.

(k) The Spines of the Lumbal Vertebrae in the Pygmie, were strait, as in a
Man; and not bending upwards, as in the Ape and Monkey kind.

(l) I am apt to think these Tubercula are in our Pygmie; but our Subject being
young, and several of the Parts not yet hardened into Bones but Cartilaginous;
I was not fully satisfied herein, and do leave it as a Quaere.

(m) Riolan in this account is mistaken, nor is he here consistent with
himself, as to what he writes of this part in other places. Job. Philip.
Ingrassias Comment. in Galen. de Ossibus, Cap. x. Text. ^. page m. 18^
who has wrote a most learned and incomparable Comment upon Galen's Book de
Ossibus, tells us; Amplum Sacrumve Os in Homine sex vel ad minus quinque ex
Ossibus constat. Galenus tamen, Simiarum Canumve Sceletos dissecans, interdum
quatuor ex Ossibus componi inquit. Sub Osse inquam Sacro largius sumpto,
Coccygem quoque comprehendens: (quem Coccygem pro uno Osse, ut in praesenti
textu facit, tanquam quartum adjungens assumpsit, a Sacro interim distinguens)
saepius autem tribus duntaxat proprie sumptum Os Sacrum a Coccyge distinctum
expressit, uti nunc etiam facit: unde tribus ex partibus constructum esse ait,
tanquam ex propriis Vertebris. So Falloppius and others do make the Os Sacrum
in a Man to consist of six Bones, sometimes five. In our Pygmie the Os Sacrum
was composed of five Bones: But in the Sceleton of a Monkey I observed but:
three Bones or Vertebrae which did make up the Os Sacrum.

But as our Pygmie in the number of the Vertebrae which composes the Os Sacrum,
did imitate the Humane kind; so in other respects 'twas much liker to the
Sceleton of Apes and Monkeys: For the Os Sacrum here, was nothing so dilated
and spread, as it is in Man; but contracted and narrow as it is in Apes; and very
remarkably different from the Humane Sceleton; as 'twas likewise in the Spines
and Processes which more resembled the Ape-kind.

(n) The Os Coccygis in our Pygmie consisted of four Bones, as it is in an
Humane Sceleton, and these not perforated. In the Ape, and especially in the
Monkey, there are more Bones, and those perforated, as Riolan describes them.
Hence Julius Pollux styles it, (...), Perforatus Coccyx. This Os Coccygis makes
a little bunching out of the Skin in the Pygmie, as I have represented it in my
second figure, and is remarked before ( vide page 14.) but in Man, it is not
protuberant. What Riolan observes out of the Nubian Geography, of a Nation in
the Isle of Namaneg, having Tails, I think is fabulous; unless they be Monkeys,
or of that kind: I am certain that Story of the Kentish Longtails he mentions,
is utterly false, though he modestly expresses himself, fabulosum puto. His words
are these: In Insula Namaneg Maris Orientalis, Gens est caudata, ex Geographia
Arabica Nubiensi page 70. fabulosum puto quod de Anglis Caudatis referunt
Historici, quibus ob injuriam D. Thomac Cantuariensi illatam, Deus Coccygem
instar Caudae produxit Riolan. Encheirid. Anat. lib. 6. cap. 16. p. 451.
.

(o) In our Pygmie the Ribs were altogether as much curved, as in an Humane
Sceleton; and it was as full chested as a Man.

(p) In the number of the Ribs our Pygmie imitated the Ape-kind: for it had
thirteen of a side, six and twenty in all: In a Man there is but twenty four,
though sometimes there has been observed thirteen of a side. As to the other
Particulars that Riolan mentions, viz. the number of the Costae verae, and the
ossious Extremes of the Nothae, and the Articulation of the Ribs, herein our
Pygmie more resembled a Man: for it had but seven Costae verae that were
articulated to the Sternum; and the Extremes of the Nothae were Cartilaginous,
not Ossious, and continued to the Sternum as in an Humane Sceleton; and the
Articulation of the Ribs was more on the Body of the Vertebrae, than in the
Interstices. Drelincourt is mistaken in mentioning but twelve Ribs in the Ape,
of a side, or his was different.

(q) Jo. Philippus Ingrassias Jo. Phil. Ingrassias Comment. in Galen, d^
Ossibus, Cap. 12. Text. 1. page m. 190.
makes eight Bones in the Sternum of Infauts; and tells us, that in time these
Bones do coalesce, and grow sewer. Galen makes seven Bones in the Sternum,
according to the number of the Costae verae that insert their Cartilages into
them. But the eighth Bone Ingrassias says, is for the Cartilago Ensiformis. In
the Sternum of our Pygmie I numbered seven Bones, the two last being small and
partly Cartilaginous; and here the Cartilages were inserted at the Commissures
and Joynings of the Bones of the Sternum. The Cartilago Ensiformis was long and
roundish. The whole of the Sternum of our Pygmie much more resembled the Humane
Sceleton, than the Monkey's, being much broader and larger, and as far as I
observed just alike.

(r) The Scapula of our Pygmie, though in most respects it resembled a Man's, yet
I thought it did not so much, as a Monkey's; for it seemed narrower, and the
Basis was proportionably longer. But this I suppose might happen in preparing
the Sceleton by paring away the Cartilages (for the Creature was young) which
in a longer time would have hardened into a Bone. So likewise that Process
which receives the Clavicula called Acromion, was Cartilaginous, as was
likewise the End of the Processus Coracoides, and of the Cervix it self, which
last received the head of the Shoulder Bone. So that as yet there was not a
Sinus formed here for the receiving it; but that Extreme was flatter than
usually and plain; nor was there that Sinus under the Spine, as in an adult
Humane Scapula.

I observed no difference in the Figure and Structure of the Clavicula in our
Pygmie and in a Man. Nor did I observe that Bone Riolan mentions, but a large
Cartilage which did conjoyn that Extreme of the Clavicula to the Acromium,
which in time might become long; this Cartilage was about a quarter of an Inch
long.

CAP. IV.
De Artubus Superioribus.
(a) SIMIAE and Hominis Omoplatae omnino similes sunt.

(b) Humerus simiae non admodum ab humano differt, in caudata dissimilis est
juxta inferius caput, quod cubito articulatur. Hac enim regione re^^ectitur ab
exterior part introrsum, atque in illa flexura canaliculum acquirit ex
opposito latere pervium.

(c) Cubiti Ossa duo in utraque simia humanis respondent.

(d) Carpus simiae non valde differt ab humano, obtinuit tamen nonum os, de quo
sic loquitur Eustachius: Hoc ossiculum non in prima brachialis acie est
locatum, sed tertio ejusdem aciei ossi incumbit, atque inter ea quae indicem
and medium digitum sustinent seipsum inserit: vocatur a Galeno (...), hoc osse
videntur carere simiae caudatae, sed ejus loco adipiseuntur os peculiare, quod
carpi ossi cubito substrato annectitur, and satis long protuberat. Deinde
instar cornicis versus manus volam incurvatur, atque cum processu ossis carpi
radio articulati, magnam cavitatem musculorum tendinibus efformat.

(e) Metacarpij, Digitorumque Ossa simiae, tam caudatae quam non caudatae,
parum admodum ab humanis ossibus dis^repant. Simia quidem magnum manus digitum
Pollicem, mutilum obtinet, and curtum, and indici propinquum, non oppositum,
instar alt^rius manus, ut in homine: Reliqui digiti mulio sunt minores digitis
pedum.

(a) I have already mentioned that the Scapula or Omoplato in our Pygmie did
not seem so slike a Man's, as a Monkey's did; nor does it appear so in my
figure; not but that I think it is so, when adult; and it is Cartilages are
hardened into a Bone: but my figure only represents what was now formed into a
Bone, and without the Cartilages, which in time would have become bony.

(b) The Os Humeri in our Pygmie was a little above five Inches long, just the
same length with the Thigh Bone, and not altogether so thick. That end which
was joined to the Bones of the Cubit, was about an Inch and a half broad. I
observed here, upon the flexure of the Cubit forwards, that in the Os Humeri
there was a deep sinus, and the Bone so thin here, that it would admit the Rays
of Light thorough; but 'twas not pervious as Ri^la^ says it is in a Monkey;
nor did I observe it so, in the Sceleton of a Monkey.

(c) In the Pygmie the Bones of the Cubit were exactly like a Man's. The Vlva
was five Inches long; the Radius five Inches and an half. They had large
Cartilages at both Extremes.

(d) So likewise the Bones of the Carpus in the Pygmie resembled those of a
Man. I did not observe here that ninth Bone described by Eustachius. For indeed
in our Subject, there were but four in each Carpus, that were ossified: the
others were only Cartilaginous.

(e) In the Hand, our Pygmie resembled the Ape and Monkey-kind. For though the
Bones of the Metacarp and Fingers were like to those of a Man; yet the Thumb
was much smaller, than the other Fingers, and shorter, and liker the Ape-kind.
This Galen frequently takes notice of. It Is true, the other Fingers were much
larger in our Pygmie than in the Ape-kind, and more resembling those of a Man,
so that I was surprised to see them so big: but the Thumb, which the Ancients
and Gallen call (...), and Hippocrales (...), in our Subject was so
disproportionate and little, that as Galen remarks Galen de usu Partium, lib.
1. cap. 22. p.m. 310.
, any one that should view it, would think that it was but a ridiculous
imitation of Mankind, and nothing answering to it is Names. And in the
precedent Chapter he vigorously disputes against the Epicure^ns and the
Followers of As^lepiades; and from the admirable Structure and wise Contrivance
of all the Parts, and particularly the Tendons that go to the Fingers; he
confutes their Hypothesis as vain, and has this noble Fyiphenema,(...) (...)
i. e. Vos, per Deos immortales, cum nihil habeatis, quod in tot Insertionibus
reprehendatis, neque Tendonum molem, neque locum, neque Insertionis modum, sed
in his omnibus mirabilem quandam Proportionem videatis, una sola in utroque
magno digito similiter perdita (and hoc non sine ratione, quod ea non egebamus)
temere dicitis and absque Art omnia hujusmodi facta fuisse.

The Bones of the Metacarpus in the Pygmie were an Inch and three quarters
long. The two last Joints of the Thumb were scarce an Inch long; the first
Joint of the Thumb was a little above an Inch. The Forefinger was two Inches
and almost an half: The middle Finger, two Inches and three quarters. The third
or Ring-finger was two Inches and half a quarter; and the little Finger was not
full two Inches long. The first Joint of the fore and middle Finger was above a
quarter of an Inch broad, and the Girth of each about was an Inch. The Pygmie
therefore in the Fingers, having them so large and thick, imitated a Man; but
in the Thumb, which was so slender and small, it resembled the Ape-kind.

CAP. V.
De Artubus Inferioribus.
OSSA (a) Ilium in utraque simia, tam caudata qua;m non caudata, toto habitu,
and figura distant ab humanis: dehiscunt enim eo in loco, ubi pubis Ossa esse
debebant, atque omnino privantur Osse pubis: propterea ad velociter currendum
ineptae sunt. Ischij articulus plane dissimilis est ab illo hominis, ut notavit
Galenus.

(b) Ea est Femoris structura in simia, ut eam stare rectam non permit at, nec
instar hominis corpus suum erigere, aut incedere, ne quidem sedere, quia
femoris caput obliquim in articulo coxae, committitur. (c) In homine cervix
rotundi capitis femoris oblonga est, and sensim oblique deorsum ducitur. In
simia vero brevis, and propemodum transversa visitur. Sed femoris cervice,
apophyses duae, trochanteres dictae, in simia similes sunt humanis, verum in
illa, ut in caudata minores.

(d) Patella utriusque simiae manifestum discrimen ab humana demonstrat: est
enim oblonga, non rotunda, Quamvis autem extri^seus gibba sit, atque intus
cava, nihilominus long aliter se habet quam in homine. Nam secundum ipsius
longitudinem recurvatur, excavaturque adeo, ut nihil propemodum in medio
emineat, curvo aduncoque ejus sinu naviculam quandam elegantissime refer
videatur. In caudata simia patella videtur ex duobus Ossibus mutuo adnatis
constructa.

(e) Tibiae utrumque Os in utraque simia humanis Ossibus simillimum est.

(f) Simiae Pes ab humano maxim discrepat, est enim oblongus latusque homini,
angustus brevisque simiae, pro ratione corporis, pedisque digiti longiores
sunt, sed metatarsi Ossa breviora, calcaneum vero angustius, and anteriori in
part qua cum Osse, cyboide committitur, latius evadens, magisque inibi longum,
quam retro, impedit ne simia diu erecta, and stare, and ambulare queat.
Astragalus Galeno tenuis non efficitur, sed manens sublimis, Oss^ scaphoidi
conjungitur, quod simiae repugnat, in qua astragalus humilem, oblongam atque
tenuem cervicem habet. Planta in simia ex quatuor Ossibus componitur. Pollex ex
tribus, inquit Eustachius. Quamvis Volcherus in caudata simia nuliam observarit
disserentiam, qua discreparent ab homine. (g) Digitorum notissima est
discrepantia in homine, ut notavit Galenus, omnes una serie disponuntur,
brevissimoque spatio discreti, multo minores sunt, quam qui in manu habentur.
Nam quanto pes summa manu major est, tanto illius digiti manus digitis sunt
minores.

(h) Accedit quod pollex longitudine indici aequalis est, quem dupla
crassitudine superat, talisque est quatuor digitorum commensuratio, ut ab
indice ad minimum semper deficiat longitudo: and secundae aciei Ossa, si
indicem exceperis, breviora sunt iis, quae in tertia phalange reponuntur. Haec
omnia in ^traque simia aliter se habent, omnes enim pedis digiti insigni spatio
discreti sunt, multoque longiores, quam in manu existunt: Pollex caeteris
digitis brevior tenuiorque est, atque diversam ab aliis positionem sortitur,
dehiscit etiam, ut pollex in manu valde ab indice. Digiti pedis simiae, manus
humanae digitorum seriem imitantur, est enim pollex in pede simiae reliquis
digits brevior, inter alios quatuor digitos ut in manu, medius omnium
longissimus.

(a) There was no Part I think in the whole Sceleton where the Pygmie differed
more from a Man, than in the Structure and Figure of the Os Ilium: for in a
Humane Sceleton those Bones are spread broad, forming a Sinus or Hollow on the
Inside. In the Pygmie they were proportionably longer and narrower, and not so
Concave on the inside, but in all respects Conformable to the Shape of the same
Bones in the Ape and Monkey-kind. But why Riolan should deny the Os Pubis to be
in Monkeys, I see no reason; for naturally there is not that Dehiscence or
Separation of the Os Pubis, as Coiter has given in his Figure of the Sceleton
of a Monkey, and as he describes it; from whence I suppose Riolan borrows this
Descriprion: for in the Sceletons of two Monkeys I observed these Bones were
joined together, and in the Pygmie they are closed as in a Man. When the
Cartilage that joins them is divided, they will part asunder; but otherwise
they are firmly knit together. This therefore is no reason, why they should not
run fast: and the contrary was observed of the Pygmie that it did so.

The length of the Os Ilium, from it is Spine to it is Conjunction with the Os
Ischium, was three Inches; where 'twas broadest, 'twas an Inch and half; where
narrowest, but three quarters of an Inch. The Os lschium was an Inch and three
quarters long; the Os Pubis was an Inch long.

(b) I did not observe any difference in the Structure of the Thighbone in our
Pygmie from that in Man; nor was it is Articulation or Insertion of it is Head
into the Acetabulum, more oblique than in Man. So that from this Articulation,
I saw no reason why it should not walk upright and sit; our Pygmie did both:
When I saw it, 'twas just a little before it is death; and though 'twas weak and
feeble, it would stand, and go upright.

The length of the Thigh Bone in the Pygmie was five Inches: The girth of it in
the middle an Inch and three quarters; where 'twas joined to the Bones of the
Leg, 'twas an Inch and almost an half broad.

(c) The Neck of the Head of the Thigh Bone in our Pygmie was not different in
it is length, as I did observe, from that of a Man's, but the same
proportionably; as were likewise the two Apophyses, called Trochanteres.

(d) The Patella in our Pygmie was not yet ossified. As much as I could
discover of it is shape, it was the same as in Man; round and not long; and but
one Bone, and not two, as Riolan describes it in the Monkey. In the Sceletons
of the Monkeys I used, these Bones were lost, so that I did not observe them.

(e) The two Bones in the Leg, the Tibia and the Fibula were just the same in
the Pygmie as in Man; and their Articulations were alike: The Tibia was four
Inches long; the Fibula was a little shorter. The girth of the Tibia in the
middle was about an Inch; of the Fibula, about half an Inch.

(f) What makes the foot of the Pygmie seem different from a Man's, is chiefly
the length of the Toes, and the Structure of the great Toe. In other respects,
it has a great resemblance with it. For the Bones of the Metatarsus here,
seemed proportionably as long as in Man. The Os Calcis, Calcaneum or Heel-bone
was not narrow, but broad; and forewards, where 'twas joined to the Os Cuboide
or Cubiforme, not broader, nor longer than behind; where it juts out so far, as
sufficiently secures it is standing or walking erect. The Astragalus I did not
observe different from a Man's. The Scaphoides or Naviculare here was
Cartilaginous. If one reckons three Joints in the great Toe, then there can be
but four Bones in the Planta Pedis, or Metatarsus; which with Eustachius I am
more inclined to, because really this Part performs upon any occasion the use
of an Hand too; and the great Toe, (like the Thumb in the Hand) stands off from
the range of the other Fingers. Besides, I observed a difference in the Color
in the Bones of the Metatarsus and the Toes: for the Color of the Toes was
white and opace; the Color of the Bones of the Metatarsus was like to that of
the Cartilages, and more transparent. Now all the three Bones in the great Toe
were of the same color, white as were the other Toes. Therefore I shall make
but four Bones in the Metatarsus, answerable to those of the Metacarpus in the
Hand, and three Bones in the great Toe.

(g) And as the Hand of our Pygmie in some Parts resembled the Humane; in
others the Ape-kind: So the same may be said of the Foot too. For the Heel, the
Tarsus and Metatarsus were like to the Humane. But all the Toes were liker to
the Ape and Monkey-kind: For the Toes here, if we may call them Toes, and not
rather Fingers, were almost as long as the Fingers in the Hand; much longer
proportionably than in Man, and not lying so close together: But the Bones of
the Fingers in the Hand, were larger and bigger than those of the Toes.

(h) The great Toe in the Pygmie, was shorter than the first of the other Toes;
though in a Man it is altogether as long; and herein it resembles the Ape-kind.
But whereas Aristotle (as I have remarked) mentions, that in Apes the middle
Toe is the longest, as is the middle Finger in the Hand; In the Sceleton of the
Pygmie I did observe, that the first and middle Toe were both much of a length,
each measuring an Inch and three quarters: The third and little Toe were about
an Inch and an half long; the little Toe being rather somewhat shorter than the
third Toe. If in the great Toe you reckon three Articuli, as Eustachius does,
then from the Tarsus to it is Extreme, the great Toe measured two Inches and an
half: but if with Coiter you make but two Articuli or Joints in the great Toe,
and the other to be a Bone of the Metatarsus; these two were only an Inch and a
quarter long: The four Bones of the Metatarsus were much of a length, being
about an Inch and a quarter long.

This great Toe (as has been already frequently remarked) being set off from
the range of the others, more resembles a Thumb. This Difference I observe in
it is make, That the Bones that compose it, are much bigger and larger, than any
of the other Toes; and in respect of the Thumb in the Hand, vastly bigger. In
the Sceletou of a Monkey I did not observe the Bones of the great Toe, to
exceed those of the other. But as the Thumb in the Foot is much bigger, than
that in the Hand; so the Fingers in the Hand are much larger than those in the
Foot.

CAP. VI.
De Sesamoideis.
IN Homine Ossa Sesamoidea pauca sunt, magnaque ex part cartilaginosa, and si
ea quae pollici applicantur exceperis, in constanti sede firmata. In simia vero
multa, atque magna occurrunt, and ossea perpetuo sunt. Cuique primo quatuor
digitorum internodio, and secundo pollicis gemina fere semper adnectuntur. Duo
ossicula magnitudine ciceris, supra utrumque tuberculum femoris in origin
gemellorum reperiuntur.

As to the Ossa Sesamoidea in our Subject, I have very little to say: For it
being young, very likely they might be only Cartilaginous, and the Skin
adhering so firmly here, they might be taken off with it. Since they are in
Apes, I do not doubt, but that they were in our Pygmie too, though I did not
observe them.

Having now made my Remarks upon the Comparison, that Riolan, or rather
Eustachius and Coiter, have given us, between the Sceleton of a Man, an Ape,
and a Monkey; and shown wherein the Sceleton of our Pygmie either agreed or
disagreed from any of them, I shall make some Reflections upon the whole; and
more particularly upon some Parts, which deserve here a more distinct
Consideration. But shall first of all take the Dimensions of the Sceleton, and
of some other Parts I have not mentioned already.

As from the top of the Cranium to the Extreme of the Heel in a strait Line,
the Sceleton of the Pygmie measured about two Foot; from the first Vertebra of
the Neck to the last of the Os Coccygis, eleven Inches; from the head of the
Shoulder Bone, to the end of the middle Finger, 'twas about fifteen Inches; the
end of this Finger reaching in an erect Posture an Inch and half below the
Patella: whereas in an Humane Sceleton, from the end of the middle Finger to
the lower part of the Patella, it wanted five Inches and an half: Our Pygmie
therefore herein imitated the Ape-kind. From the head of the Thigh Bone, to the
bottom of the Os Calcis in the Pygmie, was about ten Inches. From the setting
on of the first Rib, to the fastening on of the last, was four Inches. The
distance between the last Rib, and the Spine of the Os Ilium, not full two
Inches. From the Spine of the Os Ilium, to the bottom of the Os Pubis, in a
strait Line, was four Inches and three quarters. The distance between the end
of the Scapula, and Spine of the Os Ilium about three Inches.

Both when it was alive, and after it is death, I admired the straitness and
shape of it is Back. Now the Scapula coming down so low on the Ribs, and
inclining toward the Vertebrae of the Back, and the Os Ilium rising so high,
they do contribute very much toward it; and must also a^ford a great safeguard
and strength to the Back and Spine.

The Sceleton of our Pygmie was just the same length of one of a Monkeys that I
borrowed: But because I observed most of the Apophyses of the Bones to be
Cartilaginous in the Pygmie, I must conclude, that 'twas but young; and that
probably it might grow taller; to what height I am uncertain. Yet I can by no
means be induced to believe, that it would ever arrive to the Stature of a Man,
as some sort of this Species of Animals has been observed to do; for then I
could not expect to have seen here, the Bones themselves so solid, or the
Cranium to be so entirely ossisied, or the Sutures to be so closed and
indented, and the Backbone and Ribs so fully hardened, as all the Bones of the
Artus or Limbs were likewise, except at their Apophyses, and in the Carpus and
Tarsus. Now all these Parts that had these Cartilaginous Apophyses, had already
acquired so great a length, in proportion to the rest of the Body, that it is
not to be imagined, that they would have exceeded it, or at least not much; and
considering that Animals come to their (...) of growth sooner or later,
according to their Longevity, as a Man, (till he is past the Age that any of
these Creatures, it may be, arrive to) does not leave growing: this inclines me
to think, since we found most parts of the Body so perfected here, that it
might not in time much exceed the height it had already acquired. I could have
wished that those that have wrote of any of this Species of Animals, had given
us their Dimensions and Ages; but they are silent herein, or at least too
general: only Le Compte observed an Ape in the Straits of Molucca four foot
high; but this may not be our sort. As to those of Borneo, I was informed by a
Sea-Captain who used those Parts, that the King there formerly had one as tall
as a Man, that would frequently come down to the Town, and a great many Stories
are told of him. The same Captain had two given him, both young, and about the
height of our Pygmie; but these were not hairy, but naked as a Man; and one of
them that he carried to Batavia, was looked upon as so great a Rarity, that all
the time he staid there, his Ship was constantly visited by such as came to see
it. But it is Master of Fact, not Reasoning, that will best determine this
doubt, and a faithful Observation that must inform us, to what tallness this
sort of Animal in Angola, and the Countries thereabout, does usually grow; for
in different Countries they may be different in this respect, though the same
Species, as is seen even in Mankind.

It Is not therefore that I am fond of the word Pygmie, that I have called our
Animal so, or that I would undertake to justify our present Subject to be
exactly the Pygmie of the Ancients: Of this Quadru-Manu; sort of Animals there
are diverse Species, and some may be taller and others shorter; but all of them
being but Brutes, I was unwilling to call ours a Man, though with an Epithet.
'Twas necessary to give it a Name, because not tallying exactly with the
Descriptions of those that are given us, I did not know but that it might be
different: and it is present height corresponding so well with that of the
Pygmies of the Ancients, (and we may allow something for growth too) induced me
to this denomination: For as A. Gellius A. G^ll. N^st. A^^^^. lib. 9. cap. 4.
p. 205
tells us, the Pygmies were two Foot and a quarter high. Pygmaeos quoque (says
he) hand long ab his nasci, quorum qui longissimi sunt, non longiores esse
quam pedes duos and quadrantem. And so Pliny Plin^ N^^ Hist. lib. 7. cap. 2.
p.m. 13.
, Supra hos extrema in part Montium Trispithami, Pygmaeique narrantur, ternas
Spimathas longitudine, hoc est ternos dodrantes non excedentes; that is twenty
seven Inches. For as Ludovicus Vives Lud. (...) Comment in D. Aug(...)ni de
Civitate De^, lib. 16. cap. 8. p.m. 82^
observes, a Foot contains sixteen Digiti or twelve Pollices. The Dodrans or
Spithama, which is the Palmus major, contains nine Pollices; the Palmus minor
is but three Pollices, or four Digiti, that is, a quarter of a Foot: And so
Herodotus Herod^tus in Europe, No. 149. p.m. 448.
informs us, that the Palmus contains four Digiti, and the Cubit six Palmi. The
Pygmie therefore being Trispithamus or three Spithamae long, was twenty seven
Inches long, or as A. Gellius tells us, two Foot and a quarter. So our Animal,
before Dissection measured twenty six Inches; but in the Sceleton, only four
and twenty Inches. Not but Strabo Strab^. Geograph. lib. 15. p.m. 489.
out of Megasthenes, does mention too, the (...), as well as the (...); but
these latter (he tells us) were those, that Homer makes to fight the Cranes,
However it be, if our Ape be not the Pygmie of the Ancients, yet I cannot but
think, the Pygmies of the Ancients were only a sort of Apes, notwithstanding
all the Romances that have been made about them. And if so, and our Ape be
found not much to exceed the measures given, I shall think my Conjecture in
giving this Name, not amiss. But of this hereafter. And to proceed:

Since the Bones are the main Timber-work in this Fabric of Animal Bodies, by
which the whole is supported, and upon their Structure, in a good measure, does
depend their manner of local motion, we will here more particularly enquire,
which may be thought the most natural way of walking in our Pygmie, either as a
Quadruped or a Biped, for it did both upon occasion; and we will see whether by
Nature 'twas equally provided for the doing both.

Now when I observed it to go upon all four, as a Quadruped (as has been
already remarked) it did not place the Palms of the Hands flat to the Ground,
but went upon it is Knuckles, or rather upon the first Joints of the Fingers of
the Fore-hands, the second and third Joints being bended or touching the
Ground; which seemed to me so unusual a way of walking, as I have not observed
the like before in any Animal. And I did expect it the less here: because the
Fore-limbs being so very long, it might be thought, that it had the less need
of thus raising the Body. And the whole weight of the Body thus lying upon
these Joints of the Fingers, one would think, that they should be soon tired in
supporting it, and that Nature did not design it for a Constancy, but only upon
occasion, or a present shift: For if it was to be it is usual way of walking, no
doubt, for it is greater ease, it would place the Palms flat to the Ground, as
all other Animals do the sole of the Foot, and hereby it would be rendered
better able to bear this weight.

Besides, when it walks thus upon it is Fingers, the flexure at the Elbow will
be inwards, toward the sides of the Body, which is different from all other
Quadrupeds, and in it is Progression will be of no use at all, nay, will be an
hinderance to it; and it will require a great tention of the Muscles to keep
these Fore-limbs strait; and if they are not kept so, they must halt, and cannot
move swiftly; which makes me diffident, that this cannot be it is Natural Posture
in going; for Nature always contrives the easiest and best ways of Motion. Now
in Quadrupeds the flection of the fore and hinder Limbs, is both the same way:
But in a Man and an Ape (as I have before remarked from Aristotle) it is
contrary; or as Pliny expresses it, Homini genua and Cubita contraria, item
Vrsis and Simiarum generi, ob id minime pernicibus. But how Pliny comes to
bring in the Bear here, I do not understand: for if with the Parisians Vide
Their Anatomic Description of a Bear in their Memoirs, p. m. 44.
we should here understand by Genua, the Heel-bone, and by Cubita a Bone of the
Carpus (which are often longer in Brutes than in Man) then this will be a
Property not peculiar to Bears, but might be observed in other Quadrupeds too.
I should rather own it as a Mistake in Pliny. Nor can I assent to the
Parisians, That all Animals have these Parts turned after the same, manner,
whatever Aristotle may report thereof. I must confess I am of Aristotle's mind,
and any Body may experience it in himself, and observe the flexure of the Cubit
to be different from that of the Knee; and where it is so, there the Motion upon
all four, will be very awkward and unnatural, and as Pliny observes, it cannot
be swift.

I shall here further observe, that in Quadrupeds the make of the Thorax, the
setting on of the Scapula, and the Articulation of the Humerus, or
Shoulder Bone, are much different from what they are in Bipeds.: for Quadrupeds
are narrow Chested, and their Thorax not so round as in a Man, because in them
the Scapulae are to be placed more forward upon the Ribs, and not so backwards
as in Men. And the Articulation or the Shoulder with the Scapula in Quadrupeds
lies nearer the Ribs; in Man it is extended farther from them. Now our Pygmie so
exactly imitating Humane-kind in all these Circumstances, makes me think that
Nature did not design it a Quadruped, but a Biped. For it had a full round
Chest or Thorax, and it is Scapulae placed backwards, not so forwards on the
Ribs, and the Articulation of the Shoulder with the Scapula, stood off from the
Ribs as it does in Man. And from this very Consideration Galen len de usu
Partium, lib. 13. cap. 11. p. m. 627.
tells us, That a Man, if he would, could not walk upon all four, (...) (says
he) (...). i.e. Merito itaque Homo ne, si volet, quidem ambularc quatuor
artubus queat, quod in ipso Scapularum Articuli long a Thorace sint abducti.
And Galen all along owns, that the Structure of the Scapula in the Ape, is the
same as in a Man; and tells us that an Ape is exactly neither a Quadruped, nor
a Biped, but amphibious between both. For in the same Chapter, speaking of the
Ape, he says, (...) i. e. Quod vero ad Scapulas and Claves attinet, homini
maxim est similis, quamquam ea part homini similis esse non debebat, nam quod
ad ambulationis celeritatem pertinet, simia inter genus utrumque ambigit, neque
cnim Bipes penitus est, neque Quadrupes; sed quatenus est Bipes, clauda est,
non enim recte plane stare potest; and quatenus est Quadrupes, mutila simul
est, ac tarda, quod Humeri articulus a Thorace plurimum sit abductus,
quemadmodum si idem articulus in alio quopiam animante a Thorace divulsus extra
secessisset. Now although Galen tells us here, that an Ape can scarce stand
upright; yet in another place he declares quite the contrary; for, says he
Galen de usu Partium, lib. 11. cap. 2^
, (...). i.e. Est autem simillima homini Simia, ut quae rotundam praecipue
habet factem, Dentes Caninos parvos, latum Pectus, Claviculas longiores,
minimum Pilosa, quae recta etiam stat belle ut and incedere sine errore, and
currere velociter possit.

We have seen upon what accounts our Pygmie may be thought not to be a
Quadruped, or that it is natural Gression is not on all four, and how ill it is
provided to go that way. We will now enquire, Whether there is not more reason
to think that Nature designed it to be a Biped, and to walk erect. And in the
doing this, we may observe the largeness of the He^l-bone in the Foot, which
being so much extended, sufficiently secures the Body from falling backwards,
as the length of the Toes does it is being cast too forwards; and the Arms being
so long, may easily give a poise either way, for the preserving the
AEquilibrium of the Body. And it may be, this is the Reason why the Pongos hold
their hands behind their Necks, when they walk erect. If we consider the
Articulation of the Os Femoris in the Acetabulum, there is no difference to be
observed from a Man, nor indeed in any other Circumstance that relates to this
Matter. It Is true, in my first figure I represent him as weak and feeble and
b^^ding; for when I first saw him, he was dyings; besides, being young, and ill
it had not that strength in it is Limbs, as in time and in health, it might have
acquired; and I was willing to repre^^nt what I saw my self. But what very much
sways with me, to think him a Biped, and to go erect, and that Nature did
design it so, much more than any of the Ape and Monkey-kind besides, was my
observing the Peritonaeum to be entire, and not perforated or protruded in the
^roin, as it is in Apes and Dogs, and other Quadrupeds: as likewise, because I
found the Pericardium in our Pygmie to be fastened to the D^^hragm, as it is in
Man, and which is not so in Apes and Monkeys. Both which are so remarkable
differences, and (as I have already (...) marked) so particularly contrived for
the advantage of an erect (...)re of the Body, that, I think, the Inference is
easy, and we may (...)ly conclude, that Nature intended it a Biped, and has
not been wanting in any thing, in forming the Organs, and all Parts
accordingly; and if not altogether so exactly as in a Man, yet much more than
in any other Brute besides: For I own it, as my constant Opinion,
(notwithstanding the ill surmise and suggestion made by a forward Gentleman)
that though our Pygmie has many Advantages above the rest of it is Species, yet I
still think it but a sort of Ape and a mere Brute; and as the Proverb has it,
(...) Lucian. adversus indoctum. Oper. p. m. 865.
An Ape is an Ape, though finely clad.

This Proverb, perhaps, might have it is rise from some such occasion as Lucian
mentions in another place; and the Story being pleasant, and relating to what
we have been just now discoursing upon, viz. it is manner of Motion, we will
insert it here, and then proceed to the Myology. Lucian Lucian. Piscator sive
Reviviscentes. p. m. 214.
therefore says, (...) etc. i. e. Fertur AEgyptius Rex quidam Simias ut
tripudiarent instituisse, Animaliaque (nam admodum ad res humanas imitandas
sunt. apta) celerrim^ didicisse, ut Personata ac Purpurata saltarent: eraique
admodum visu res digna, donec Spectator quispiam urbanus nuces e sinu
depromptas in medium abjiceret: id simiae videntes, tripudij oblitae, id quod
erat, simiae pro saltatoribus evaserunt, Personas conterebant, vestitum
discerpebant, invicemque pro fructibus depugnabant, ita ut Pyrriches ordo
dissolveretur, a Theatroque ridebatur. And in another place Lucian. pro Mercede
conductis, p.m. 363.
he tells the like Story of Cleopatra's Apes. So that they can, not only go
erect, but can dance in a figure too, if taught to do so. But this is not
natural, but acquired by Art; and even Dogs have been taught to do the same. So
AElian AElian. Hist. Animal. lib. 5. p.m. 26.
tells us, that an Ape is easily taught to perform any Action; if it is taught
to Dance, 'twill Dance, or Play upon the Pipe; and that once he saw one supply
the Place of a Coachman; holding the Reins; pulling them in, or letting them
loose, and using the Whip, as there was occasion. And that Story in Kercher
(100)Kercher. China illustrata, Part.4. cap. 7. p.m. 195.
, of the Embassy that the King of Bengal sent to the Great Mogul in the Year
1660 is very remarkable, where a great Ape richly adorned, did drive a Chariot
magnificently gilded, and set with Jewels; and did it with the greatest State
and Pageantry in the World, and as skilfully as the best Coachman could do.

It would be infinite to relate all the Stories that are told us of them; and I
have been too tedious already. I shall therefore hasten now: But must inform
the Reader, that I am obliged to my good Friend Mr. Cowper, not only for
designing all my figures; but obtained of him likewise to draw up this ensuing
account of the Muscles; whose great Skill and Knowledge herein, is sufficiently
made evident by his Myotomia Reformata, or, New Administration of all the
Muscles in Humane Bodies, published sometime since: To which I refer my Reader,
for a fuller account of them, whenever it is said, that such and such Muscles in
the Pygmie resembled those in Humane Bodies. And for his greater Ease, there
are References all along made, to the figures; where the first Number signifies
the Figure, or Table; the second Number the Muscle exhibited or represented
there.

84 THE MYOTOMY OR DESCRIPTION OF THE MUSCLES.
Of the Muscles of the Abdomen.
THE Obliquus Descendens (Fig. 3.38.) agreed in it is situation and progress,
with that of a Humane Body, as the accurate Galen and Vesalius describe it, and
did not partly spring from any of the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of
the Loins; or their Ligaments and Membranes, as the later Writers would have it
in Humane Bodies. Neither did any part of the Obliquus Ascendens (Fig. 3. 39.)
arise from the Lumbal Vertebrae, as Vesalius describes it in Men: but agreed
with the Description of Galen, and did not differ from the Humane. Drelincourt
observes the like in Apes: The same Author takes notice, that the Pyramidales
are wanting in those Animals; which were absent also in the Pygmie. The Rectus
(Fig. 3. 40.) agreed with the Humane, and had no Connection with a Muscular
Portion, springing either from the Clavicula or first Rib, as Vesalius has
figured Galen's Description of it in Apes and Dogs. The Parisians say, In
Monkeys it ascends to the top, passing under the Pectoralis and Little
Serratus, it was Fleshy only to the half of the Sternum, the rest being but a
mere Tendon. Drelincourt observes the Tendinous Inscriptions of these Muscles
in Apes, appeared only on their inside, and not on the out. The Transversalis
in this, as in most Quadrupeds, did not differ from that in Man.

The Cremaster Muscles were very small by reason of the leanness of the
Subject. The Accelerator Spermatis (Fig. 7. G.) Erector Penis (Fig. ib. K.) and
Transversalis Penis (ib. L.) agreed in their Situation and Figure with those of
Men; the last of which only varied in it is Termination, as appears in the
Figure.

The Detrusor Vrinae agreed with the Figure of the Bladder of Vrinae of this
Animal. The Sphincter Vesicae differed not from that in Men; and most, if not
all Quadrupeds; it being placed in the Neck of the Bladder, beyond the
Caruncula or Caput Gallinaginis, immediately above the Prostates. The Sphincter
Any differed not from the Humane; unless it might seem somewhat less. The
Levatores Any were longer and more divided from each other, than in Humane
Bodies: The like may be observed in most, if not all Quadrupeds; by reason of
the Length and differing Figure of the Bones, whence these Muscles take their
rise.

I could find no Occipital nor Frontal Muscles in this Animal.

The Orbicularis Palpebrarum ( Fig. 3.2.) and Aperiens Palpebram Rectus agreed
with the Humane, and those of most Quadrupeds. The Obliquus Superior, Inferior,
Elevator, Depressor, Adductor, and Abductor Oculi, agreed with those of the
Humane Eye and an Ape's, as Julius Casserius Placentinus Figures them Tab. 4.
Organi Visus, Fig. XII. and XIII. Nor was there any Musculus Septimus Brutorum
in this Animal. The Aloe Nasi of the Pygmie being small, those Muscles only
appeared, which from their Office are called Constrictores Alarm Nasi, ac
Depressores Labij superioris.

The Quadratus Genae, or Platusma Myoides, by reason of the Leanness of the
Subject, (as I suspect) did not appear Fleshy. The Buccinator (Fig.3.7.) was
longer than that in Man. Nor was it any where intertext with various orders of
Fibers, as Anatomists commonly represent it in Man; or seemed to arise from any
other Parts, but the Processus Corone; from whence it is Fibers had a strait
progress to the Angle of the Lips; as in Men: This and the former Muscles, are
counted Common Muscles to the Cheeks and Lips.

The Muscles Common to both Lips, are the Zygomaticus, (Fig. 3. 3.) Elevator,
Depressor, and Constritor Labiorum, which were not so conspicuous, as in Men.
The Proper Muscles of the upper and under Lip, were very distinct in this
Animal, ( viz.) the Elevator and Depressor Labij Superioris, (Fig. 3. 4.) the
last of which is mentioned above, and called Constrictor Aloe Nasi; the
Depressor and Elevator Labij Superioris, (Fig. 3.5.)

Though the Auricula or Outward Ear of this Animal was as large, if not larger
than that of a Man, yet I could not observe any Muscle, which served for it is
Motion. I could not examine the Muscles of the Tympanum and Stapes, by reason
the Bones were kept entire for a Sceleton.

The Sternohyoideus, Coracohyoideus, Mylohyoideus and Geniohyoideus, did not
differ from those in Men; which Drelincourt has also observed of the former in
the Female Ape. The Stylohyoideus did not arise from the Styliform Process;
that Process being wanting in this Animal, or at least did not appear, by
reason it was young; this Muscle therefore seemed to arise from the Os Petrosum.

The Genioglossus, by reason of the length of the Lower Jaw, was longer than
that in Man. The Ceratoglossus and Styloglossus differed not; except that the
latter arises from the Os Petrosum, like the Stylohyoideus. The other Muscles
appeared in this Animal belonging to it is Tongue. The Sternothyroideus,
Hyothyroideus, Cricothyroideus, Cricoarytaenoideus, Posticus and Lateralis; the
Thyroarytaenoideus, and Arytaenoideus varied not from those in Men. The Myscles
of the Fauces also, differed not from those in Man, (viz.) The
Stylopharyngaeus, Pterygopharyngaeus, Oesophagaeus and Vaginalis Gulae. The
following Muscles of the Gargareon were exactly like the Humane, (viz.) the
Sphenostaphylinus and Pterygostaphylinus.

Now all the Muscles of the Lower Jaw may be seen without incommoding any
hereafter mentioned. The Temporalis (Fig. 3. 1.) and Masseter (Fig. 3. 6.)
seemed somewhat larger than the Humane, and as they are commonly in Brutes, by
reason their lower Jaw-bones are larger than those of Men; yet these Muscles
were not so strong, as those of Monkeys, as the Parisians represent them. The
Superior Salival Duct past over the Masseter, and entered the Musculus
Buccinator of the Pygmie, as in Man. The Digastricus arose not from the
Mammiform Process, as in Men; but sprang from the Occipital-bone; it is progress
in this Animal agreed exactly with that in a Humane Body. Drelincourt describes
it in Apes thus, Ven line a habet intermedium pollice longum, and gracilem,
enascitur, autem ^^n ab ^ pophyse Styloide, sed ab osse Basilari.

The Muscles of the Thorax which appear on the forepart come next. The
Inter^^s^ales externi and interni, (Fig. 4.32.) Triangularis, Scalenus Primus,
S^^undus and Tertius; Subelavius (Fig. 3. 34.) Serratus minor anticus (Fig. 3.
35.) Serratus major anticus, (Fig. 3. 37.) All these were like the Humane. The
Parisians tell us, That the Great Serratus did in in their Monkeys arise from
the fourth, fifth, and sixth Vertebra of the Neck; but it was not so in the
Pygmie: The like is taken notice of by Drelincourt in Apes. The Diaphragma was
larger in this Animal, than in Man, agreeable to the Capacity of its Thorax:
The rest of the Muscles of the Thorax appear on it is Back-part, which we shall
mention hereafter.

Before I pass to the Muscles on the Back-part of our Pygmie, I shall take
notice of a Pair of Muscles, that do not appear in Humane Bodies; which from
their Use may be called Elevatores Clavicularum, (Fig. 3. 12.) Either of them
arises Fleshy from the Transverse Processes of the second and third Vertebra of
the Neck; and descends obliquely outward to it is broad Insertion at the upper
part of the Clavicula; when it Acts, it draws up the Clavicle, assisting the
Elevator Scapulae, and upper part of the Cucularis, in raising the whole
Shoulder. The situation of this Muscle, is not unlike the upper part of that
represented by Vesalius in his sixth Table of the Muscles O. T. P. Q. which he
says is found in Dogs and Apes, and described by Galen in Humane Bodies, in
whom it is not existent. Drelincourt calls it Levator Omoplatae, (adding) ab
Apophysibus transversis cervicalibus in Acromion and extremum claviculae
extenditur.

The Muscles employed in the Motion of the Scapula, are the Cucularis. (Fig.4.
1.1.1.) Rhomboides (Fig.4.6.) Levator Scapulae (ib.5.) These also agreed with
the Humane: The like being taken notice of by Drelincourt of the Cucularis, in
the Female Ape. The rest of the Muscles of the Thorax, are the Serratus
superior posticus, (Fig. 4. 7.) the Serratus inferior posticus (Fig. 4. 32.
32.) These differed not from those in Men. The Sacrolumbalis (Fig, 4. 29.) was
not so thick as in Men, but was every way slenderer.

The Muscles employed in the Motion of the Head of the Pygmie, differed very
little from those in Man; as the Splenius, (Fig. 4. 2.) Complexus, (Fig. 4.4.)
Rectus major, Rectus minor, Obliquus Superior, and Obliquus Inferior, neither
was this Inferior Oblique Muscle larger than in Man; as Vesalius, Lib. II. Cap.
XXVIII. assures us, it is in Apes and Dogs. The Mastoideus (Fig. 3.8. 8.) was
chiefly inserted to the Occipital-bone, as the Parisians observe it in Monkeys.
The Rectus internus major, not commonly described by Authors in Humane Bodies,
though it is very plain and constant in all those, I have hitherto looked for it,
was also in the Pygmie. The Rectus internus minor, or Musculus Annuens,
sometimes observed by me in Humane Bodies, was also in this Animal; and so was
the Rectus Lateralis described by Falloppius in Men. Nor was any of those
Muscles I have discovered in Humane Bodies, wanting in this Animal, but the
Interspinales Colli.

The Longi Colli of this Animal, appeared to be longer and larger than those of
Humane Bodies. The Spinalis Colli and Transversalis Colli were like those in
Humane Bodies. The Interspinales Colli, which I have elsewhere described in
Men, did not appear in this Animal. The Longissimus Dorsi (Fig. 4. 28.) nor
unlike the Sacrolumbalis above noted, was not so thick and fleshy at it is
Origin from the Os Ilium, Sacrum, and Vertebrae of the Loins; nor was it is
external Surface in the Pygmie so tendinous, as in Humane Bodies; but was
somewhat broader. The Quadratus Lumborum was longer than in Men, agreeable to
the space between the Spine of the Os Ilium, and lower Rib of this Animal. See
the Figure of the Sceleton. The Sacer, and Semispinatus, differed not from the
Humane, as I have represented them in my Myotomia Reformata, page.135.

The Muscles of the Superior Parts and Trunk of the Body being dispatched, we
come next to those of the Limbs; and first of the Arm or Os Humeri. The
Pectoralis (Fig. 3. 33.) was much broader at it is Original, from the Sternum,
than in Man: it is Fibers were decussated near it is Insertion. Galen and Jacobus
Sylvius take notice of another Muscle under the Pectoralis in Apes, which is
implanted into the Arm near the Pectoral Muscle. The Deltoides (Fig. 3. 15. and
4. 12.) was also broader at it is Original. Jac. Sylvius tells us, this Muscle
in Apes is like that of a Man. The Supraspinatus (Fig. 4. 8.) agreed with the
Humane in it is situation; but was somewhat broader at it is Origin from the
upper part of the Basis Scapulae. The Infraspinatus, as the former Muscle was
broader at it is Original from the Scapula, this on the contrary was there
narrower than the Humane. Sylvius and Drelincourt mention these Muscles in
Apes; but whether they resemble those of Men, or this Animal, does not appear
by their Accounts. Teres minor, (Fig. 4. 10.) this is sometimes wanting in Men:
it was somewhat shorter and thicker in this Animal. The Teres major, (Fig. 4.
11.) was very large in the Pygmie. The Latissimus Dorsi agreed with the Humane
in it is Original and Progress toward the Arm; but when it arrived at the
Axilla, it parted with a fleshy Portion, which descended on the inside of the
Arm, with the Musculus Biceps, and becoming a slender Tendon is inserted to the
internal protuberance of the Os Humeri: ( vide Fig. 8. C.) which represents the
production of this Muscle. This Appendix or Accessory Muscle of the Latissimus
Dorsi, is not peculiar to this Animal; the like being found in Apes according
to Jacobus Sylvius, who, I am inclined to think is mistaken, in representing
it is Insertion at the Olecranum of that Animal: This part of the Latissimus
Dorsi seems a proper Instrument in turning the Os Humeri to a prone Position,
when these Animals go on all four, for the more advantageous stepping with the
Fore-feet, by raising the Os Humeri, and turning it backwards. Galen in Lib. de
Musculis, Cap. XIX. describes this Appendix of the Latissimus Dorsi, under the
Title of a small Muscle found in the Articulation of the Shoulder. The
Coracobrachialis was like that in Man, but had no division in it for any Nerve
to pass through. The Subscapularis was also like that in Man.

The Muscles employed in Bending and Extending the Cubit, differed very little
from the Humane, viz. Biceps, (Fig. 3.16.16.) Brachiaeus internus, (ib. 18.)
Gemellus, (Fig. 4. 14.) Brachiaeus externus, Anconaeus, (Fig. 4. 15. 15.) The
like is observed of these Muscles by Sylvius in Apes, who only adds that the
Extenders are remarkably large in that Animal. The Biceps in the Pygmie, had
the same double tendinous Termination, as in Man.

The Caro Musculosa Quadrata appeared in the Palm of the Pygmie: nor was there
any fleshy Belly, and long Tendon to the Palmaris; yet there was a Tendon or
Ligament extended in the Palm; the like has been often taken notice of in Men,
as Realdus Columbus also observes. The Parisians tell us, the Palmaris in
Monkeys is extraordinary large.

The Muscles of the four Fingers were, the Perforatus,( Fig. 3. 24.) Perforans,
( Fig. 3. 25.) Lumbricales; ( ib. 31.) these agreed exactly with the Humane;
but the Extensor Digitorum Communis ( Fig 4. 21.) was larger and distinct from
the Extensor minimi Digiti, as in Men and Apes, which Drelincourt observes. The
Extensor Indicis, Abductor Indicis, ( Fig. 3.30.) Extensor minimi digiti, (
Fig. 4.20.) Abductor minimi digitis ( Fig. 4. 25.) and Interossij Manus,
differed not from those in Men. All the Muscles of the Thumb resembled those in
Men, (viz.) the Flexor tertij internodij pollicis, Abductor Pollicis, ( Fig. 3.
28.) Fiexor primi and secundi ossis pollicis, ( ib. 29.) Adductor Pollicis, (
Fig. 4. 27.) Extensor Primi internodij Pollicis, ( ib. 23.) Extensor secundi
ossis Pollicis, and Extensor tertij ossis pollicis. The Muscles of the Wrist
also agreed with those in Men; viz. the Flexor Carpi Radialis, ( Fig. 3. 23.)
and Vlnaris, ( ib. 26.) the Extensor Carpi Radialis, ( ib. 19.) and Vlnaris; (
ib. 20.) The two last Drelincourt says, are also like the Humane in the
Male-Ape.

The Muscles employed in the Pronation and Supination of the Radius in the
Pygmie, were larger in proportion than those in Men. The Pronator Radij teres
(Fig. 3.20.) had a double Origin; the one from the internal Protuberance of the
Os Humeri, the other from the upper part of the Vlna: the Pronator Radij
Quadratus. The Supinator Radij Longus is taken notice of by Drelincourt in Apes
to be like that of Men. The Supinator Radij bravis, (Fig. 4. 24.) agreed
exactly with the Humane.

The Muscles of no part disagreed so much from those in Men, as those of the
Thigh of this Animal: Here was no Glutaeus minor; nor did the Glutaeus maximus
(Fig. 4. 33. 33.) resemble the Humane: It was merely Tendinous at it is Origin,
from the whole Spine of the Os Ilium; it was much longer, and not so thick as
in Man; nor were it is fleshy Fibers so divided: This Sylvius describes for the
Membranosus in Apes. The Parisians give a very imperfect account of the Musculi
Glutaei in Monkeys, where they tell us, The Muscles of the Buttock had a Figure
differing from those in Men, being shorter, by reason the Ossa Ilium in Apes
are much straiter than in Man. The Glutaeus medius was also longer than that in
Man. The Psoas magnus was also longer; which Sylvius (from it is Figure I
suppose) calls Lumbaris Biceps in Apes. The Psoas parvus was also longer and
larger, than in Man. Besides this, the Parisians tell us of two other little
Muscles in Monkeys, which have the same Origin as the Psoas; and were inserted
into the upper and inward part of the Os Pubis. The Iliacus Internus was long,
conformable to the Figure of the Os Ilium of this Animal; ( Vide Fig. 5. 28.
28) The Pectineus was not very distinct. The Triceps (Fig. 4. 37.) had no
Tendinous Termination at the lower Appendix of the Thigh Bone internally.
Jacobus Sylvius says in Apes, Tricipitis pars longissima a Tubere in Condylum:
altera portio insignis, a Tubere etiam nata, postico cruri prope toti assixa,
ad usque Cavitatem inter duos condylos mediam: tertia minima and brevissima
ossis pubis in medium and posticum Os Cruris. The Pyriformis (Fig. 4. 35.) was
like the Humane; nor did it appear less in proportion, as the Parisians
represent it, in Monkeys, who say, This Muscle, instead of taking it is rise
from the lower and external part of the Os Sacrum, it proceeded from the
Ischium near the Cavitas Cotyloides. The Marsupialis had it is Marsupium much
broader than in Men. The Quadratus Femoris was less than in Man. The Obturator
extrorsum was much larger.

The Common Muscles of the Thigh and Leg, agreed in their Situation and Number,
with those of Men. The Membranosus (Fig. 3.41.) had not so strong a Tendon to
cover the Muscles of the Thighs and Tibia, as in Man. The Sartorius (Fig. 3.
42.) agreed with the Humane. The Gracilis (Fig 3 48.) was thicker and larger
near it is Origin. The Seminervosus (Fig. 4. 40.) and Semimembranosus, differed
not from the Humane. The Biceps (Fig. 4. 41.)had it is second beginning,
somewhat lower, than in Men: The Parisians tell us, The Biceps in Monkeys had
not a double Origin as in Man, but proceeded entire, from the Knob of the
Ischium, and was inserted to the upper part of the Perona. This single Head was
in requital very thick and strong. The Rectus had a double order of Fibers, as
in Man. The Popliteus, I must confess escaped my notice. Sylvius tells us, in
Apes, it agrees with Men. The rest of the Muscles of this part, which we esteem
Proper to the Tibia, and arise from the Os Femoris, were much less than the
Humane, as the Vastus Internus, (Fig. 3. 44.) Crureus, and Vastus externus.

The Muscles of the Tarsus or Foot, agreed in Number and Situation with the
Humane; but varied in their Figure. The Gasterocnemius externus (Fig. 4. 43.)
had not so large a Belly, nor were it is Fibers so variously disposed; but it
continued fleshy much lower, than in Man. Sylvius tells us in Apes, Capita
Gemellorum (meaning this Muscle) Ossae Sesamoidca habent, firmantia in Condylis
Crus cum Tibia. The Plantaris differed not from that in Man. The Gasterocnemius
internus, or soleus, (Fig. 4. 44.) continued fleshy to the Os Calcis, as
Sylvius observed it in Apes. The Tibialis Anticus (Fig. 3. 49.) was much
larger, and continued fleshy much lower, than in Man. Sylvius observed an Os
Sesamoides in the Tendon of this Muscle in Apes. The Peroneus primus (Fig. 3.
51.) differed very little from that in Man; its Tendon having the same progress
in the Bottom of the Foot, to the Bone of the Metatarsus of the Great Toe;
which is nevertheless denied by Galen to be existent in Man; for which
Vesalius, lib. 2. cap. 59. severely Censures him. I have more than once, seen a
Boney body, placed in this Tendon at it is Flexure on the Os Cuboides in Humane
Bodies: The like is taken notice of by Sylvius in an Ape. The Peroncus secundus
differed not from that in Man. The Tibialis Posticus (Fig. 4. 45.) was not so
large as in Man.

The Muscles of the Great Toe differed from the Humane. The F^^ensor Pollicis
longus (Fig. 3. 52.) had a more Oblique progress, and was fleshy lower. The
Extensor Pollicis brevis (Fig. 3. 53.) was mu^^^arger, and it is progress on the
Foot almost transverse. The Flexor Po^^i^cis longus was pretty large. The
Flexor Pollicis brevis (Fig. 4. 47.) was very large, and inseparably joined
with the Abductor, which was very little. The Parisians tell us, The Great Toes
of the Monkeys had Muscles like those, of a Ma^s Thumb. The Extensor Digitorum
Pedis longus (Fig. 3.53.) had no Tendon implanted on the Os Metatarsi of the
Little Toe. The Perforatus (Fig. 4. 46.) Perforans, (ib. 48.) Lumbricales, and
Abductor Minimi Digiti, differed very little from those in Men. The Musculus
Extensor Digitorum brevis, and Transversalis Pedis did not appear in this
Animal.

I shall not at present give the Reader the trouble of the Reflections, that I
intended, upon the Observations made in the Anatomy of this remarkable
Creature; since I am conscious (having been so tedious already) that 'twill but
farther tire him, and my self too. I shall therefore now conclude this
Discourse, with a brief Recapitulation of the Instances I have given, wherein
our Pygmie, more resembled the Humane kind, than Apes and Monkeys do: As
likewise sum up those, wherein it differed from a Man, and imitated the
Ape-kind. The Catalogues of both are so large, that they sufficiently evince,
That our Pygmie is no Man, nor yet the Common Ape; but a sort of Animal between
both; and though a Biped, yet of the Quadrumanus-kind; though some Men too, have
been observed to use their Feet like Hands, as I have seen several.

The Orang-Outang or Pygmie more resembled a Man, than Apes and Monkeys do.
1. IN having the Hair of the Shoulder tending downwards; and that of the Arm,
upwards. 2. In the Face 'twas liker a Man; having the Forehead larger, and the
Rostrum or Chin shorter. 3. In the outward Ear likewise except as to it is
Cartilage, which was thinner as in Apes. 4. In the Fingers; which were much
thicker than in Apes. 5. In being in all respects designed by Nature, to walk
erect; whereas Apes and Monkeys want a great many Advantages to do so. 6. The
Nates or Buttocks larger than in the Ape-kind. 7. It had Calves in it is Legs.
8. The Shoulders and Breast were more spread. 9. The Heel was longer. 10. The
Membrana Adiposa placed here, next to the Skin. 11. The Peritonaeum in the
Groin entire; and not perforated, or protruded, as in Apes and Monkeys. 12. The
Intestines or Guts much longer. 13. The Intestines being very different in
their bigness, or largeness of their Canalis. 14. In having a Caecum or
Appendicula Vermiformis, which Apes and Monkeys have not: and in not having the
beginning of the Colon so projected or extended, as Apes and Monkeys have. 15.
The Insertion of the Ductus Bilarius and the Ductus Pancreaticus in a Man, the
Pygmie, and an Ape was at the same Orifice. In a Monkey there was two Inches
distance. 16. The Colon was here longer. 17. The Liver not divided into Lobes,
as in Apes and Monkeys; but entire, as in Man. 18. The Biliary Vessels, the
same as in Man. 19. The Spleen the same. 20. The Pancreas the same. 21. The
Number of the Lobes of the Lungs, the same as a Man's. 22. The Pericardium
fastened to the Diaphragm, as in Man; but is not so in Apes and Monkeys. 23.
The Cone of the Heart, not so pointed, as in Apes. 24. It had not those Pouches
in the Chaps, as Apes and Monkeys have. 25. The Brain was abundantly larger
than in Apes; and all it is Parts exactly formed like the Humane Brain. 26. The
Cranium more globous; and twice as big as an Ape's or Monkey's. 27. All the
Sutures here, like the Humane: And in the Lambdoidal uture were the Ossa
triquetra Wormiana. In Apes and Monkeys it is otherwise, 28. It had an Os
Cribriforme, and the Crista Galli; which Monkeys have not. 29. The Sella Equina
here, the same as in Man; in the Ape-kind it is more rising and eminent. 30. The
Processus Pterygoides, as in Man: In Apes and Monkeys they are wanting. 31. The
Ossa Bregmatis and Temporum here the same as in Man. In Monkeys they are
different. 32. The Os Zygomaticum in the Pygmie was small; in the Monkey and
Apes it is bigger. 33. The Shape of the Teeth more resembled the Humane,
especially the Dentes Canini and Molares. 34. The Transverse Apophyses of the
Vertebrae of the Neck, and the Sixth and Seventh Vertebra, were liker the
Humane, than these Parts in Apes and Monkeys are. 35. The Vertebrae of the Neck
had not those Foramina for transmitting the Nerves; which Apes have and Man has
not. 36. The Vertebrae of the Back, and their Apophyses Rectae like the Humane:
and in the lower Vertebrae but two Apophyses infernae; not four, as in Apes.
37. There were but five Vertebrae of the Loins here, as in Man: in Apes and
Monkeys there are six. 38. The Spines of the Lumbal Vertebrae strait, as in
Man. 39. The Os Sacrum was composed of five Vertebrae, as in Man: in Apes and
Monkeys there are but three Vertebrae. 40. The Os Coccygis had but four Bones,
and these not perforated, as it is in Man: In Monkeys there are more Bones, and
they are perforated. 41. In the Pygmie there were but seven Costae verae; and
the Extremes of the Nothae were Cartilaginous; and the Ribs were articulated to
the body of the Vertebrae. In Apes and Monkeys there are eight Costae verae;
and the Extremes of the Nothae are ossious; and the Articulation is in the
Interstices of the Vertebrae. 42. The Os Sterni in the Pygmie was broad, as in
a Man: in the Monkey it is narrow. 43. The Bones of the four Fingers much larger
than in the Ape-kind. 44. The Thigh Bone in it is Articulation, and all other
respects, like the Humane. 45. The Patella round, not long; single, not double;
as it is said to be in Apes. 46. In the Heel, the Tarsus, and Metatarsus, the
Pygmie was like a Man. 47. The middle Toe in the Pygmie was not the longest, as
it is in the Ape-kind. 48. These Muscles, viz. The Obliquus Inferior Capitis,
the Pyriformis and Biceps Femoris, were like the Humane; whereas the same in
Apes and Monkeys are different. And Note, That all the other Muscles that are
not otherwise specified in the following Catalogue, were like the Humane also;
but whether all the same Muscles in Apes and Monkeys resemble the Humane, Could
not be determined, for want of a Subject to compare them with, or Observations
made by others.
The Orang-Outang or Pygmie differed from a Man, and resembled more the Ape and
Monkey-kind.
1. IN the littleness of it is Stature. 2. In the flatness of the Nose and the
slit in the Alae Narium. 3. In having a rising Ridge of the Cranium under the
Eyebrows. 4. In being more hairy behind, than before. 5. In having the Thumb
so little, though larger than in the Ape-kind. 6. In having the Palm of the Hand
longer and narrower. 7. In the length of the Toes. 8. In having the Great Toe
set at a distance from the other, like a Thumb; and being Quadrumanus, like the
Ape-kind. 9. In having the Shoulder and Thigh shorter. 10. In having the Arms
longer. 11. In having no pendulous Scrotum. 12. In the largeness of the
Omentum. 13. The Gallbladder long and slender. 14. The Kidneys rounder than in
Men; and the Tubuli Vrinarij different. 15. The Bladder of Urine longer. 16. In
having no Fraenum to the Praeputium. 17. In having the Bony Orbit of the Eye so
much protruded inwards, toward the Brain. 18. It had not those two Cavities
under the Sella Turcica, as in Man. 19. The Processus Mastoides and Styloides
very small, almost wanting. 20. The Bones of the Nose flat. 21. In the Number
of the Teeth, it resembled the Ape-kind. 22. The Vertebrae of the Neck, short
as in the Ape-kind and flat before, not round; and their Spines, not bifide, as
in Man. 23. In the first Vertebra of the Neck; there was no Spine. 24. In an
Ape the Tenth Vertebra of the Back; in a Man the Twelfth; in the Pygmie the
Thirteenth Vertebra, infra s^prave suscipitur. 25. The Os Sacrum altogether
like the Ape-kind, only in the number of the Vertebrae. 26. In having Thirteen
Ribs on a side: a Man has but Twelve. 27. The Bone of the Thumb but small. 28.
The Os Ilium perfectly like the Ape-kind; being longer, narrower, and not so
Concave as in Man. 29. The Bones of the Toes in their length, and the Great Toe
in it is Structure imitated the Ape-kind. 30. These Muscles were wanting in the
Pygmie, which are always found in Men; viz. Occipitales, Frontales, Dilatatores
Alarm Nast, seu Elevatores Labij Superioris, Interspinales Colli, Glutaei
minimi, Extensor Digitorum Pedis brevis, and Transversalis Pedis. 31. These
Muscles did not appear in the Pygmie, and are sometimes wanting too in Humane
Bodies; viz. Pyramidales; Caro musculosa Quadrata; the long Tendon and fleshy
Belly of the Palmaris; Attollens Auriculam; and Retrahens Auriculam. 32. The
Elevatores Clavicularum are in the Pygmie and the Ape-kind, and not in Man. 33.
These Muscles resembled those in Apes and Monkeys, and differed from the
Humane, viz. Longus Colli, Pectoralis, Latissimus Dorsi Glutaeus maximus and
medius, Psoas magnus and parvus, Iliacus internus, and the Gasterocnemius
internus. 34. These Muscles differed likewise from the Humane, viz. the
Deltoides; the Pronator Radij teres; the Extensor Pollicis brevis.
The Explanation of the Figures.
Figure the First
REpresents the Fore-parts of the Orang-Outang or Pygmie, in an Erect Posture:
Where you may observe the largeness of the Head; and broadness of the Forehead;
the jutting out of the Eyebrows; the Eyes somewhat sunk; the Nose flat; the
Face without hair and wrinkled; the Teeth like the Humane; the Chin short; the
Ears standing off from the Head; the Head hairy; the Shoulders spread and
large; the Arms and Palms of the Hands long; the Nails like those in a Man; the
Hair of the Shoulder inclining downwards, and that on the Arms, upwards; the
Fingers large; the Thumb little; the Breast full chested and spread; the Mammae
or Teats placed as in Man; the Belly flat; the Navil as in Man; the Penis
halfway covered with the Prepuce, which had no Fraenum; no pendulous Scrotum
here; the Thighs a little divaricated; the Legs long and with Calves; the Foot
like a Hand, having long Toes, and the Great Toe placed at a distance from the
others, like a Thumb; the Feet, Hands, Face, Ears, and Penis without Hair; and
all the Foreparts of the Body rather less hairy than here represented; and the
Head is too much shrunk down between the Shoulders.

The Second Figure
REpresents the Hinder Parts of the Pygmie in an Erect Posture likewise; where
may be observed the Globous Figure of the Head; the straitness of the Back; and
that it is more hairy behind, than before; the Fingers of the right Hand are
represented bending, to show the Action, when, it goes on all four; for then it
places only the Knuckles, not the Palms of the Hands to the Ground. The Sole of
the left Foot, by reason of the length of the Toes, and the setting on of the
Great Toe, looks like the Palm of the Hand: but the right, having so long a
Heel, and its Toes being hid, appears rather like a Foot, and upon occasion
performs the Office of both, either of a Foot or Hand. A little above the Anus,
there is a black Spot, which represents a small Protuberance of the Os Coccygis.

The Third Figure
REpresents the Muscles which appear on the Forepart of the Body.
A. Part of the Coronary Suture. B. The Division of the Cranium made by the
Saw. c. The Meatus Auditorius. d. Part of the Os Jugale, or Zygomaticum. e. The
Parotid Gland. * The Salival Duct. f. The Inferior Maxillary Gland. g. g. The
Claviculae. h. Part of the Spina Scapulae, as joined to the Clavicle. j. The
Nerves, and Blood Vessels which pass to the Arm. k. The Trunk of the Nerve in
the left Arm, that goes to the Fingers. l. A large Trunk of the Artery, and a
Nerve in the Cubit, as in Humane Bodies. m. m. The Internal Protuberances of
the Os Humeri. n. The Radius of the left Arm made bare. o. The Vmbilicus, or
Navil. p. The Linea Alba. q. q. The Tendons of the Oblique Muscles, called
Linea Semilunaris. r. r. The Tunica Vaginalis, containing the Vasa
Praeparantia, etc. s. s. The Testes or Stones. t. The Blood Vessels of the
Thigh, as they pass under the Inguinal Glands. T. The Os pubis. V. The
Ligamentum suspensorium Penis. u. The Great Trochanter. w. The Penis. x. x. The
two Patellae. y. y. The internal and lower Appendix of the Os Femoris. z. z.
The Tibia.
No 1. The Musculus Temporalis. 2. The Orbicularis Palpebrarum. 3. Zygomaticus,
seu distortor oris. 4. Elevator Labij superioris proprius. 5. Elevator Labij
inferioris proprius. 6. Masseter. 7. Buccinator. 8. 8. Mastoideus. 9.
Sternohyoideus. X. Part of the Corocohyoideus. 11. Part of the Digastricus, and
it is Insertion into the Chin. 12. Elevator Claviculae, which Muscle is not in
Man, but in the Pygmie and Apes. 13. Part of the Complexus Capitis. 14. Part of
the Cucularis. 15. 15. Deltoides. 15. 16. The Biceps. 17. The thin Tendinous
Expansion of the Biceps which involves the Muscles of the Cubit, as in Man. 18.
Part of the Brachaeus internus. 19. The Tendinous Elongation of the Latissimus
Dorsi, which is found in the Pygmie, and in Apes and Monkeys; and not in Man;
near it is Insertion into the Internal Protuberance of the Os Humeri. 20. 20.
The Pronator Radij teres. That of the left side, being dissected from it is
Insertion, and left at it is two Originals. 21. 21. The Supinator Radij Longus.
22. Part of the Extensor Radialis. 23.23. The Flexor Radialis, that of the left
Arm hanging at it is insertion. 24. 24. The Perforatus; that of the left side
hanging by its Tendons on the Palm of the Hand. 25. The Perforans; a little
raised in the left Arm. 26. The Tendon of the Flexor Vlnaris as it runs to the
Carpus. 27. A Tendinous Expansion, like the Palmaris in Man; but here was no
Muscle, which is often seen in Humane Bodies. 28. 28. The Abductor Pollicis.
29. The Flexor Secundi internodij Pollicis. 30. Abductor Indicis, 31. 31. The
Lumbricales. 32. The Abductor minimi digiti. 33. The Pectoralis; that of the
left side being raised, to show the decussation of it is Fibers, as in Man. 34.
Part of the Musculus subclavius. 35. Serratus minor anticus. 36. 36. The
Intercostales externi. 37.37. The Serratus major anticus; where it is indented
with the Musculus obliquus descendens. 38. 38. The Obliquus descendens. 39. The
Obliquus ascendens, as it appeared after the descendens was removed. 40.40. The
Musculi Recti, with their Paragraphs or Inscriptions as in Man 41. 41. The
Musculus communis Membranosi. 42. 42. The Sartorius. 43. 43. The Rectus
Femoris. 44. 44. The Vastus internus. 45. Part of the Vastus externus. 46. 46.
Parts of the Triceps. 47 47. The Pectinaeus. 48. The Gracilis. 49. 49. The
Tibialis Anticus. 50. Part of the Gasterocnemius. 51. Parts of the Peronei. 52.
The Extensor Pollicis longus. 53. The Extensor Pollicis brevis, which differed
in this Animal, from that in Man. 54. The Tendons of the Extensor Communis
digitorum, as they pass between the Interossij. 55. The Abductor minimi digiti.
56. The Pronator Radij Quadratus. 57. Part of the Supinator Radij brevis; at
it is Insertion to the Radius.
Figure the Fourth
Shows the Muscles of the Back-part of the Body.
a. THE Sagittal Suture. b. The Lambdoidal Suture. c. c. c. The Spines of the
Superior Vertebrae of the Thorax, and of one of the Inferior of the Neck. d.
The Extremity of the Clavicle, where it is connected to the Spine of the
Scapula. e. The Spine of the Scapula. f. The lower Angle of the Scapula. g. The
upper part of the Os Humeri, made bare, by raising the Deltoid Muscle. h. h.
The Acromion or Elbow. i. The External Protuberance of the Os Humeri, where the
upper part of the Radius, is Articulated. k. The Vlna. l. l. The Spines of the
Back and Loins. m. m. The Spines of the Ossa Ilium. n. The Os Coccygis. o. The
Great Trochanter. p. The Trunk of the Great Crural Nerve. q. q. The Ossa
Ischij. r. r. r. The Crural Nerves in the Hams. s. s. The Os Calcis. t. t. The
Malleolus Internus. u. The Malleolus externus. w. w. The Great Toe. x. x. The
four little Toes. y. y. The Pelvis left open, by taking out the Anus with the
Rectum. No 1.1.1.1. The Musculus Cucularis, raised on the right side, and left
fastened to the Occiput, and to its Insertion at the Spine of the Scapula and
Clavicle. 2. Part of the Splenius. 3. Part of the Mastoideus. 4. Part of the
Complexus. 5. Part of the Levator Scapulae. 6. Rhomboides. 7. Part of the
Serratus superior posticus. 8. Supraspinatus. 9. Infraspinatus. X. The Teres
minor, which is larger here than in Man. 11. The Teres major. 12. The Deltoides
raised. 13. 13. 13. 13. The Latissimus Dorsi, on the right side in situ in the
left, freed from it is Original and hanging down. 14. The Biceps Externus seu
Gemellus. 15. The Anchonaeus. 16. Part of the Brachaeus internus. 17. Part of
the Biceps internus. 18. The Supinator Radij longus. 19. The Extensor Carpi
Radialis. 20. 20. The Extensor Carpi Vlnaris. 21. 21. The Extensor Communis
digitorum, on the right side hanging by its Tendons. 22. 22. The Extensor
minimi digiti, on the right side hanging down. 23. The Extensores Pollicis. 24.
The Supinator Radij brevis. 25. The Abductor minimi digiti. 26. The Musculi
interossei. 27. The Abductor Pollicis. 28. The Longissimus Dorsi. 29. The
Sacrolumbalis. 30. 30. The Intercostales. 31. Part of the Serratus major
anticus. 32. The Serratus inferior posticus. 33. The Glutaeus maximus on the
left side in situ, on the right freed from its Origin, and left at it is
Insertion. 34. The Glutaeus medius. 35. The Pyriformis. 36. The Marsupialis s.
Obturator. 37. 37. Part of the Triceps. 38. 38. The Gracilis. 39. The
Semimembranosus. 40. The Seminervosus. 41. The Biceps femoris. 42. Part of the
Vastus externus. 43. 43. The Gasterocnemius externus, that of the right side
hanging to its Insertion, at the Os Calcis. 44. The Gasterocnemius Internus.
45. Part of the flexor Digitorum perforatus. 46. The fleshy part of the flexor
Digitorum perforatus. 47. The flexor Ossis Pollicis, together with the Abductor
Pollicis, raised from it is Origin, and hanging down. 48. The Musculi
Lumbricales.
The fifth Figure
Represents the Sceleton, or the Bones.
1. THE Os Frontis. 2. The Os Bregmatis. 3. Part of the Os Occipitis. 4. Os
Temporale, seu Squammosum. 5. Os Jugale, seu Zygomaticum. 6. The first Bone of
the Upper Jaw. 7. The Os Lachrymale. 8. The Os Narium. 9. The fourth Bone of
the Upper Jaw. 10. The upper part of the Os Sphaenoides. 11. The lower Jaw. a.
The Processus Condyloides of the lower Jaw. b. The Processus Corone. c. The
Coronal Suture. d. The Sutura Ossis Temporalis, seu Squammosi. e. A Foramen for
the passing the Nerves, and the Blood Vessels in the upper Jaw. f. A like
Foramen in the under Jaw. g. Where the Skull was sawed, to take out the Brain.
h. The Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck. j. j. The Oblique
ascending and descending Processes of the Neck.
12. 12. The Vertebrae of the Neck. 13. 13. The Claviculae or Collar Bones. K.
K. The Connection of the Claviculae, to the Spina Scapulae.
14.14. The Internal parts of the Scapula. l. l. The Processus Chorocoides
Scapulae.
15. 15. The Os Humeri...A Sinus for receiving the External Tendon of the head
of the Biceps. m. m. A Sinus for receiving the Prominence ( n.n.) of the Vlna
upon bending the Arm.
16. 16. The Vlna. o. Part of the Olecranon of the Vlna of the left Arm.
17. 17. The Radius. p. A Prominence of the Radius, to which the internal great
Tendon of the Musculus Biceps is inserted.
18. 18. The Bones of the Carpus, which in a great measure were Cartilaginous.
19. 19. The Bones of the Metacarpus. 20. 20. The Bones of the Thumb. 21. 21.
The Bones of the Fingers. 22. 22. The Sternum or Os Pectoris. 23. The Cartilago
Ensiformis. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. The Thirteen Ribs of
each side,
24. The Vertebrae of the Back. 25. The Vertebrae of the Loins. q. The
Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins. r. The Foramina for the
passage of the Nerves.
26. The Os Sacrum. 27. The Os Coccygis. 28. 28. The Os Ilium. 29. The Os
Pubis. 30. The Os Ischij. s. s. The Cartilaginous Conjunction of the Os Ilium
with the Os Pubis and Ischij at the Acetabulum. t. t. The large Foramen of the
Os Pubis and Ischij.
31. 31. The Os femoris. v. v. The Head of the Os femoris in the Acetabulum. w.
w. The Great Trochanter, which was Cartilaginous. X. The lesser Trochanter.
32. 32. The Patella, which was Cartilaginous. 33. 33. The Tibia. 34. 34. The
Fibula. 35. 35. The Os Calcis. 36. 36. The Astragalus. 37. The Os Cubiforme.
38. The Os Naviculare, seu Cuneiforme majus. 39. The Ossa Cuneiformia minora.
40. 40. The Ossa Metatarsi. 41. 41. The Ossa Digitorum. 42. 42. The Bones of
the Great Toe. y. The Malleolus externus. z. The Malleous internus. * * * *
Signify, that those Parts were Cartilaginous.

The sixth Figure
Represents the Stomach, Intestines, Pancreas, Spleen, Liver, etc.
A. A. THE back side of the Stomach, it being turned upwards. B. Part of the
Oesophagus or Gullet, before it joins with the upper or left Orisice of the
Stomach. C. The right Orisice of the Stomach, or Pylorus. a. a. The Extremities
of the Vasa Brevia, which pass between the Spleen and the Stomach. b. b. etc.
Diverse Lymphatick Glands on the Stomach. D. The Superior Coronary Arteries and
Veins, and their Ramifications. E. E. The Inferior Coronary Blood Vessels of
the Stomach, which sends Branches also to the Omentum. F. F. The Omentum or
Caul turned up, to show it is lower Leaf. G. G. The Liver, like the Humane; and
not divided into Lobes, as it is in Apes. c. A small Lobe of the Liver at the
entrance of the Vena Porta. d. The Fissure or Cleft in the Liver at the
entrance of the Vmbilical Vein. f. f. The Gall Bladder. H. The beginning of the
Duodenum. I. I. The Pancreas. g. g. The Blood Vessels of the Spleen, especially
a Branch of the Vena Porta. K. K. The Spleen. L. L. L. The Small Guts. M. The
Ileon just before it enters the Colon. N. The beginning of the Colon. h. h. One
of the Ligaments of the colon. O. O. The Caecum, or Appendicula Vermiformis. P.
P. The Colon in its whole Progress, to the Rectum. j. j. Part of the
Mesenterie. k. k. The Glands of the Mesenterie. l. That part of the Mesenterie,
which is connected to the Caecum, or the Mesocaecum. m. The Mesocolon, or that
Part of the Mesenterie that is fastened to the Colon. Q. The upper part of the
Intestinum Rectum.
The seventh Figure
Shows the Organs of GENERATION.
A. THE back part of the Bladder of Urine, the greatest part of the Bladder
being cut off. B. The Penis. C. C. The two Vreters. D. D. The Vasa Deferentia.
E. E. The Vesiculae Seminales. F. The Glandulae Prostatae, or Corpus Glandosum.
G. The Bulb of the Cavernous Body of the Vrethra, covered with the Musculus
accelerator Vrinae seu Spermatis. a. a. The two Productions of the last
mentioned Muscle, which are inserted to the two Cavernous Bodies of the Penis,
on each side the Vrethra, by which means that part of the Vrethra is comprest,
and it is Contents forced out. b. b. The beginning of the two Cavernous Bodies
of the Penis.
H. The Cavernous Body of the Vrethra. j. One of the Transverse Muscles of the
Penis, called the Third Pair. K. K. The Musculi Directores Penis.
The Eighth Figure
Exhibits part of the Musculus Latissimus Dorsi dissected.
A. A. THAT part of the Muscle that lies on the Back, as in Humane Bodies. B.
It Is Tendon, which is inserted to the Os Humeri, as in Men. c. The Tendinous
Extremity of a fleshy Production of this Muscle, which is implanted on the
Internal Protuberance of the Os Humeri of this Animal; as it is also in Apes and
Monkeys.
The ninth Figure
Represents the Vrinary Parts and Organs of Generation.
A. THE left Kidney entire. a. a. The Membrana Adiposa, partly freed from the
Kidney, and turned back. B. The Right Kidney opened, to show its Glandulous
Substance, and Vrinary Tubes, and the Pelvis. b The Tubuli Vrinarij which arise
from the Glandulous Substance, and like Lines drawn from a Circumference to a
Center, pass to the Fimbria or Edge c c, in Man to the several Papille, where
their Orifices open and empty themselves into the Pelvis. c. c. The said
Fimbria, of a Semicircular Figure, where the Extremes of the Vrinary Tubes
discharge the Urine into the Pelvis, or rather Funnel of the kidneys. d. The
Pelvis or Infundibulum: For being large here in the Kidney, and running into a
long slender Stem in the Vreter, it more properly represents a Funnel, and
serves for the Conveying the Urine thence into the Bladder. C. C. The Glandulae
Renales. D. D. The Descending Trunk of the Arteria Magna or Aorta, below the
Diaphr^gm. d. The Caeliac Artery. d. The Arteria Mesenterica superior. g. The
Arteria Mesenterica inferior. E. The Descending Trunk of the Vena Cava. F. F.
The Emulgent Arteries. f. f. The Emulgent Veins. G. G. The Vreters. H. The
Bladder of Urine. h. h. The Spermatick Veins which discharge themselves into
the Vena Cava, and the left Emulgent, as in Man. j. The Spermatick Arteries, as
they arise from the forepart of the Trunk of the Aorta. J. J. The Vasa
Praeparantia Pampini-formia, seu Corpora Pyramidalia. K. K. The Testes or
Stones, which appear here flaccid, having been kept some time, before the
figure was taken. L. L. The Epididymis, making several Convolutions on the body
of the Testes. M. Part of the Cremaster Muscle. N. N. The Vasa Deferentia. O.
O. The Vesiculae Seminales. P. The Prostates or Corpus Glandosum. Q. The
Musculus Erector Penis of the right side. R. The upper part or Dorsum Penis. S.
The Corpora Cavernosa Penis, cut transverse. T. The Vrethra. k. k. The main
Trunk of the Iliac Artery and Vein. l. l. The Vmbilical Arteries. m. m. The
Artery that goes to the Penis. n. n. The Artery that goes to the Bladder of
Urine. o. The internal Iliac Vein and Artery. p. The external Iliac Vein and
Artery. q. The Vena Pudenda seu Penis. r. r. The Nerves of the Penis. s. s.
The Arteries of the Penis.
The tenth Figure
Demonstrates the Parts of the Thorax with the Arteria Asperae and Larynx.
A. THE forepart of the Os Hyoides. a. a. Its two ends, that are connected to
the two Superior long Processes of the Cartilago Scutiformis. B. The
Epiglottis. C. The Cartilago Scutiformis. b. The Prominent part of the Annulary
Cartilage. D. D. The Musculi Hyothyroidei. E. E. The Musculi Sternothyroidei.
c. c. The Musculi Cricothyroidei. F. The Arteria Aspera, or Windpipe. G. It Is
division, where it passes to the right and left Lobes of the Lungs. H. H. The
Lungs. J. The Cone of the Heart. K. The right Ventricle of the Heart here
opened, so that part of the Polypus contained there, came in view. L. Part of
the Pericardium, on the Basis or upper part of the Heart. M. M. The Thymus,
lying on the Pericardium. N. The Mediastinum freed from the Sternum, and turned
to the right side. O. O. The two Subclavian Arteries. P. The Carotid Arteries.
The eleventh Figure
Shows the Polypus or Coagulated Blood found in the left Venticle of the Heart.
A. THAT part contained in the Ventricle. B. Three Impressions, formed by the
Semilunary Valves. C. That part, that lay in the Aorta. D. That part that
passed into the descending Trunk of the Aorta. E. Those Ramuli of it that lay
in the ascendent Branches of the Aorta.
The twelfth Figure
The Polypus found in the right Ventricle of the Heart.
A. THAT part contained in the Ventricle. B. The Impressions made by the
Valvulae sigmoides. C. The Branches leading to the right and left Lobes of the
Lungs.
The thirteenth Figure
Represents the Basis of the Brain with the Medulla Oblongata, and the Nerves
and Arteries cut off.
A. A. THE two anterior or fore Lobes of the Brain. B. B. The two posterior or
hinder Lobes of the Brain. a.a. Two depressions in the fore Lobes caused by the
rising of the Frontal bone, that composes the upper part of the Orbit of the
Eye; which in this Animal, and in Monkeys, is more eminent than in Man. b. b.
The division of the right and left Hemisphere of the Brain, where the Palx is
placed. This forepart of the Brain in this Animal appeared somewhat flatter
than in Man. C. C. The Cerebellum. D. The Principium Medullae, Spinalis, or
that part of the Caudex Medullaris, where the Corpora Pyramidalia and Olivaria
are placed, as in an Humane Brain. E. E. The Protuberantia Annularis, or Pons
Verolij. e. e. The Carotid Arteries. f. f. The Vertebral Arteries. g. The
Cervical Artery. h. The Communicant Branches between the Cervical and Carotid
Arteries. j. A small Artery descending down the Spinal Marrow. k. The
Infundibulum. l. l. The Glandulae duae albae pone Infundibulum,, or rather two
Medullary Protuberances, there. m. m. Parts of the Crura Medullae Oblongatae
before they unite under the Pons Verolij, or Annular Protuberance. 1. The
Olfactory, or first pair of Nerves. 2. The Optic, or second pair of Nerves. 3.
The Nervi Oculorum motorij, or third pair of Nerves. 4. The Pathetick, or
fourth pair of Nerves. 5. The fifth pair of Nerves. 6. The sixth pair of
Nerves. 7. The Auditory, or seventh pair of Nerves. 8. The Par Vagum, or eighth
pair of Nerves. 9. The ninth pair of Nerves. 10. The tenth pair of Nerves,
which may be reckoned rather the first pair of the Neck. * * The Nervus
accessorius, that goes to the eighth pair, or Par Vagum.
The fourteenth Figure.
Represents the inward Parts of the Brain, as divided by an Horizontal Section;
where the Basis of the Brain is reflected upwards.
A. A. PArts of the hinder Lobes of the Brain. B. B. The upper part of the
Brain next it is Hemispheres, divided from the lower. C. C. The lower part next
the Basis, reflected or turned up. a. a. The Cortical or Cinericious part of
the Brain, which is Glandulous. b. b. The Medullary part, that runs up between
the Cortical, and is Nervous. D. The Corpus Transversale. E. The Fornix. e. e.
The Crura Fornicis. f. The two Roots of the Fornix.






















A PHILOLOGICAL ESSAY Concerning the PYGMIES, THE CYNOCEPHALI, THE SATYRS and
SPHINGES OF THE ANCIENTS,

Wherein it will appear that they were all either APES or MONKEYS; and not MEN,
as formerly pretended.

By Edward Tyson M. D.

A Philological Essay Concerning the PYGMIES OF THE ANCIENTS.
HAVING had the Opportunity of Dissecting this remarkable Creature, which not
only in the outward shape of the Body, but likewise in the structure of many of
the Inward Parts, so nearly resembles a Man, as plainly appears by the Anatomy
I have here given of it, it suggested the Thought to me, whether this sort of
Animal, might not give the Foundation to the Stories of the Pygmies? and astord
an occasion not only to the Poets, but Historians too, of inventing the many
Fables and wonderful and merry Relations, that are transmitted down to us
concerning them? I must consess, I could never before entertain any other
Opinion about them, but that the whole was a Fiction: and as the first Account
we have of them, was from a Poet, so that they were only a Creature of the
Brain, produced by a warm and wanton Imagination, and that they never had any
Existence or Habitation elsewhere.

In this Opinion I was the more confirmed, because the most diligent Enquiries
of late into all the Parts of the inhabited World, could never discover any
such Puny diminutive Race of Mankind. That they should be totally destroyed by
the Cranes, their Enemies, and not a Straggler here and there left remaining,
was a Fate, that even those Animals that are constantly preyed upon by others,
never undergo. Nothing therefore appeared to me more Fabulous and Romantic,
than their History, and the Relations about them, that Antiquity has delivered
to us. And not only Strabo of old, but our greatest Men of Learning of late,
have wholly exploded them, as a mere sigment; invented only to amus^^ and
divert the Reader with the Comical Narration of their Achievements, believing
that there were never any such Creatures in Nature.

This Opinion had so fully obtained with me, that I never thought it worth the
Enquiry, how they came to invent such Extravagant Stories: Nor should I now,
but upon the Occasion of Dissecting this Animal: For observing that it is called
even to this day in the Indian or Malabar Language, Orang-Outang, i.e. a Man of
the Woods, or Wild-men; and being brought from Africa, that part of the World,
where the Pygmies are said to inhabit; and it is present Stature likewise
tallying so well with that of the Pygmies of the Ancients; these Considerations
put me upon the search, to inform my self farther about them, and to examine,
whether I could meet with any thing that might illustrate their History. For I
thought it strange, that if the whole was but a mere Fiction, that so many
succeeding Generations should be so fond of preserving a Story, that had no
Foundation at all in Nature; and that the Ancients should trouble themselves so
much about them. If therefore I can make out in this Essay, that there were
such Animals as Pygmies; and that they were not a Race of Men, but Apes; and
can discover the Authors, who have forged all, or most of the idle Stories
concerning them; and show, how the Cheat in after Ages has been carried on, by
embalming the Bodies of Apes, then exposing them for the Men of the Country,
from whence they brought them: if I can do this, I shall think my time not
wholly lost, nor the trouble altogether useless, that I have had in this
Enquiry.

My Design is not to justify all the Relations that have been given of this
Animal, even by Authors of reputed Credit; but, as far as I can, to distinguish
Truth from Fable; and herein, if what I assert amounts to a Probability, it is
all I pretend to. I shall accordingly endeavor to make it appear, that not
only the Pygmies of the Ancients, but also the Cynocephali, and Satyrs and
Sphinges were only Apes or Monkeys, not Men, as they have been represented. But
the Story of the Pygmies being the greatest Imposture, I shall chiefly concern
my self about them, and shall be more concise on the others, since they will
not need so strict an Examination.

We will begin with the Poet Homer, who is generally owned as the first
Inventor of the Fable of the Pygmies, if it be a Fable, and not a true Story,
as I believe will appear in the Account I shall give of them. Now Homer only
mentions them in a Simile, wherein he compares the Shouts that the Trojans
made, when they were going to join Battle with the Graecians, to the great
Noise of the Cranes, going to fight the Pygmies: he faith Homer. Iliad. lib. 3.
ver. 4.
, (...)
(...)
(...). i. e.
Quae simul ac fugere Imbres, Hyememque Nivalem
Cum magno Oceani clangore ferantur ad undas
Pygmaeis pugnamque Viris, caedesque ferentes.


Or as Helius Eobanus Hessus paraphrases the whole Homeri Ilias Latino Carmine
reddita ab Helio Ecbano Hesso.
. Postquam sub Ducibus digesta per agmina stabant
Quaeque suis, Equitum turmae, Peditumque Cohortes,
Obvia torquentes Danais vestigia Troes
Ibant, sublato Campum clamore replentes:
Non secus ac cuneata Gruum sublime volantum
Agmina, dum fugiunt Imbres, ac srigora Brumae,
Per Coelum matutino clangore feruntur,
Oceanumque petunt, mortem exitiumque cruentum
Irrita Pigmaeis moturis arma ferentes.


By (...) therefore, which is the Passage upon which they have grounded all
their fabulous Relations of the Pygmies, why may not Homer mean only Pygmies or
Apes like Men. Such an Expression is very allowable in a Poet, and is elegant
and significant, especially since there is so good a Foundation in Nature for
him to use it, as we have already seen, in the Anatomy of the Orang-Outang. Nor
is a Poet tied to that strictness of Expression, as an Historian or
Philosopher; he has the liberty of pleasing the Reader's Fancy, by Pictures
and Representations of his own. If there be a becoming likeness, it is all that
he is accountable for. I might therefore here make the same Apology for him, as
Strabo Strabo Geograph. lib. 1. p. m. 25.
does on another account for his Geography, (...), That he said it, not through
Ignorance, but to please and delight: Or, as in another place he expresses
himself Strabo ibid. p. m. 30.
, (...). Homer did not make this slip through Ignorance of the true History, but
for the Beauty of his Poem. So that though he calls them Men Pygmies, yet he may
mean no more by it, than that they were like Men. As to his Purpose, 'twill
serve altogether as well, whether this bloody Battle be fought between the
Cranes and Pygmaean Men, or the Cranes and Apes, which from their Stature he
calls Pygmies, and from their shape Men; provided that when the Cranes go to
engage, they make a mighty terrible noise, and clang enough to fright these
little Wights their mortal Enemies. To have called them only Apes, had been
flat and low, and lessened the grandieur of the Battle. But this Periphrasis of
them, (...), raises the Reader's Fancy, and surprises him, and is more
becoming the Language of an Heroic Poem.

But how came the Cranes and Pygmies to fall out? What may be the Cause of this
Mortal Feud, and constant War between them? For Brutes, like Men, don't war
upon one another, to raise and increase their Glory, or to enlarge their
Empire. Unless I can acquit my self herein, and assign some probable Cause
hereof, I may incur the same Censure as Strabo Strabo Geograph. lib. 2. p. m.
48.
passed on several of the Indian Historians, (...), for reviewing the Homerical
Fight of the Cranes and Pygmies, which he looks upon only as a fiction of the
Poet. But this had been very unbecoming Homer to take a Simile (which is
designed for illustration) from what had no Foundation in Nature. His
Betrachomyomachia, it is true, was a mere Invention, and never otherwise
esteemed: But his Geranomachia has all the likelihood of a true Story. And
therefore I shall enquire now what may be the just Occasion of this Quarrel.

Athenaeus Athenaei Deipnosoph. lib. 9. p. m. 393.
out of Philochorus, and so likewise AElian AElian. Hist. Animal. lib. 15. cap.
29.
, tell us a Story, That in the Nation of the Pygmies the Male-line failing, one
Gerana was their Queen; a Woman of an admired Beauty, and whom the Citizens
worshipped as a Goddess; but she became so vain and proud, as to prefer her
own, before the Beauty of all the other Goddesses, at which they grew enraged;
and to punish her for her Insolence, Athenaeus tells us that 'twas Diana, but
AElian says 'twas Juno that transformed her into a Crane, and made her an
Enemy to the Pygmies that worshipped her before. But since they are not agreed
which Goddess 'twas, I shall let this pass.

Pomponius Mela will have it, and I think some others, that these cruel
Engagements use to happen, upon the Cranes coming to devour the Corn the
Pygmies had sowed; and that at last they became so victorious, as not only to
destroy their Corn, but them also: For he tells us Pomp. Mela de situ Orbis,
lib. 3. cap. 8.
, Fuere interius Pygmaei, minutum genus, and quod pro satis frugibus contra
Grues dimicando, defecit. This may seem a reasonable Cause of a Quarrel; but it
not being certain that the Pygmies used to sow Corn, I will not insist on this
neither.

Now what seems most likely to me, is the account that Pliny out of
Megastheues, and Strabo from Onesicritus give us; and, provided I be not
obliged to believe or justify all that they say, I could rest satisfied in
great part of their Relation: For Pliny Plinij Hist. Not. lib. 7. cap. 2. p. m.
13
tells us, Veris tempore universo agmine ad mare descendere, and Ova, Pullosque
earum Alitum consumere: That in the Springtime the whole drove of the Pygmies
go down to the Sea side, to devour the Cranes Eggs and their young Ones. So
likewise Onesicritus Strab. Geograph. lib. 15. page 489.
(...)i.e. That there is a fight between the Pygmies and the Cranes ( as Homer
relates) and the Partridges, which are as big as Geese; for these Pygmies
gather up their Eggs, and destroy them; the Cranes laying their Eggs there; and
neither their Eggs, nor their Nests, being to be found any where else. It Is
plain therefore from them, that the Quarrel is not out of any Antipathy the
Pygmies have to the Cranes, but out of love to their own Bellies. But the
Cranes finding their Nests to be robbed, and their young Ones preyed on by
these Invaders, no wonder that they should so sharply engage them; and the
least they could do, was to fight to the utmost so mortal an Enemy. Hence, no
doubt, many a bloody Battle happens, with various success to the Combatants;
sometimes with great slaughter of the long-necked Squadron; sometimes with
great effusion of Pygmaean blood. And this may well enough, in a Poet's fancy,
be magnified, and represented as a dreadful War; and no doubt of it, were one a
Spectator of it, 'twould be diverting enough. -- Si videas hoc
Gentibus in nostris, risu quatiere: sed illic,
Quanquam eadem assidue spectantur Proelia, ridet
Nemo, ubi tota cohors pede non est altior uno Juvenal. Satyr. 13. verse. 170.
.


This Account therefore of these Campaigns renewed every year on this
Provocation between the Cranes and the Pygmies, contains nothing but what a
cautious Man may believe; and Homer's Simile in likening the great shouts of
the Trojans to the Noise of the Cranes, and the Silence of the Greeks to that
of the Pygmies, is very admirable and delightful. For Aristotle Aristotle.
Hist. Animal. lib. 8. cap. 15. Edit. Scalig.
tell us, That the Cranes, to avoid the hardships of the Winter, take a Flight
out of Scythia to the Lakes about the Nile, where the Pygmies live, and where
it is very likely the Cranes may lay their Eggs and breed, before they return.
But these rude Pygmies making too bold with them, what could the Cranes do less
for preserving their Offspring than fight them; or at least by their mighty
Noise, make a show as if they would. This is but what we may observe in all
other Birds. And thus far I think our Geranomachia or Pygmaeomachia looks like
a true Story; and there is nothing in Homer about it, but what is credible. He
only expresses himself, as a Poet should do; and if Readers will mistake his
meaning, it is not his fault.

It Is not therefore the Poet that is to be blamed, though they would father it
all on him; but the fabulous Historians in after Ages, who have so odly dressed
up this Story by their fantastical Inventions, that there is no knowing the
truth, till one has pulled off those Masks and Visages, wherewith they have
disguised it. For though I can believe Homer, that there is a fight between the
Cranes and Pygmies, yet I think I am no ways obliged to imagine, that when the
Pygmies go to these Campaigns to fight the Cranes, that they ride upon
Partridges, as Athenaeus from Basilis an Indian Historian tells us; for, says
he Arhenaei Diepn^soph. lib. p. 9. m. 390.
, (...). For presently afterward he tells us from Menecles, that the Pygmies
not only fight the Cranes, but the Partridges too, (...). This I could more
readily agree to, because Onesicritus, as I have quoted him already confirms
it; and gives us the same reason for this, as for sighting the Cranes, because
they rob their Nests. But whether these Partridges are as big as Geese, I leave
as a Quaere.

Megasthenes methinks in Pliny mounts the Pygmies for this Expedition much
better, for he sets them not on a Pegasus or Partridges, but on Rams and Goats:
Fama est (says Pliny Plinij Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 2. p. 13.
) insedentes Arietum Caprarumque dorsis, armatis sagittis, veris tempore
universo agmine ad mare descendere. And Onesicritus in Strabo tells us, That a
Crane has been often observed to fly from those parts with a brass Sword fixed
in him, (...) Strabo Geograph. lib. 15. p. 489.
. But whether the Pygmies do wear Swords, may be doubted. It Is true, Ctesias
tells us Vide Photij Biblioth.
, That the King of India every fifth year sends fifty Thousand Swords, besides
abundance of other Weapons, to the Nation of the Cynocephali, (a sort of
Monkeys, as I shall show) that live in those Countries, but higher up in the
Mountains: But he makes no mention of any such Presents to the poor Pygmies;
though he assures us, that no less than three Thousand of these Pygmies are the
King's constant Guards: But withal tells us, that they are excellent Archers,
and so perhaps by dispatching their Enemies at a distance, they may have no
need of such Weapons to lie dangling by their sides. I may therefore be
mistaken in rendering (...) a Sword; it may be any other sharp pointed
Instrument or Weapon, and upon second Thoughts, shall suppose it a sort of
Arrow these cunning Archers use in these Engagements.

These, and a hundred such ridiculous Fables, have the Historians invented of
the Pygmies, that I cannot but be of Strabo's mind Strabo Geograph. lib. 11. p.
m. 350.
(...) i.e. That one may sooner believe Hesiod, and Homer, and the Tragic
Poets speaking of their Hero's, than Ctesias and Herodotus and Hellanicus, and
such like. So ill an Opinion had Strabo of the Indian Historians in general,
that he censures them all as fabulous Strabo ibid. lib. 2. p. m. 48.
; (...) i.e. All who have wrote of India, for the most part, are fabulous, but
in the highest degree Daimachus; then Megasthenes, Onesicritus, and Nearchus,
and such like. And as if it had been their greatest Ambition to excel herein,
Strabo Strabo ibid. lib. 1. p. m. 29.
brings in Theopompus, as bragging, (...) That he could foist in Fables into
History, better than Herodotus and Ctesias and Hellanicus, and all that have
wrote of India. The Satyrist therefore had reason to say, -Et quicquid Graecia
mendax
Audet in Historia Juvenal, Satyr. X. vers^ 174.
.


Aristotle Aristotle Hist. Animal. lib. 8. cap. 28.
it is true, tells us, (...) i.e. That generally the Beasts are wilder in Asia,
stronger in Europe, and of greater variety of shapes in Africa; for as the
Proverb says, Africa always produces something new. Pliny Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 6. cap. 30. p. m. 741.
indeed ascribes it to the Heat of the Climate, Animalium, Hominumque effigies
monstriferas, circa extremitates ejus gigni, minime mirum, artifici ad formanda
Corpora, effigiesque caelandas mobilitate ignea. But Nature never formed a
whole Species of Monsters; and it is not the heat of the Country, but the warm
and fertile Imagination of these Historians, that has been more productive of
them, than Africa it self; as will father appear by what I shall produce out of
them, and particularly from the Relation that Ctesias makes of the Pygmies.

I am the more willing to instance in Ctesias, because he tells his Story
roundly; he no ways minces it; his Invention is strong and fruitful; and that
you may not in the least mistrust him, he pawns his word, that all that he
writes, is certainly true: And so successful he has been, how Romantic soever
his Stories may appear, that they have been handed down to us by a great many
other Authors, and of Note too; tho some at the same time have looked upon them
as mere Fables. So that for the present, till I am better informed, and I am
not over curious in it, I shall make Ctesias, and the other Indian Historians,
the Inventors of the extravagant Relations we at persent have of the Pygmies,
and not old Homer. He calls them, it is true, from something of Resemblance of
their shape, (...): But these Historians make them to speak the Indian
Language; to use the same Laws; and to be so considerable a Nation and so
valiant, as that the King of India makes choice of them for his Corpse de
Guards; which utterly spoils Homer's Simile, in making them so little, as only
to fight Cranes.

Ctesias's Account therefore of the Pygmies (as I find it in Photius's
Bibliotheca Photij Bibliothec. Cod. 72. p. m. 145.
, and at the latter end of some Editions of Herodotus) is this:

(...)

Narrat praeter ista, in media India homines reperiri nigros, qui Pygmaei
appellentur. Eadem hos, qua Inda reliqui, lingua uti, sed valde esse parvos, ut
maximi duorum cubitorum, and plerique unius duntaxat cubiti cum dimidio
altitudinem non excedant. Comam alere longissimam, ad ipsa usque genua
demissam, atque etiam infra, cum barba longiore, quam apud ullos hominum. Quae
quidem ubi illis promissior esse coeperit, nulla deinceps vest uti: sed
capillos multo infra genua a tergo demissos, barbamque praeter pectus ad pedes
usque defluentem, per totum corpus in orbem constipare and cingere, atque ita
pilos ipsis suos vestimenti loco esse. Veretrum illis esse crassum ac longum,
quod ad ipsos quoque pedum malleolos pertingat. Pygmeos hosce simis esse
naribus, and deformes. Ipsorum item oves agnorum nostrorum instar esse; boves
and asinos, arietum fere magnitudine, equos item multosque and caetera jumenta
omnia nihilo esse nostris arietibus majora. Tria horum Pygmaeorum millia
Indorum regem in suo comitatu habere, quod sagittarij sint peritissimi. Summos
esse justitiae cultores, iisdemque quibus Indi reliqui, legibus parere. Venari
quoque lepores vulpesque, non canibus, sed corvis, milvis, cornicibus, aquilis
adhibitis.

In the middle of India (says Ctesias) there are black Men, they are called
Pygmies, using the same Language, as the other Indians; they are very little,
the tallest of them being but two Cubits, and most of them but a Cubit and a
half high. They have very long hair, reaching down to their Knees and lower;
and a Beard larger than any Man's. After their Beards are grown long, they wear
no Clothes, but the Hair of their Head falls behind a great deal below their
Hams; and that of their Beards before comes down to their Feet: then laying
their Hair thick all about their Body, they afterward gird themselves, making
use of their Hair for Clothes. They have a Penis so long, that it reaches to
the Ancle, and the thickness is proportionable. They are flat nosed, and ill
favored. Their Sheep are like Lambs; and their Oxen and Asses scarce as big as
Rams; and their Horses and Mules, and all their other Cattle nor bigger. Three
thousand Men of these Pygmies do attend the King of India. They are good
Archers; they are very just, and use the same Laws as the Indians do. They kill
Hares and Foxes, not with Dogs, but with Ravens, Kites, Crows, and Eagles.

Well, if they are so good Sports-men, as to kill Hares and Foxes with Ravens,
Kites, Crows and Eagles, I cannot see how I can bring off Homer, for making them
fight the Cranes themselves. Why did they not fly their Eagles against them?
these would make greater Slaughter and Execution, without hazarding themselves.
The only Excuse I have is, that Homer's Pygmies were real Apes like Men; but
those of Ctesias were neither Men nor Pygmies; only a Creature begot in his own
Brain, and to be found no where else.

Ctesias was Physician to Artaxerxes Mnemon as Diodorus Siculus Diodor. Siculi
Bibliothec. lib. 2. p. m. 118.
and Strabo Strabo Geograph. lib. 14. p. 451.
inform us. He was contemporary with Xenophon, a little later than Herodotus;
and Helvicus in his Chronology places him three hundred eighty three years
before Christ: He is an ancient Author, it is true, and it may be upon that
score valued by some. We are beholden to him, not only for his Improvements on
the Story of the Pygmies, but for his Remarks likewise on several other parts
of Natural History; which for the most part are all of the same stamp, very
wonderful and incredible; as his Mantichora, his Gryphins, the horrible Indian
Worm, a Fountain of Liquid Gold, a Fountain of Hon^y, a Fountain whose Water
will make a Man confess all that ever he did, a Root he calls (...), that will
attract Lambs and Birds, as the Loadstone does filings of Steel; and a great
many other Wonders he tells us: all which are copied from him by AElian, Pliny,
Solinus, Mela, Philostratus and others. And Photius concludes Ctesias's Account
of India with this passage; (...) i.e. These things (says he) Ctesias writes
and feigns, but he himself says all he has wrote is very true. Adding, that
some things which be describes, he had seen himself; and the others, he had
learned from those that had seen them: That he had omitted a great many other
things more wonderful, because he would not seem to those that have not seen
them, to write incredibilities. But notwithstanding all this, Lucian L^^ian
lib. 1. verae Histor. p. m. 373.
will not believe a word he says; for he tells us that Ctesias has wrote of
India, A (...), What he neither saw himself, nor ever heard from any Body else.
And Aristotle tells us plainly, he is not fit to be believed: Ev (...) Arist.
Hist. Animal. lib. 8. cap. 28.
. And the same Opinion A. Gellius A. Gellij Noctes Attic. lib. 9. cap. 4.
seems to have of him, as he had likewise of several other old Greek Historians
which happened to fall into his hands at Brundusium, in his return from Greece
into Italy; he gives this Character of them and their performance: Erant autem
isti omnes libri Graeci, miraculorum fabularumque pleni: res inauditae,
incredulae, Scriptores veteres non parvae authoritatis, Aristeas Proconnesius,
and Isagonus, and Nicaeensis, and Ctesias, and Onesicritus, and Polystephanus,
and Hegesias. Not that I think all that Ctesias has wrote is fabulous; For though
I cannot believe his speaking Pygmies, yet what he writes of the Bird he calls
Bi^^oe^ that it would speak Greek and the Indian Language, no doubt is very
true; and as H. Stephens Hen^. Stephani de Ctesia Historico antiquissimo
disquisitio, ad finem Herodoti.
observes in his Apology for Ctesias, such a Relation would seem very
surprising to one, that had never seen nor heard of a Parrot.

But this Story of Ctesias's speaking Pygmies, seems to be confirmed by the
Account that Nonnosus, the Emperor Justinian's Ambassador into AEthiopia,
gives of his Travels. I will transcribe the Passage, as I find it in Photius
Photij (...) ccd. 3. p. m. 7.
, and it is as follows:

(...)

Naviganti a Pharsa Nonnoso, and ad extremam usque insularum delato, tale quid
occurrit, vel ipso auditu admirandum. Incidit enim in quosdam forma quidem and
figura humana, sed brevissimos, and cutem nigros, totumque pilosos corpus.
Sequebantur viros aequales foeminae, and pueri adhuc breviores. Nudi omnes
agunt, pelle tantum brevi adultiores verenda tecti, viri pariter ac foeminae:
agreste nihil, neque efferum quid prae se ferentes. Quin and vox illis humana,
sed omnibus, etiam accolis, prorsus ignota lingua, multoque amplius Nonnosi
sociis. Vivunt marinis ostreis, and piscibus e e mari ad insulam projectis.
Audaces minime sunt, ut nostris conspectis hominibus, quemadmodum nos visa
ingenti fera, metu perculsi fuerint.

That Nonnosus sailing from Pharsa, when he came to the farthermost of the
Islands, a thing, very strange to be heard of, happened to him; for he lighted
on some ( Animals) in shape and appearance like Men, but little of stature, and
of a black color, and thick covered with hair all over their Bodies. The
Women, who were of the same stature, foolowed the Men: They were all naked,
only the Elder of them, both Men and Women, covered their Privy Parts with a
small Skin. They seemed not at all fierce or wild; they had a Humane Voice, but
their Dialect was altogether unknown to every Body that lived about them; much
more to those that were with Nonnosus. They lived upon Sea Oysters, and Fish
that were cast out of the Sea, upon the Island. They had no Courage; for seeing
our Men, they were frighted, as we are at the sight of the greatest wild Beast.

(...) I render here, they had a Humane Voice, not Speech: for had they spoke
any Language, though their Dialect might be somewhat different, yet no doubt but
some of the Neighborhood would have understood something of it, and not have
been such utter Strangers to it. Now 'twas observed of the Orang-Outang, that
it is Voice was like the Humane, and it would make a Noise like a Child, but
never was observed to speak, though it had the Organs of Speech exactly formed as
they are in Man; and no Account that ever has been given of this Animal does
pretend that ever it did. I should rather agree to what Pliny Plinij Not. Hist.
lib. 6. cap. 30. p. m. 741.
mentions, Quibusdam pro Sermon nutus motusque Membrorum est and that they had
no more a Speech, than Ctesias his Cynocephali which could only bark, as the
same Pliny Plinij Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 2. p. m. 11.
remarks; where he says, In multis autem Montibus Genus Hominum Capitibus
Caninis, ferarum pellibus velari, pro voce latratum edere, unguibus armatum
venatu and Aucupio vesci, horum supra Centum viginti Millia fuisse prodente se
Ctesias scribit. But in Photius I find, that Ctesias's Cynocephali did speak
the Indian Language as well as the Pygmies. Those therefore in Nonnosus since
they did not speak the Indian, I doubt, sopke no Language at all; or at least,
no more than other Brutes do.

Ctesias I find is the only Author that ever understood what Language 'twas
that the Pygmies spoke: For Herodotus Herodot. in Melpomene. page 283.
owns that they use a sort of Tongue like to no other, but screech like Bats.
He says, (...) (...) i.e. These Garamantes hunt the Troglodyte AEthiopians in
Chariots with four Horses. The Troglodyte AEthiopians are the swiftest of foot
of all Men that ever he heard of by any Report. The Troglodytes eat Serpents
and Lizards, and such fort of Reptiles. They use a Language like to no other
Tongue, but screech like Bats.

Now that the Pygmies are Troglodytes, or do live in Caves, is plain from
Aristotle Arist. Hist. Animal. lib. 8. cap. 15. p. m. 913.
, who says, (...). And so Philestratus Philostrat in vita Apollon. Tyanaei,
lib. 3. cap. 14. p. m. 152.
(...). And methinks Le Compte's Relation concerning the wild or savage Man in
Barneo, agrees so well with this, that I shall transcribe it: for he tells us,
Lewis le Compte Memoirs and Observations on China, p. m. 510.
That in Borneo this wild or savage Man is endued with extraordinary strength;
and notwithstanding he walks but upon two Legs, yet he is so swift of foot,
that they have much ado to outrum him. People of Quality course him, as we do
Stags here: and this sort of hunting is the King's usual divertisement. And
Gassendus in the Life of Peiresky, tells us they commonly hunt them too in
Angola in Africa, as I have already mentioned. So that very likely Herodotus's
Troglodyte AEthiopians may be no other than our Orang-Outang or wild Man. And
the rather, because I fancy their Language is much the same: for an Ape will
chatter, and make a noise like a Bat, as his Troglodytes did: And they undergo
to this day the same Fate of being hunted, as formerly the Troglodytes used to
be by the Garamantes.

Whether those (...) which the Nasamones met with (as Herodotus Hcrodotus in
Euterpe seu lib. 2. p. m. 102.
relates) in their Travels to discover Libya, were the Pygmies; I will not
determine: It seems the Nasamones neither understood their Language, nor they
that of the Nasamones. However, they were so kind to the Nasamones as to be
their Guides along the Lakes, and afterward brought them to a City, (...) i.e.
in which all were of the same stature with the Guides, and black. Now since
they were all little black Men, and their Language could not be understood, I
do suspect they may be a Colony of the Pygmies: And that they were no farther
Guides to the Nasamones, than that being frighted at the sight of them, they
ran home, and the Nasamones followed them.

I do not find therefore any good Authority, unless you will reckon Ctesias as
such, that the Pygmies ever used a Language or Speech, any more than other
Brutes of the same Species do among themselves, and what we know nothing of,
whatever Democritus and Melampodes in Pliny Plnij Not. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 49.
, or Apollonius Tyanaeus in Porphyry Porphyrius de Abstinentia, lib. 3. pagem.
103.
might formerly have done. Had the Pygmies ever spoke any Language intelligible
by Mankind, this might have furnished our Historians with notable Subjects for
their Novels; and no doubt but we should have had plenty of them.

But Albertus Magnus, who was so lucky as to guess that the Pygmies were a sort
of Apes; that he should afterward make these Apes to speak, was very
unfortunate, and spoiled all; and he does it, methinks, so very awkardly, that
it is as difficult almost to understand his Language as his Apes; if the Reader
has a mind to attempt it, he will find it in the Margin Si qui Homines sunt
Silvestres, sicut Pygmeus, non secundum unam rationem nobiscum dicti sunt
Homines, sed aliquod habent Hominis in quadam deliberatione and Loquela, etc. A
little after adds, Voces quaedam (sc. Animalia) formant ad diversos conceptus
quos habent, sicut Homo and Pygmaeus; and quaedam non faciunt hoc, sicut
multitudo fere tota aliorum Animalium. Adhuc autem eorum quae e^ ratione
cogitativa formant voces, quaedam sunt succumbentia, quaedam autem non
succumbentia. Dico autem succumbenti^, a conceptu Animae cadentia and mota ad
Narurae Instinctum, sicut Pygmeus, qui non, seuqitur rationem Loquelae sed
Naturae Instinctum; Homo autem non succumbit sed sequitur rationem. Albert.
Magn. de Animal. lib 1. cap. 3. p.m. 3.
.

Had Albertus only asserted, that the Pygmies were a sort of Apes, his Opinion
possibly might have obtained with less difficulty, unless he could have
produced some body that had heard them talk. But Ulysses Aldrovandus Vlys.
Aldrovandi Ornitholeg. lib. 20. p.m. 344.
is so far from believing his Ape Pygmies ever spoke, that he utterly denis,
that there were ever any such Creatures in being, as the Pygmies, at all; or
that they ever fought the Cranes. Cum itaque Pygmaeos (says he) dari negemus,
Grues etiam cum iis Bellum gerere, ut fabulantur, negabimus, and tam
pertinaciter id negabimus, ut ne jurantibus credemus.

I find a great many very Learned Men are of this Opinion: And in the first
place, Strabo Strabo Geograph. lib. 17. p. m. 565.
is very positive; (...) i.e. No Man worthy of belief did ever see them. And
upon all occasions he declares the same. So Julius Caesar Scaliger Jul. Caes.
Scaliger. Comment. in Arist. Hist. Animal. lib. 8.. 126. p. m. 914.
makes them to be only a Fiction of the Ancients, At haec omnia ( says he)
Antiquorum sigmenta and merae Nugae, si exstarent, reperirentur. At cum
universus Orbis nunc nobis cognitus sit, nullibi haec Naturae Excrement^
reperiri certissimum est. And Isaac Casanbon Isaac Causabo^ Notae and Castigat.
in lib. 1. Strabonis Geograph. p. m. 38.
ridicules such as pretend to justisie them: Sic nostra aetate ( says he) non
desunt, qui eandem de Pygmaeis lepidam fabellam renovent; ut qui etiam e Sacris
Literis, si Deo placet, fidem illis conentur astruere. Legi etiam Bergei
cujusdam Galli Scripta, qui se vidisse diceret. At non ego credulus illi, illi
inquam Omnium Bipedum mendacissimo. I shall add one Authority more, and that is
of Adrian Spigelius, who produces a Witness that had examined the very place,
where the Pygmies were said to be; yet upon a diligent enquiry, he could
neither find them, nor hear any tidings of them. Spigelius Adrian. Spigelij de
Corporis Humani fabrica, lib. 1. cap. 7. p. m. 15.
therefore tells us, Hoc loco de Pygmaeis dicendum erat, qui (...) dicti a
statura, quae ulnam non excedunt. Verum ego Poetarum fabulas esse crediderim,
pro quibus tamen Aristoteles minime haberi vult, sed veram esse Historiam. 8.
Hist Animal. 12. asseverat. Ego quo minus hoc statuam, tum Authorilate primum
Doctissimi Strabonis 1. Geograph. coactus sum, tum potissimum nunc moveor, quod
nostro tempore, quo nulla Mundi pars est, quam Nautarum Industria non
perlustrarit, nihil tamen unquam simile aut visum est, aut anditum. Accedit
quod Franciscus Alvarez Lusitanus, qui ea ipsa loca peragravit, circa quae
Aristoteles Pygmaeos esse scribit, nullibi tamen tam parvam Gentam a se
conspectam tradidit, sed Populum esse Mediocris staturae, and AEthiopes tradit.

I think my self therefore here obliged to make out, that there were such
Creatures as Pygmies, before I determine what they were, since the very being
of them is called in question, and utterly denied by so great Men, and by
others too that might be here produced. Now in the doing this, Aristotle's
Assertion of them is so very positive, that I think there needs not a greater
or better Proof; and it is so remarkable a one, that I find the very Enemies to
this Opinion at a loss, how to shift it off. To lessen it is Authority they have
interpolated the Text, by soisting into the Translation what is not in the
Original; or by not translating at all the most material possage, that makes
against them; or by miserably glossing it, to make him speak what he never
intended: Such unfair dealings plainly argue, that at any rate they are willing
to get rid of a Proof, that otherwise they can neither deny, or answer.

Aristotle's Text is this, which I shall give with Theodorus Gaza's
Translation: for discoursing of the Migration of Birds, according to the Season
of the Year, from one Country to another, he says Aristotel. Hist. Animal lib.
8. cap. 12.
:

(...) (...)

Jam ab Autumnali AEquinoctio ex Ponto, Locisque frigidis fugiunt Hyemem
futuram. A Verno autem ex tepida Regione ad frigidam sese conferunt, aestus
metu futuri: and alia de locis vicinis discedunt, alia de ultimis, prope
dixerim, ut Grues faciunt, quae ex Scythicis Campis ad Paludes AEgypto
superiores, unde Nilus profluit, veniunt, quo in loeo pugnare cum Pygmaeis
dicuntur. Non enim id fabula est, sed certe, genus tum hominum, tum etiam
Equorum pustillum (ut dicitur) est, deguntque in Cavernis, unde Nomen
Troglodytae a subeundis Cavernis accepere.

In English it is thus: At the Autumnal AEquinox they go out of Pontus and the
cold Countries to avoid the Winter that is coming on. At the Vernal AEquinox
they pass from hot Countries into cold ones, for fear of the ensuing Heat; some
making their Migrations from nearer places; others from the most remote (as I
may say) as the Cranes do: for they come out of Scythia to the Lakes above
Egypt, whence the Nile does flow. This is the place, whereabout the Pygmies
dwell: For this is no Fable, but a Truth. Both they and the Horses, as it is
said, are a small kind. They are Troglodytes, or live in Caves.

We may here observe how positive the Philosopher is, that there are Pygmies;
he tells us where they dwell, and that it is no Fable, but a Truth. But
Theodorus Gaza has been unjust in translating him, by foisting in, Quo in loco
pugnare cum Pygmaeis dicuntur, whereas there is nothing in the Text that
warrants it: As likewise, where he expresses the little Stature of the Pygmies
and the Horses, there Gaza has rendered it, Sed certe Genus tum. Hominum, tum
etiam Equorum pusillum. Aristotle only says, (...) He neither makes his
Pygmies Men, nor says any thing of their fighting the Cranes; though here he had
a fair occasion, discoursing of the Migration of the Cranes out of Scythia to
the Lakes above Egypt, where he tells us the Pygmies are. Cardan Cardan de
Rerum varietate, lib. 8. cap. 40. p. m. 153.
therefore must certainly be out in his guess, that Aristotle only asserted the
Pygmies out of Complement to his Friend Homer; for surely then he would not
have forgot their fight with the Cranes; upon which occasion only Homer
mentions them Apparet ergo ( says Cardan) Pygmaeorum Historiam esse fabulosam,
quod and Strabo sentit, and nosird aetas, cum omnia nunc ferme orbis mirabilia
innotuerint, declarat. Sed quod tantum Philosophum decepit, fuit Homeri
Auctoritas non apudillum levis
. I should rather think that Aristotle, being sensible of the many Fables that
had been raised on this occasion, studiously avoided the mentioning this fight,
that he might not give countenance to the Extravagant Relations that had been
made of it.

But I wonder that neither Casaubon nor Duvall in their Editions of Aristotle's
Works, should have taken notice of these Mistakes of Gaza, and corrected them.
And Gesner, and Aldrovandus, and several other Learned Men, in quoting this
place of Aristotle, do make use of this faulty Translation, which must
necessarily lead them into Mistakes, Sam. Bochartus Bocharti Hierozoic. S. de
Animalib. S. Script. part. Posterior. lib. 1. cap. 11. p. m. 76.
though he gives Aristotle's Text in Greek, and adds a new Translation of it, he
leaves out indeed the Cranes fighting with the Pygmies, yet makes them Men,
which Aristotle does not; and by anti-placing, it aiunt, he renders Aristotle's
Assertion more dubious; Neque enim (says he in the Translation) ^est fabula,
sed revera, ut aiunt, Genus ibi parvum est tam Hominum quam Equorum. Julius
Caesar Scaliger in translating this Text of Aristotle, omits both these
Interpretations of Gaza; but on the other hand, is no less to be blamed in not
translating at all the most remarkable passage, and where the Philosopher seems
to be so much in earnest; as, (...), this he leaves wholly out, without giving
us his reason for it, if he had any: And Scaliger's Scaliger. Comment. in
Arist. Hist. Animal. lib. 8. p. m. 914.
insinuation in his Comment, viz. Negat esse fabulam de his (so. Pygmeis)
Herodotus, at Philosophus semper moderatus and prudens ctiam addidit, (...), is
not to be allowed. Nor can I assent to Sir Thomas Brown's Sir Thomas Brouns
Pseudodoxia, or, Enquiries into Vulgar Errors, lib. 4. cap. 11.
remark upon this place; Where indeed (says he) Aristotle plays the Aristotle;
that is, the wary and evading Assertor; for though with non est fabula he seems
at first to confirm it, yet at last he claps in, sicut aiunt, and shakes the
belief he placed before upon it. And therefore Scaliger (says he) has not
translated the first, perhaps supposing it surreptitious, or unworthy so great
an Assertor. But had Scaliger known it to be surreptitious, no doubt but he
would have remarked it; and then there had been some Color for the Gloss. But
it is unworthy to be believed of Aristotle, who was so wary and cautious, that
he should in so short a passage, contradict himself; and after he had so
positively affirmed the Truth of it, presently doubt it. His (...) therefore
must have a Reference to what follows, Pusillum genus, ut aiunt, ipsi atque
etiam Equi, as Scaliger himself translates it.

I do not here find Aristotle asserting or confirming any thing of the fabulous
Narrations that had been made about the Pygmies. He does not say that they were
(...) or (...) or (...); he only calls them (...). And discoursing of the
Pygmies in a place, where he is only treating about Brutes, it is reasonable to
think, that he looked upon them only as such. This is the place where the
Pygmies are; this is no sable, says Aristotle, as it is that they are a
Dwarfish Race of Men; that they speak the Indian Language; that they are
excellent Archers; that they are very Just; and abundance of other Things that
are fabulously reported of them; and because he thought them Fables, he does
not take the least notice of them, but only says, This is no Fable, but a
Truth, that about the Lakes of Nile such Animals, as are called Pygmies, do
live. And, as if he had foreseen, that the abundance of Fables that Ctesias
(whom he says is not to be believed) and the Indian Historians had invented
about them, would make the whole Story to appear as a Figment, and render it
doubtful, whether there were ever such Creatures as Pygmies in Nature; he more
zealously asserts the Being of them, and assures us, That this is no Fable, but
a Truth.

I shall therefore now enquire what sort of Creatures these Pygmies were; and
hope, so to manage the Matter, as in a great measure, to abate the Passion
these Great Men have had against them: for, no doubt, what has incensed them
the most, was, the fabulous Historians making them a part of Mankind, and then
inventing a hundred ridiculous Stories about them, which they would impose upon
the World as real Truths. If therefore they have Satisfaction given them in
these two Points, I do not see, but that the Business may be accommodated very
fairly; and that they may be allowed to be Pygmies, though we do not make them
Men.

For I am not of Gesner's mind, Sed veterum millus (says he Gesner. Histor.
Quadruped. p. m. 885.
) aliter de Pygmaeis scripsit, quam Homunciones esse. Had they been a Race of
Men, no doubt but Aristotle would have informed himself farther about them.
Such a Curiosity could not but have excited his Inquisitive Genius, to a
strictrer Enquiry and Examination; and we might easily have expected from him a
larger Account of them. But finding them, it may be, a sort of Apes, he only
tells us, that in such a place these Pygmies live.

Herodotus Herodot. Melpomene seu lib. 4. p. m. 285.
plainly makes them Brutes: For reckoning up the Animals of Libya, he tells us,
(...) (in the Margin it is (...)) (...) i.e. That there are here prodigious
large Serpents, and Lions, and Elephants, and Bears, and Asps, and Asses that
have horns, and Cynocephali, (in the Margin it is Acephali) that have Eyes in
their Breast, (as is reported by the Libyans) and wild Men, and wild Women, and
a great many other wild Beasts that are not fabulous. It Is evident therefore
that Herodotus his (...) are only (...) or wild Beasts; and though they are
called (...), they are no more Men than our Orang-Outang, or Homo Sylvestris,
or wild Man, which has exactly the same Name, and I must consess I cannot but
think is the same Animal: and that the same Name has been continued down to us,
from his Time, and it may be from Homer's.

So Philostratus speaking of AEthiopia and Egypt, tells us Philostratus in
vita Apollon. Tyanaei, lib. 6. cap. 1. p. m. 258.
, (...) i. e. Here are bred wild Beasts that are not in other places; and black
Men, which no other Country affords: and amongst them is the Nation of the
Pygmies, and the BARKERS, that is, the Cynocephali. For though Philostratus is
pleased here only to call them Barkers, and to reckon them, as he does the
Black Men and the Pygmies amongst the wild Beasts of those Countries; yet
Ctesias, from whom Philostratus has borrowed a great deal of his Natural
History, styles them Men, and makes them speak, and to perform most notable
Feats in Merchandising. But not being in a merry Humor it may be now, before
he was aware, he speaks Truth: For Caelius Rhodiginus's Caelij Rhadigini
Lection. Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 13.
Character of him is, Philostratus omnium qui unquam Historiam conscripserunt,
mendacissimus.

Since the Pygmies therefore are some of the Brute Beasts that naturally breed
in these Countries, and they are pleased to let us know as much, I can easily
excuse them a Name. (...), or Orang-Outang, is alike to me; and I am better
pleased with Homer's (...) than if he had called (...). Had this been the only
Instance where they had misapplied the Name of Man, methinks I could be so good
natured, as in some measure to make an Apology for them. But sinding them so
extravagantly loose, so wretehedly whimsical, in abusing the Dignity of
Mankind, by giving the Name of Man to such monstrous Productions of their idle
Imaginations, as the Indian Historians have done, I do not wonder that wise Men
have suspected all that comes out of their Mint, to be false and counterfeit.

Such are their' (...) or (...), that want Noses, and have only two holes above
their Mouth; they eat all things, but they must be raw; they are short lived;
the upper part of their Mouths is very prominent. The (...) whose Ears reach
down to their Heels, on which they lie and sleep. The (...), that have no
Mouths, a civil sort of People, that dwell about the Head of the Ganges; and
live upon smelling to boiled Meats and the Odours of Fruits and Flowers; they
can bear no ill scent, and therefore cannot live in a Camp. The (...) or (...)
that have but one Eye, and that in the middle of their Foreheads; they have
Dogs Ears; their Hair stands an end, but smooth on the Breasts. The (...), that
have Eyes in their Breasts. The (...) with Heads like Wedges. The (...) with
great Heads. The (...), who live a Thousand years. The (...), so swift, that
they will outrun a Horse. The (...) that go with their Heels forward, and
their Toes backwards. The (...), The (...) The (...), who have one Leg, but
will jump a great way, and are called Sciapodes, because when they lie on their
Backs, with this Leg they can keep off the Sun from their Bodies.

Now Strabo Strabo Geograph. lib. 15. p. m. 489. and lib. 2. p. 48. and alibi.
, from whom I have collected the Description of these Monstrous sorts of Men,
and they are mentioned too by Pliny, Solinus, Mela, Philostratus, and others;
and Munster in his Cosmography Munster Cosmograph. lib. 6. p. 1151.
has given a figure of some of them; Strabo, I say, who was an Enemy to all
such fabulous Relations, no doubt was prejudiced likewise against the Pygmies,
because these Historians had made them a Puny Race of Men, and invented so many
Romances about them. I can no ways therefore blame him for denying, that there
were ever any such Men Pygmies; and do readily agree with him, that no Man ever
saw them: and am so far from dissenting from those Great Men, who have denied
them on this account, that I think they have all the reason in the World on
their side. And to show how ready I am to close with them in this Point, I will
here examine the contrary Opinion, and what Reasons they give for the
supporting it: For there have been some Moderns, as well as the Ancients, that
have maintained that these Pygmies were real Men. And this they pretend to
prove, both from Humane Authority and Divine.

Now by Men Pygmies we are by no means to understand Dwarfs. In all Countries,
and in all Ages, there has been now and then observed such Miniture of Mankind,
or under-sized Men. Cardan Cardan de subtilitate, lib. 11. p. 458.
tells us he saw one carried about in a Parrot's Cage, that was but a Cubit
high. Nicephorus Nicephor. Histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 12. cap. 37.
tells us, that in Theodosius the Emperor's time, there was one in Egypt that
was no bigger than a Partridge; yet what was to be admired, he was very
Prudent, had a sweet clear Voice, and a generous Mind; and lived Twenty Years.
So likewise a King of Portugal sent to a Duke of Savoy, when he married his
Daughter to him, an Ethiopian Dwarf but three Palms high Happetius in Relat.
curiosis, No. 85. p. 677.
. And Thevenot Thevenot. Voyage de Levant. lib. 2. c. 68.
tells us of the Present made by the King of the Abyssins, to the Grand
Seignior, of several little black Slaves out of Nubia, and the Countries near
AEthiopia, which being made Eunuchs, were to guard the Ladies of the Seraglio.
And a great many such like Relations there are. But these being only Dwarfs,
they must not be esteemed the Pygmies we are enquiring about, which are
represented as a Nation, and the whole Race of them to be of the like stature.
Dari tamen integras Pumilionum Gentes, tam falsum est, quam quod falsissimum,
says Harduin Jo. Harduini Notae in Plinij Not. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 22. p. 688.
.

Neither likewise muse it be granted, that though in some Climates there might be
Men generally of less stature, than what are to be met with in other Countries,
that they are presently Pygmies. Nature has not fixed the same standard to the
growth of Mankind in all Places alike, no more than to Brutes or Plants. The
Dimensions of them all, according to the Climate, may differ. If we consult the
Original, viz. Homer that first mentioned the Pygmies, there are only these two
Characteristics he gives of them. That they are (...) seu Cubitales; and that
the Cranes did use to fight them. It Is true, as a Poet, he calls them (...),
which I have accounted for before. Now if there cannot be found such Men as are
Cubitales, that the Cranes might probably fight with, notwithstanding all the
Romances of the Indian Historians, I cannot think these Pygmies to be Men, but
they must be some other Animals, or the whole must be a Fiction.

Having premised this, we will now enquire into their Assertion that maintain
the Pygmies to be a Race of Men. Now because there have been Giants formerly,
that have so much exceeded the usual Stature of Man, that there must be
likewise Pygmies as defective in the other extreme from this Standard, I think
is no conclusive Argument, though made use of by some. Old Caspar Bartholine
Caspar. Bartholin Opusculum de Pygmaeis.
tells us, that because J. Cassanius and others had wrote de Gygantibus, since
no Body else had undertaken it, he would give us a Book de Pygmaeis; and since
he makes it his design to prove the Existence of Pygmies, and that the Pygmies
were Men, I must confess I expected great Matters from him.

But I do not find he has informed us of any thing more of them, than what Jo.
Talentonius, a Professor formerly at Parma, had told us before in his Variarum
and Reconditarum Rerum Thesaurus Jo. Talentonij Variar. and recondit. Rerum
Thesaurus, lib. 3. cap. 21.
, from whom he has borrowed most of this Tract. He has made it a little more
formal indeed, by dividing it into Chapters; of which I will give you the
Titles; and as I see occasion, some Remarks thereon: They will not be many,
because I have prevented my self already. The first Chapter is, De
Homuncionibus and Pumilionibus seu Nanis a Pygmaeis distinctis. The second
Chapter, De Pygmaeinominibus and Etymologia. The third Chapter, Duplex esse
Pygmaeorum Gemus; and primum Genus aliquando dari. He means Dmarfs, that are no
Pygmies at all. The fourth Chapter is, Alterum Genus, nempe Gentem Pygmaeorum
esse, aut saltem aliquando fuisse Autoritatihus Humanis, side tamen dignorum
asseritur. It Is as I find it printed; and no doubt an Error in the printing.
The Authorities he gives, are, Homer, Ctesias, Aristotle, Philostratus, Pliny,
Juvenal, Oppian, Baptista Mantuan, Sr. Austin and his Scholiast. Ludovic.
Vives, Jo. Laurentius Anania, Job. Cassanius, Job. Talentonius, Gellius, Pomp.
Mela, and Olaus Magnus. I have taken notice of most of them already, as I shall
of St. Austin and Ludovicus Vives by and by. Jo. Laurentius Anania Joh.
Laurent. Anania prope finem tractatus primi suae Geograph.
ex Mercatorum relatione tradit (says Bartholine) eos ( sc. Pygmaeos) in
Septentrionali Thraciae Part reperiri, (quae Scythiae est proxima) atque ibi
cum Gruibus pugnare. And Job. Cassanius Joh. Cassanius libello de Gygantibas,
p. 73.
(as he is here quoted) says, De Pygmaeis fabulosa quidem esse omnia, quae de
iis narrari solent, aliquando existimavi. Verum cum videam non unum vel
alterum, sed complures Classicos and probatos Autores de his Homunculis multa
in eandem fere Sententiam tradidisse; eo adducor ut Pygmaeos fuisse inficiari
non ausim. He next brings in Jo. Talentonius, to whom he is so much beholden,
and quotes his Opinion, which is full and home, Constare arbitror (says
Talentonius) Jo. Talentonius Variar. and recondit. Rerum Thesaurus, lib 3. cap.
21. p. m. 515.
debere concedi, Pygmaeos non solum olim fuisse, sed nunc etiam esse, and
homines esse, nec parvitatem illis impedimento esse quo minus sint and homines
sint. But were there such Men Pygmies now in being, no doubt but we must have
heard of them; some or other of our Saylors, in their Voyages, would have
lighted on them. Though Aristotle is here quoted, yet he does not make them Men;
So neither does Anania: And I must own, though Talentonius be of this Opinion,
yet he takes notice of the faulty Translation of this Text of Aristotle by
Gaza: and though the parvity or lowness of Stature, be no Impediment, because we
have frequently seen such Dwarf-Men, yet we did never see a Nation of them: For
then there would be no need of that Talmudical Precept which Job. Ludolphus Job
Ludolphi Comment. in Historiam AEthiopic. p. m. 71.
mentions, Nanus ne ducat Nanam, ne forte oriatur ex iis Digitalis (in Bechor.
fol. 45.)

I had almost forgotten Olaus Magnus, whom Bartholine mentions in the close of
this Chapter, but lays no great stress upon his Authority, because he tells us,
he is fabulous in a great many other Relations, and he writes but by hearsay,
that the Greenlanders fight the Cranes; Tandem (says Bartholine) neque ideo
Pygmaei sunt, si forte sagittis and hastis, sicut alij homines, Grues
conficiunt and occidunt. This I think is great Partiality: For Ctesias, an
Author whom upon all turns Bartholine makes use of as an Evidence, is very
positive, that the Pygmies were excellent Archers: so that he himself owns,
that their being such, illustrates very much that Text in Ezekiel, on which he
spends good part of the next Chapter, whose Title is, Pygmaeorum Gens ex
Ezekiele, atque rationibus probabilibus adstruitur; which we will consider by
and by. And though Olaus Magnus may write some things by hearsay, yet he cannot
be so fabulous as Ctesias, who (as Lucian tells us) writes what he neither saw
himself, or heard from any Body else. Not that I think Olaus Magnus his
Greenlanders were real Pygmies, no more than Ctesias his Pygmies were real Men;
though he vouches very notably for them. And if all that have copied this Fable
from Ctesias, must be looked upon as the same Evidence with himself; the number
of the Testimonies produced need not much concern us, since they must all stand
or fall with him.

The probable Reasons that Bartholine gives in the fifth Chapter, are taken
from other Animals, as Sheep, Oxen, Horses, Dogs, the Indian Formica and
Plants: For observing in the same Species some excessive large, and others
extremely little, he infers, Quae certe cum in Animalibus and Vegetabilibus
fiant; cur in Humana specie non sit probabile, haud video: imprimis cum detur
magnitudinis excessus Gigantaeus; cur non etiam dabitur Defectus? Quia ergo
dantur Gigantes, dabuntur and Pygmaei. Quam consequentiam ut firmam, admittit
Cardanus, Cardan^de Rerum varietate, lib. 8. cap. 40.
licet de Pygmaeis hoc tantum concedat, qui pro miraculo, non pro Gente. Now
Cardan, though he allows this Consequence, yet in the same place he gives several
Reasons why the Pygmies could not be Men, and looks upon the whole Story as
fabulous. Bartholine concludes this Chapter thus: Vlterius ut Probabilitatem
fulciamus, addendum Sceleton Pygmaei, quod Dresdae vidimus inter alia, plurima,
servatum in Arce sereniss. Electoris Saxoniae, altitudine infra Cubitum, Ossium
soliditate, proportioneque tum Capitis, tum aliorum; ut Embrionem, aut
Artificiale quid Nemo rerum peritus suspicari possit. Addita insuper est
Inscriptio Very Pygmaei. I hereupon looked into Dr. Brown's Travels into those
Parts, who has given us a large Catalogue of the Curiosities, the Elector of
Saxony had at Dresden, but did not find amongst them this Sceleton; which, by
the largeness of the Head, I suspect to be the Sceleton of an Orang-Outang, or
our wild Man. But had he given us either a Figure of it, or a more particular
Description, it had been a far greater Satisfaction.

The Title of Bartholine's sixth Chapter is, Pygmaeos esse aut fuisse ex variis
eorum adjunctis, accidentibus, etc. ab Authoribus descriptis ostenditur. As
first, their Magnitude: which he mentions from Ctesias, Pliny, Gellias and
Juvenal; and though they do not all agree exactly, it is nothing. Autorum hic
dissensus nullus est (says Bartholine) etenim sicut in nostris hominibus, it a
indubie in Pygmaeis non omnes ejusdem magnitudinis. 2. The Place and Country:
As Ctesias (he says) places them in the middle of India; Aristotle and Pliny
at the Lakes above Egypt; Homer's Scholiast in the middle of Egypt; Pliny at
another time says they are at the Head of the Ganges, and sometimes at
Gerania, which is in Thracia, which being near Scythia, confirms (he says)
Anania's Relation. Mela places them at the Arabian Guls; and Paulus Jovius
docet Pygmaeos ultra Japonem esse; and adds, has Autorum dissensiones facile
fuerit conciliare; nec mirum diversas relationes a Plinio auditas. For (says
he) as the Tartars often change their Seats, since they do not live in Houses,
but in Tents, fo it is no wonder that the Pygmies often change theirs, fince
instead of Houses they live in Caves or Huts, built of Mud, Feathers, and
Eggshels. And this mutation of their Habitations he thinks is very plain from
Pliny, where speaking of Gerania, he says, Pygmaeorum Gens fuisse ( non jam
esse) proditur, creduntque a Gruibus fugatos. Which passage (says Bartholine)
had Adrian Spigelius considered, he would not so soon have left Aristotle's
Opinion, because Franc. Alvares the Portuguese did not find them in the place
where Aristotle left them; for the Cranees, it may be, had driven them thence.
His third Article is, their Habitation, which Aristotle says is in Caves;
hence they are Troglodytes. Pliny tells us they build Huts with Mud, Feathers,
and Egg-shells. But what Bartholine adds, Eo quod Terrae Cavernas inhabitent,
non injuria dicti sunt olim Pygmaei, Terrae filii, is wholly new to me, and I
have not met with it in any Author before: though he gives us here several other
significations of the word Terrae filij from a great many Authors, which I will
not trouble you at present with. 4. The Form, being flat nosed and ugly, as
Ctesias. 5. Their Speech, which was the same as the Indians, as Ctesias; and
for this I find he has no other Author. 6. Their Hair; where he quotes Ctesias
again, that they make use of it for Clothes. 7. Their Virtues and Arts; as that
they use the same Laws as the Indians, are very just, excellent Archers, and
that the King of India has Three thousand of them in his Guards. All from
Ctesias. 8. Their Animals, as in Ctesias; and here are mentioned their Sheep,
Oxen, Asses, Mules, and Horses. 9. Their various Actions; as what Ctesias
relates of their killing Hares and Foxes with Crows, Eagles, etc. and fighting
the Cranes, as Homer, Pliny, Juvenal.

The seventh Chapter in Bartholine has a promising Title, An Pygmaei sint
homines, and I expected here something more to our purpose; but I find he
rather endeavors to answer the Reasons of those that would make them Apes,
than to lay down any of his own to prove them Men, And Albertus Magnus's
Opinion he thinks absurd, that makes them part Men part Beasts; they must be
either one or the other, not a Medium between both; and to make out this, he
gives us a large Quotation out of Cardan. But Cardan Cardan. de Rerum
varietate, lib. 8. cap. 40.
in the same place argues that they are not Men. As to Suessanus Suessanus
Comment, in Arist. de Histor. Animal. lib. 8. cap. 12.
his Argument, that they want Reason, this he will not grant; but if they use
it less, or more imperfectly than others (which yet, he says, is not certain)
by the same parity of Reason, Children, the Boeotians, Cumani and Naturals may
not be reckoned Men; and he thinks, what he has mentioned in the preceding
Chapter out of Ctesias, etc. shows that they have no small use of Reason. As to
Suessanus's next Argument, that they want Religion, Justice, etc. this, he
says, is not confirmed by any grave Writer; and if it was, yet it would not
prove that they are not Men. For this defect (he says) might hence happen,
because they are forced to live in Caves for fear of the Cranes; and others
besides them, are herein faulty. For this Opinion, that the Pygmies were Apes
and not Men, he quotes likewise Benedictus Varchius Benedict. Varcbius de
Monstris. lingua vernacula.
, and Job. Tinnulus Job. Tinnulus in GlattoChrjsio.
, and Paulus Jovius Paulus Jovius lib. de Muscovit. Legatione.
, and several others of the Moderns, he tells us, are of the same mind.
Imprimis Geographici quos non puduit in Mappis Geographicis loco Pygmaeorum
simias cum Gruibus pugnantes ridicule dipinxisse.

The Title of Bartholine's eighth and last Chapter is, Argumenta little qui
Pygmaeorum Historiam fabulosam censent, recitantur and refutantur. Where he
tells us, the only Person amongst the Ancients that thought the Story of the
Pygmies to be fabulous was Strabo; but amongst the Moderns there are several,
as Cardan, Budaeus, Aldrovandus, Fullerus and others. The first Objection (he
says) is that of Spigelius and others; that since the whole World is now
discovered, how happens it, that these Pygmies are not to be met with? He has
seven Answers to this Objection; how satisfactory they are, the Reader may
judge, if he pleases, by perusing them amongst the Quotations Respondes 1.
Contrarium testari Mercatorum Relationem apud Ananiam supra Cap. 4. 2. Et licet
non invent^ essent vivia quolibet, pari j^re Mono^erota and alia negare
liceret. 3. Qui maria pernavigant, vix eras pa^cas maritimas lustrant, adeo non
terras omnes a mari dissitas. 4. Neque in Oris illos habitare maritimis ex
Capite quinto manisestum est. 5. Quis testatum seomnem adhibuisse diligentiam
in inquirendo eos ut inve^^^^et. 6 Ita in terra habitant, ut in Antris vitam
tolerare dicantur. 7. Si vel maxim omni ab omni^^ ^^igertia quaesiti fuissent,
nec inventi; fieri potest, ut instar Gigantum jam desierint nec sint amplius.
. Cardan's second Objection (he says) is, that they live but eight years,
whence several Inconveniences would happen, as Cardan shows; he answers that no
good Author asserts this; and if there was, yet what Cardan urges would not
follow; and instances out of Artemidorus in Pliny Psinij Hist. Not. lib. 7.
cap. 2. p. m. 14.
, as a Parallel in the Calingae a Nation of India, where the Women conceive
when five years old, and do not live above eight. Gesner speaking of the
Pygmies, says, Vitae autem longitudo anni arciter octo ut Albertus refert.
Cardan perhaps had his Authority from Alberius, or it may be both took it from
this passage in Pliny, which I think would better agree to Apes than Men. But
Artemidorus being an Indian Historian, and in the same place telling other
Romances, the less Credit is to be given to him. The third Objection, he says,
is of Cornelius a Lapide, who denies the Pygmies, because Homer was the first
Author of them. The sourth Objection he says is, because Authors disser about
the Place where they should be: This, he tells us, he has answered already in
the fifth Chapter. The fifth and last Objection he mentions is, that but few
have seen them. He answers, there are a great many Wonders in Sacred and
Profane History that we have not seen, yet must not deny. And he instances in
three; As the Formicae Indicae, which are as bigs as great Dogs: The Cornu
Plantabile in the Island Goa, which when cut off from the Beast, and flung upon
the Ground, will take root like a Cabbage: And the Scotland Geese that grow
upon Trees, for which he quotes a great many Authors, and so concludes.

Now how far Bartholine in this Treatise has made out that the Pygmies of the
Ancients were real Men, either from the Authorities he has quoted, or his
Reasonings upon them, I submit to the Reader. I shall proceed now (as I
promised) to consider the Proof they pretend from Holy Writ: For Bartholine and
others insist upon that Text in Ezekiel ( Cap. 27. Verse. 11.) where the Vulgar
Translation has it thus; Filij Arvad cum Exercitu tuo supra Muros tuos per
circuitum, and Pygmaei in Turribus tuis fuerunt; Scuta sua suspenderunt supra
Muros tuos per circuitum. Now Talentonius and Bartholine think that what
Ctesias relates of the Pygmies, as their being good Archers, very well
illustrates this Text of Ezekiel: I shall here transcribe what Sir Thomas Brown
Sir Thomas Brown's Enquivies into Vulgar Errors, lib. 4. cap. 11. p. 242.
remarks upon it; and if any one requires farther Satisfaction, they may
consult Job Ludolphus's Comment on his AEthiopic History Comment. in H^st.
AEthiopic. p. 73.
.

The second Testimony ( says Sir Thomas Brown) is deduced from Holy Scripture;
thus rendered in the Vulgar Translation, Sed and Pygmaei qui erant in turribus
tuis, pharetras suas suspenderunt in muris tuis per gyrum: from whence
notwithstanding we cannot infer this Assertion, for first the Translators
accord not, and the Hebrew word Gammadim is very variously rendered. Though
Aquila, Vatablus and Lyra will have it Pygmaei, yet in the Septuagint, it is no
more then Watchmen; and so in the Arabic and HighDutch. In the Chalde,
Cappadocians, in Symmachus, Medes, and in the French, those of Gamed.
Theodotian of old, and Tremellius of late, have retained the Textuary word; and
so have the Italian, Low Dutch and English Translators, that is, the Men of
Arvad were upon thy Walls round about, and the Gammadims were in thy Towers.

Nor do Men only dissent in the Translation of the word, but in the Exposition
of the Sense and Meaning thereof; for some by Gammadims understand a People of
Syria, so called from the City of Gamala; some hereby understand the
Cappadocians, many the Medes: and hereof Forerius has a singular Exposition,
conceiving the Watchmen of Tire, might well be called Pygmies, the Towers of
that City being so high, that unto Men below, they appeared in a Cubital
Stature. Others expound it quite contrary to common Acception, that is not Men
of the least, but of the largest size; so does Cornelius construe Pygmaei, or
Viri Cubitales, that is, not Men of a Cubit high, but of the largest Stature,
whose height like that of Giants, is rather to be taken by the Cubit than the
Foot; in which phrase we read the measure of Goliath, whose height is said to be
six Cubits and a span. Of affinity hereto is also the Exposition of Jerome; not
taking Pygmies for D^^arfs, but stout and valiant Champions; not taking the
sense of (...), which signifies the Cubit measure, but that which expresses
Pugils; that is, Men fit for Combat and the Exercise of the Fist. Thus can
there be no satisfying illation from this Text, the diversity, or rather
contrariety of Expositions and Interpretations, distracting more than
confirming the Truth of the Story.

But why Aldrovandus or Caspar Bartholine should bring in St. Austin as a
Favourer of this Opinion of Men Pygmies, I see no Reason. To me he seems to
assert quite the contrary: For proposing this Question, An ex propagine Adam
vel filiorum Noe, quaedam genera Hominum Monstrosa prodierunt? He mentions a
great many monstrous Nations of Men, as they are described by the Indian
Historians, and amongst the rest, the Pygmies, the Sciopodes, etc. And adds,
Quid dicam de Cynocephalis, quorum Canina Capita atque ipse Latratus magis
Bestias quam Homines confitentur? Sed omnia Genera Hominum, quae dicuntur esse,
esse credere, non est necesse. And afterward so fully expresses himself in
favor of the Hypothesis I am here maintaining, that I think it a great
Confirmation of it. Nam and Simias ( says he) and Cercopithecos, and Sphingas,
si nesciremus non Homines esse, sed Bestias, possent isti Historici de sua
Curiositate gloriantes velut Gentes aliquas Hominum nobis impunita vanitate
mentiri. At last he concludes and determines the Question thus, Aut illa, quae
talia de quibusdam Gentibus scripta sunt, omnino nulla sunt, aut si sunt,
Homines non sunt, aut ex Adam sunt si homines sunt.

There is nothing therefore in St. Austin that justifies the being of Men
Pygmies, or that the Pygmies were Men; he rather makes them Apes. And there is
nothing in his Scholiast Ludovicus Vives that tends this way, he only quotes
from other Authors, what might illustrate the Text he is commenting upon, and
no way asserts their being Men. I shall therefore next enquire into Bochartus's
Opinion, who would have them to be the Nubae or Nobae. Hos Nubas Troglodyticos
(says Sam. Bochart. Geograph. Sacrae, Part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 23. p.m. 142.
he) ad Avalitem Sinum esse Pygmaeos Veterum multa probant. He gives us five
Reasons to prove this. As, 1. The Authority of Hesychius, who says (...). 2.
Because Homer places the Pygmies near the Ocean, where the Nubae were. 3.
Aristotle places them at the Lakes of the Nile. Now by the Nile Bochartus tells
us, we must understand the Astaboras, which the Ancients thought to be a Branch
of the Nile, as he proves from Pliny, Solinus and AEthicus. And Ptolomy (he
tells us) places the Nubae hereabout 4. Because Aristotle makes the Pygmies to
be Troglodytes, and so were the Nubae 5. He urges that Story of Nonnosus which
I have already mentioned, and thinks that those that Nonnosus met with, were a
Colony of the Nubae; but afterward adds, Quos tamen absit ut putemus Statura
fuisse Cubitali, prout Poetae fingunt, qui omnia in majus augent. But this
methinks spoils them from being Pygmies; several other Nations at this rate may
be Pygmies as well as these Nubae. Besides, he does not inform us, that these
Nubae used to fight the Cranes; and if they do not, and were not Cubitales,
they cannot be Homer's Pygmies, which we are enquiring after. But the Notion of
their being Men, had so possessed him, that it put him upon fancying they must
be the Nubae; but it is plain that those in Nonnosus could not be a Colony of
the Nubae; for then the Nubae must have understood their Language, which the
Text says, none of the Neighborhood did. And because the Nubae are
Troglodytes, that therefore they must be Pygmies, is no Argument at all. For
Troglodytes here is used as an Adjective ^ and there is a sort of Sparrow which
is called Passer Troglodytes. Not but that in Africa there was a Nation of Men
called Troglodytes, but quite different from our Pygmies. How far Bochartus may
be in the right, in guessing the Lakes of the Nile (whereabout Aristotle places
the Pygmies) to be the Fountains of the River Astaboras, which in his
description, and likewise the Map, he places in the Country of the Avalitae,
near the Mossylon Emporium; I shall not enquire. This I am certain of, he
misrepresents Aristotle where he tells us Bocharti Hierozoici pars Posterior,
lib. 1. cap. 11. p. 76.
, Quamvis in ea fabula hoc saltem verum esse asserat Philosophus, Pusillos
Homines in iis locis degere: for as I have already observed; Aristotle in that
Text says nothing at all of their being Men: the contrary rather might be
thence inferred, that they were Brutes. And Bochart's Translation, as well as
Gaza's is faulty here, and by no means to be allowed, viz. Vt aiunt, genus ibi
parvum est tam Hominum, quam Equorum; which had Bochartus considered, he would
not have been so fond it may be of his Nubae. And if the (...) in Hesychius are
such Pygmies as Bochartus makes his Nubae, Quos tamen absit ut putemus statura
fuisse Cubitali, it will not do our business at all; and neither Homer's
Authority, nor Aristotle's does him any Service.

But this Fable of Men Pygmies has not only obtained amongst the Greeks and
Indian Historians: the Arabians likewise tell much such Stories of them, as the
same learned Bochartus informs us. I will give his Latin Translation of one of
them, which he has printed in Arabic also: Arabes idem ( says Bochartus ibid.
p.m. 77.
Bochartus) referunt ex cujusdam Graeculi side, qui Jacobo Isaaci filio,
Sigariensi fertur it a narrasse. Navigabam aliquando in mari Zingitano, and
impulit me ventus in quandam Insulam. In cujus Oppidum cum devenissem, reperi
Incolas Cubitalis esse staturae, and plerosque Coclites. Quorum multitudo in me
congregata me deduxit ad Regem suum. Jussit is, ut Captivus detinerer; and in
quandam Caveae speciem conjectus sum; eos autem aliquando ad bellum instrui cum
viderem, dixerunt Hostem imminere, and fore ut propediem ingrueret. Nec multo
post Gruum exercitus in eos insurrexit. Atque ideo erant Coclites, quod eorum
oculos hae confodissent. Atque Ego, virga assumpta, in eas impetum feci, and
illae avolarunt atque aufugerunt; ob quod facinus in honor fui apud illos.
This Author, it seems, represents them under the same Misfortune with the Poet,
who first mentioned them, as being blind, by having their Eyes peck'd out by
their cruel Enemies. Such an Accident possibly might happen now and then, in
these bloody Engagements, though I wonder the Indian Historians have not taken
notice of it. However the Pygmies showed themselves grateful to their
Deliverer, in heaping Honors on him. One would guess, for their own sakes,
they could not do less than make him their Generalissimo; but our Author is
modest in not declaring what they were.

Isaac Vossius seems to unsettle all, and endeavors utterly to ruin the whole
Story: for he tells us, If you travel all over Africa, you shall not meet with
either a Crane or Pygmie: Se mirari (says Isaac Vossius de Nili aliorumque
flumimnum Origin, Cap. 18.
Isaac Vossius) Aristotelem, quod tam serio affirmet non esse fabellam, quae de
Pygmaeis and Bello, quod cum Gruibus gerant, narrantur. Si quis totam pervadat
Africam, nullas vel Grues vel Pygmaeos inveniet. Now one would wonder more at
Vossius, that he should assert this of Aristotle, which he never said. And
since Vossius is so mistaken in what he relates of Aristotle; where he might so
easily have been in the right, it is not improbable, but he may be out in the
rest too: For who has traveled all Africa over, that could inform him? And why
should he be so peremptory in the Negative, when he had so positive an
Affirmation of Aristotle to the contrary? or if he would not believe
Aristotle's Authority, methinks he should Aristophanes's, who tells us
Aristophanes in Nubibus.
, (...). It Is time to sow when the noisy Cranes take their flight into Libya.
Which Observation is likewise made by Hesiod, Theognis, Aratus, and others. And
Maximus Tyrius (as I find him quoted in Bochartus) says, (...). i. e. Grues
per aestatem ex AEgypto abscedentes, quia Calorem pati non possunt, alis
velorum instar expansis, per aerem ad Scythicam plagam recta feruntur. Which
fully confirms that Migration of the Cranes that Aristotle mentions.

But Vossius I find, though he will not allow the Cranes, yet upon second
Thoughts did admit of Pygmies here: For this Story of the Pygmies and the
Cranes having made so much noise, he thinks there may be something of truth in
it; and then gives us his Conjecture, how that the Pygmies may be those Dwarfs,
that are to be met with beyond the Fountains of the Nile; but that they do not
fight Cranes but Elephants, and kill a great many of them, and drive a
considerable Traffic for their Teeth with the Jagi, who sell them to those of
Congo and the Portuguese. I will give you Vossius's own words; Attamen (says
Isaac Vossius ibid:
he) ut solent fabellae non de nihilo fingi and aliquod plerunque continent
very, id ipsum qnoque ^.ic factum esse existimo. Certum quippe est ultra Nili
fontes multos reperiri Nanos, qui tamen non cum Gruibus, sed cum Elephantis
perpetuum gerant bellum. Praecipuum quippe Eboris commercium in regno magni
Macoki per istos transigitur Homunciones; habitant in Sylvis, and mira
dexteritate Elephantos sagittis conficiunt. Carnibus vescuntur, Dentes vero
Jagis divendunt, illi autem Congentibus and Lusitanis.

Job Ludolphus Job Ludolphus in Comment. in Historiam AEthiopicam, p.m. 71.
in his Commentary on his AEthiopick History remarks, That there was never
known a Nation all of Dwarfs. Nani quippe (says Ludolphus) Naturae quodam
errore ex aliis justae staturae hominibus generantur. Qualis vero ea Gens sit,
ex qua ista Naturae Ludibria tanta copia proveniant, Vossium docere oportebat,
quia Pumiliones Pumiles alios non gignunt, sed plerunque steriles sunt,
experientia test; ut plane non opus habuerunt Doctores Talmudici Nanorum
matrimonia prohibere, ne Digitales ex iis nascerentur. Ludolphus it may be is a
little too strict with Vossius for calling them Nani; he may only mean a sort
of Men in that Country of less Stature than ordinary. And Dapper in his History
of Africa, from whom Vossius takes this Account, describes such in the Kingdom
of Mokoko, he calls Mimos, and tells us that they kill Elephants. But I see no
reason why Vossius should take these Men for the Pygmies of the Ancients, or
think that they gave any occasion or ground for the inventing this Fable, if
there was no other reason, this was sufficient, because they were able to kill
the Elephants. The Pygmies were scarce a Match for the Cranes; and for them to
have encountered an Elephant, were as vain an Attempt, as the Pygmies were
guilty of in Philostratus Philostratus. Icon, lib. 2. p.m. 817.
, who to revenge the Death of Antaeus, having found Hercules napping in Libya,
mustered up all their Forces against him. One Phalanx (he tells us) assaulted
his left hand; but against his right hand, that being the stronger, two
Phalanges were appointed. The Archers and Slingers besieged his feet, admiring
the hugeness of his Thighs: But against his Head, as the Arsenal, they raised
Batteries, the King himself taking his Post there. They set fire to his Hair,
put Reaping-hooks in his Eyes; and that he might not breath, clapped Doors to
his Mouth and Nostrils; but all the Execution that they could do, was only to
awake him, which when done, deriding their folly, he gathered them all up into
his Lion's Skin, and carried them ( Philostratus thinks) to Euristhenes. This
Antaeus was as remarkable for his height, as the Pygmies were for their lowness
of Stature: For Plutarch Plutarch. in vita Q. Sertorij.
tells us, that Q. Sertorius not being willing to trust Common Fame, when he
came to Tingis (now Tangier) he caused Antaeus's Sepulcher to be opened, and
found his Corpse full threescore Cubits long. But Sertorius knew well enough how
to impose upon the Credulity of the People, as is evident from the Story of his
white Hind, which Plutarch likewise relates.

But to return to our Pygmies; though most of the great and learned Men would
seem to decry this Story as a Fiction and mere Fable, yet there is something of
Truth, they think, must have given the first rise to it, and that it was not
wholly the product of Fancy, but had some real foundation, though disguised,
according to the different Imagination and Genius of the Relator: It Is this
that has incited them to give their several Conjectures about it. Job Ludolphus
finding what has been offered at in Relation to the Pygmies, not to satisfy,
he thinks he can better account for this Story, by leaving out the Cranes, and
placing in their stead, another sort of Bird he calls the Condor. I will give
you his own words: Sed ad Pygmaeos (s;aith Job Ludolphus Comment. in Historiam
suam AEthiopic. p. 73.
Ludolphus) revertamur; fabula de Geranomachia Pygmaeorum seu pugna cum Gruibus
etiam aliquid de vero trahere videtur, si pro Gruibus Condoras intelligas, Aves
in interiore Africa maximas, ut fidem pene excedat; aiunt enim quod Ales ista
vitulum Elephanti in Aererm extollere possit; ut infra docebimus. Cum his
Pygmaeos pugnare, ne pecora sua rapiant, incredibile non est. Error ex eo natus
videtur, quod primus Relator, alio vocabulo destitutus, Grues pro Condoris
nominarit, sicuti Plautus Picos pro Gryphibus, and Romani Boves lucas pro
Elephantis dixere.

It Is true, if what Juvenal only in ridicule mentions, was to be admitted as a
thing really done, that the Cranes could fly away with a Pygmie, as our Kites
can with a Chicken, there might be some pretense for Ludovicus's Condor or
Cunctor: For he mentions afterward J^b Ludolphus ibi... page 164.
out of P. Job. dos Santos the Portuguese, that 'twas observed that one of
these Condors once flew away with an Ape, Chain, Clog and all, about ten or
twelve pounds weight, which he carried to a neighboring Wood, and there
devoured him. And Garcilasso de la Vega Garcilasso de la Vega Royal Comment. of
Peru.
relates that they will seize and fly away with a Child ten or twelve years
old. But Juvenal Juvenal Satyr. 13. ^e^^. 167.
only mentions this in ridicule and merriment, where he says, Ad subitas
Thracum volucres, nubemque sonoram
Pygmaeos parvis currit Bellator in armis:
Mox impar hosti, raptusque per era curvis
Vnguibus a saeva fertur Grue.


Besides, were the Condors to be taken for the Cranes, it would utterly spoil
the Pygmaeomachia; for where the Match is so very unequal, it is impossible for
the Pygmies to make the least show of a fight. Ludolphus puts as great
hardships on them, to fight these Condors, as Vossius did, in making them fight
Elephants, but not with equal Success; for Vossius's Pygmies made great
Slaughters of the Elephants; but Ludolphus his Cranes sweep away the Pygmies,
as easily as an Owl would a Mouse, and eat them up into the bargain; now I
never heard the Cranes were so cruel and barbarous to their Enemies, though there
are some Nations in the World that are reported to do so.

Moreover, these Condor's I find are very rare to be met with; and when they
are, they often appear single, or but a few. Now Homer's, and the Cranes of the
Ancients, are always represented in Flocks. Thus Oppian Oppian. lib. 1. de
Pij^^bus.
as I find him translated into Latin Verse: Et velut AEthiopum veniunt, Nilique
fluenta
Turmatim Palamedis Aves, celsaeeque per altum
Era labentes fugiunt Athlanta nivosum,
Pygmaeos imbelle Genus, parvumque fatigant,
Non perturbato procedunt ordine densae
Instruct is volucres obscurant era Turmis.
To imagine these Grues a single Gigantick Bird, would much lessen the Beauty
of Homer's Simile, and would not have served his turn; and there are none who
have borrowed Homer's fancy, but have thought so. I will only farther instance
in Baptista Mantuan: Pygmaei breve vulgus, iners Plebecula, quando
Convenere Grues longis in praelia rostris,
Sublato clamore fremunt, dumque agmine magno
Hostibus occurrit, tellus tremit Indica, clamant
Littora, arenarum nimbis absconditur aer;
Omnis and involvit Pulvis solemque, Polumque,
Et Genus hoc Hominum natura imbelle, quietum,
Mite, facit Mavors pugnax, immane Cruentum.


Having now considered and examined the various Opinions of these learned Men
concerning this Pygmaeomachia; and represented the Reasons they give for
maintaining their Conjectures; I shall beg leave to subjoyn my own: and if what
at present I offer, may seem more probable, or account for this Story with more
likelihood, than what has hitherto been advanced, I shall not think my time
altogether misspent: But if this will not do, I shall never trouble my head more
about them, nor think my self any ways concerned to write on this Argument
again. And I had not done it now, but upon the occasion of Dissecting this
Orang-Outang, or wild Man, which being a Native of Africa, and brought from
Angola, though first taken higher up in the Country, as I was informed by the
Relation given me; and observing so great a Resemblance, both in the outward
shape, and, what surprised me more, in the Structure likewise of the inward
Parts, to a Man; this Thought was easily suggested to me, That very probably
this Animal, or some other such of the same Species, might give the first rise
and occasion to the Stories of the Pygmies. What has been the (...), and
rendered this Story so difficult to be believed, I find has been the Opinion
that has generally obtained, that these Pygmies were really a Race of little
Men. And though they are only Brutes, yet being at first called wild Men, no
doubt from the Resemblance they bear to Men; there have not been wanting those
especially amongst the Ancients, who have invented a hundred ridiculous Stories
concerning them; and have attributed those things to them, were they to be
believed in what they say, that necessarily conclude them real Men.

To sum up therefore what I have already discoursed, I think I have proved,
that the Pygmies were not an Humane Species or Men. And though Homer, who first
mentioned them, calls them (...), yet we need not understand by this Expression
any thing more than Apes: And though his Geranomachia has been looked upon by
most only as a Poetical Fiction; yet by assigning what might be the true Cause
of this Quarrel between the Cranes and Pygmies, and by divesting it of the many
fabulous Relations that the Indian Historians, and others, have loaded it with,
I have endeavored to render it a true, at least a probable Story. I have
instanced in Ctesias and the Indian Historians, as the Authors and Inventors of
the many Fables we have had concerning them: Particularly, I have Examined
those Relations; where Speech or Language is attributed to them; and shown,
that there is no reason to believe, that they ever spoke any Language at all.
But these Indian Historians having related so many extravagant Romances of the
Pygmies, as to render their whole History suspected, nay to be utterly denied,
that there were ever any such Creatures as Pygmies in Nature, both by Strabo of
old, and most of our Learned Men of late, I have endeavored to assert the
Truth of their being, from a Text in Aristotle; which being so positive in
affirming their Existence, creates a difficulty, that can no ways be got over
by such as are of the contrary Opinion. This Text I have vindicated from the
false Interpretations and Glosses of several Great Men, who had their Minds so
prepossessed and prejudiced with the Notion of Men Pygmies, that they often
would quote it, and misapply it, though it contained nothing that any ways
favored their Opinion; but the contrary rather, that they were Brutes, and not
Men.

And that the Pygmies were really Brutes, I think I have plainly proved out of
Herodotus and Philostratus, who reckon them amongst the wild Beasts that breed
in those Countries: For though by Herodotus they are called (...), and
Philostratus calls them (...), yet both make them (...) or wild Beasts. And I
might here add what Pausanias Pausanias in Atticis, p. m. 21.
relates from Euphemus Car, who by contrary Winds was driven upon some Islands,
where he tells us, (...), but when he comes to describe them, tells us that
they had no Speech; that they had Tails on their Rumps; and were very
lascivious toward the Women in the Ship. But of these more, when we come to
discourse of Satyrs.

And we may the less wonder to find that they call Brutes Men, since 'twas
common for these Historians to give the Title of Men, not only to Brutes, but
they were grown so wanton in their Inventions, as to describe several Nations
of Monstrous Men, that had never any Being, but in their own Imagination, as I
have instanced in several. I therefore excuse Strabo for denying the Pygmies,
since he could not but be convinced, they could not be such Men, as these
Historians have described them. And the better to judge of the Reasons that
some of the Moderns have given to prove the Being of Men Pygmies, I have laid
down as Postulata's, that hereby we must not understand Dwarfs, nor yet a
Nation of Men, though somewhat of a lesser size and stature than ordinary; but we
must observe those two Characteristicks that Homer gives of them, that they are
Cubitales, and fight Cranes.

Having premised this, I have taken into consideration Caspar Bartholine Senior
his Opusculum de Pygmaeis, and Jo. Talentonius's Dissertation about them; and
upon examination do find, that neither the Humane Authorities, nor Divine that
they allege, do any ways prove, as they pretend, the Being of Men Pygmies. St.
Austin, who is likewise quoted on their side, is so far from favoring this
Opinion, that he doubts whether any such Creatures exist, and if they do,
concludes them to be Apes or Monkeys; and censures those Indian Historians for
imposing such Beasts upon us, as distinct Races of Men. Julius Caesar Scaliger,
and Isaac Casaubon, and Adrian Spigelius utterly deny the Being of Pygmies, and
look upon them as a Figment only of the Ancients, because such little Men as
they describe them to be, are no where to be met with in all the World. The
Learned Bochartus, though he esteems the Geranomachia to be a Fable, and slights
it, yet thinks that what might give the occasion to the Story of the Pygmies,
might be the Nubae or Nobae, as Isaac Vossius conjectures that it was those
Dwarfs beyond the Fountains of the Nile, that Dapper calls the Mimos, and tells
us, they kill Elephants for to make a Traffic with their Teeth. But Job
Ludolphus alters the Scene, and instead of Cranes, substitutes his Condors, who
do not fight the Pygmies, but fly away with them, and then devour them.

Now all these Conjectures do no ways account for Homer's Pygmies and Cranes,
they are too much forced and strained. Truth is always easy and plain. In our
present Case therefore I think the Orang-Outang, or wild Man, may exactly
supply the place of the Pygmies, and without any violence or injury to the
Story, sufficiently account for the whole History of the Pygmies, but what is
most apparently fabulous; for what has been the greatest difficulty to be
solved or satisfied, was their being Men; for as Gesner remarks (as I have
already quoted him) Sed veterum nullus aliter de Pygmaeis scripsit, quam
Homunciones esse. And the Moderns too, being biased and misguided by this
Notion, have either wholly denied them, or contented themselves in offering
their Conjectures what might give the first rise to the inventing this Fable.
And though Albertus, as I find him frequently quoted, thought that the Pygmies
might be only a sort of Apes, and he is placed in the Head of those that
espoused this Opinion, yet he spoils all, by his way of reasoning, and by
making them speak; which was more than he needed to do.

I cannot see therefore any thing that will so fairly solve this doubt, that
will reconcile all, that will so easily and plainly make out this Story, as by
making the Qrang-Outang to be the Pygmie of the Ancients; for it is the same
Name that Antiquity gave them. For Herodotus's (...), what can they be else,
than Homines Sylvestres, or wild Men? as they are now called. And Homer's
(...), are no more an Humane Kind, or Men, than Herodotus's (...), which he
makes to be (...), or wild Beasts: And the (...) or (...) (as they are often
called) were just the same. Because this sort of Apes had so great a
resemblance to Men, more than other Apes or Monkeys; and they going naturally
erect, and being designed by Nature to go so, (as I have shown in the Anatomy)
the Ancients had a very plausible ground for giving them this denomination of
(...) or (...), but commonly they added an Epithet; as (...), or some snch
like. Now the Ancient Greek, and Indian Historians, though they might know these
Pygmies to be only Apes like Men, and not to be real Men, yet being so
extremely addicted to Mythology, or making Fables, and finding this so fit a
Subject to engraft upon, and invent Stories about, they have not been wanting
in furnishing us with a great many very Romantic ones on this occasion. And
the Moderns being imposed upon by them, and misguided by the Name of (...) or
(...), as if thereby must be always understood an Humane Kind, or real Men,
they have altogether mistaken the Truth of the Story, and have either wholly
denied it, or rendered it as improbable by their own Conjectures.

This difficulty therefore of their being called Men, I think, may fairly
enough be accounted for by what I have said. But it may be objected that the
Orang-Outang, or these wild or savage Men are not (...), or Trispithami, that
is, but two Foot and a quarter high, because by some Relations that have been
given, it appears they have been observed to be of a higher stature, and as
tall as ordinary Men. Now though this may be allowed as to these wild Men that
are bred in other places; and probably enough likewise, there are such in some
Parts of the Continent of Africa; yet it is sufficient to our business if there
are any there, that will come within our Dimensions; for our Scene lies in
Africa; where Strabo observes, that generally the Beasts are of a less size
than ordinary; and this he thinks might give the rise to the Story of the
Pygmies. For, says he Strabo Geograph. lib. 17. p. m. 565.
, (...). i.e. That their Beasts are small, as their Sheep, Goats and Oxen, and
their Dogs are small, but hairy and fierce: and it may be (says he) from the
(...) or littleness of the stature of these Animals, they have invented and
imposed on us the Pygmies. And then adds, That no body fit to be believed ever
saw them; because he fancied, as a great many others have done, that these
Pygmies must be real Men, and not a sort of Brutes. Now since the other Brutes
in this Country are generally of a less size than in other Parts, why may not
this sort of Ape, the Orang-Outang, or wild Man, be so likewise. Aristotle
speaking of the Pygmies, says, (...) That both they and the Horses there are
but small. He does not say their Horses, for they were never mounted upon
Horses, but only upon Partridges, Goats and Rams. And as the Horses, and other
Beasts are naturally less in Africa than in other Parts, so likewise may the
Orang-Outang be. This that I dissected, which was brought from Angola (as I
have often mentioned) wanted something of the just stature of the Pygmies; but
it was young, and I am therefore uncertain to what tallness it might grow, when
at full Age: And neither Tulpius, nor Gassendus, nor any that I have hitherto
met with, have adjusted the full stature of this Animal that is found in those
Parts from whence ours was brought: But it is most certain, that there are sorts
of Apes that are much less than the Pygmies are described to be. And, as other
Brutes, so the Ape-kind, in different Climates, may be of different Dimensions;
and because the other Brutes here are generally small, why may not they be so
likewise. Or if the difference should be but little, I see no great reason in
this case, why we should be over-nice, or scrupulous.

As to our Ape Pygmies or Orang-Outang fighting the Cranes, this, I think, may
be easily enough made out, by what I have already observed; for this wild Man I
dissected was Carnivorous, and it may be Omnivorous, at least as much as Man
is; for it would eat any thing that was brought to the Table. And if it was not
their Hunger that drove them to it, their Wantonness, it may be, would make
them apt enough to rob the Cranes Nests; and if they did so, no doubt but the
Cranes would make noise enough about it, and endeavor what they could to beat
them off, which a Poet might easily make a Fight: Though Homer only makes use of
it, as a Simile, in comparing the great Shouts of the Trojans to the Noise of
the Cranes, and the Silence of the Greeks to that of the Pygmies when they are
going to Engage, which is natural enough, and very just, and contains nothing,
but what may easily be believed; though upon this account he is commonly exposed,
and derided, as the Inventor of this Fable; and that there was nothing of Truth
in it, but that 'twas wholly a Fiction of his own.

Those Pygmies that Paulus Jovius (w) Paui. Jovij de Legatione Muschovitar.
lib. p.m. 489.
describes, though they dwell at a great distance from Africa, and he calls them
Men, yet are so like Apes, that I cannot think them any thing else. I will give
you his own words: Vltra Lapones (says he) in Regione inter Little and
Aquilonem perpetua oppressa Caligine Pygmaeos reperiri, aliqui eximiae fidei
testes rctulerunt; qui postquam ad summum adoleverint, nostratis Pueri denum
annorum Mensuram vix excedunt. Meticulosum genus hominum, and garritu Sermonem
exprimens, adeo ut tam Simiae propinqui, quam statura ac sensibus ab justae
Proceritatis homine remoti videantur. Now there is this Advantage in our
Hypothesis, it will take in all the Pygmies, in any part of the World, or
wherever they are to be met with, without supposing, as some have done, that
'twas the Cranes that forced them to quit their Quarters; and upon this account
several Authors have described them in different places: For unless we suppose
the Cranes so kind to them, as to wast them over, how came we to find them
often in Islands? But this is more than can be reasonably expected from so
great Enemies.

I shall conclude by observing to you, that this having been the Common Error
of the Age, in believing the Pygmies to be a sort of little Men, and it having
been handed down from so great Antiquity, what might contribute farther to the
confirming this Mistake, might be, the Imposture of the Navigators, who sailing
to these Parts where these Apes are, they have embalmed their Bodies, and
brought them home, and then made the People believe that they were the Men of
those Countries from whence they came. This M. P. Venetus assures us to have
been done; and it is not unlikely: For, says he M. Pauli Veneti de Regionibus
Orieneal. lib. 3. cap. 15. p.m. 390.
, Abundat quoque Regio ipsa (sc. Basman in Java majori) diversis Simiis magnis
and parvis, hominibus simillimis, hos capiunt Venatores and totos depilant,
nisi quod in barba and in loco secreto Pilos relinquunt, and occisos speciebus
Aromaticis condiunt, and postea desiccant, venduntque Negociatoribus, qui per
diversas Orbis Parts Corpora illa deferentes, homines persuadent Tales
Homunciones in Maris Insulis reperiri. Joh. Jonston Jo. Jonsten. Hist. Not. de
Quadruped. p.m. 139.
relates the same thing, but without quoting the Author; and as he is very apt
to do, commits a great mistake, in telling us, pro Homunculis marinis venditant.

I shall only add, That the Servile Offices that these Creatures are observed
to perform, might formerly, as it does to this very day, impose upon Mankind to
believe, that they were of the same Species with themselves; but that only out
of sullenness or cunning, they think they will not speak, for fear of being
made Slaves. Philostratus Philostratus in vita Apollonij Tyanaei, lib. 3. cap.
1. p. m. 110, and 111.
tells us, That the Indians make use of the Apes in gathering the Pepper; and
for this Reason they do defend and preserve them from the Lions, who are very
greedy of preying upon them: And although he calls them Apes, yet he speaks of
them as Men, and as if they were the Husbandmen of the Pepper Trees, (...). And
he calls them the People of Apes; (...). Dapper Dapper Description de l'
Afrique, p. m. 249.
tells us, That the Indians take the Baris when young, and make them so tame,
that they will do almost the work of a Slave; for they commonly go erect as Men
do. They will beat Rice in a Mortar, carry Water in a Pitcher, etc. And
Gassendus Gassendus in vita Pierskij, lib. 5. p. m. 169.
in the Life of Pieresky, tells us, That they will play upon a Pipe or Cittern,
or the like Music, they will sweep the House, turn the Spit, beat in a Mortar,
and do other Offices in a Family. And Acosta, as I find him quoted by
Garcilasso de la Vega Garcilasso de la Vega Royal Commentaries of Peru, lib. 8.
cap. 18. p. 1333.
tells us of a Monkey he saw at the Governor's House at Cartagena, whom they
sent often to the Tavern for Wine, with Money in one hand, and a Bottle in the
other; and that when he came to the Tavern, he would not deliver his Money,
until he had received his Wine. If the Boys met with him by the way, or made a
houting or noise after him, he would set down his Bottle, and throw Stones at
them; and having cleared the way, he would take up his Bottle, and hasten home.
And though he loved Wine excessively, yet he would not dare to touch it, unless
his Master gave him License. A great many Instances of this Nature might be
given that are very surprising. And in another place tells us, That the Natives
think that they can speak, but will not, for fear of being made to work. And
Bontius Jac. Bontij Hist. Not. and Med. lib. 5. cap. 32. p. m. 85.
mentions that the Javans had the same Opinion concerning the Orang-Outang,
Loqui vero eos, easque Javani aiunt, sed non velle, ne ad labores cogerentur.

A Philological Essay Concerning the CYNOCEPHALI OF THE ANCIENTS.
Of the Cynocephali of the Ancients.
IT IS not that I think there are any at present so mistaken, as to believe the
Cynocephali to be a Race of Men, that I write this Essay: it is so notoriously
known that they are Monkeys, or rather Baboons, that it is needless to go about
to prove it, it is what even the Ancients themselves have sufficiently
confessed. That which induces me to mention them, is to show how fond the
Ancients were of inventing Fables; and Ctesias, who has told us such fine
Stories of the Pygmies, whom he makes to be little Men, though indeed they are
only a sort of Apes; when he comes to discourse of the Cynocephali, which are a
sort of Baboons, and far less like Men than the Pygmies are, to persuade us
that these likewise are a Race of Men; he is obliged to exercise his Inventive
Faculty with more force, to use much bolder strokes, and by roundly asserting
so many incredible Things, to amuse our Imaginations, he hopes at least to give
the Reader Entertainment, though he misses his Design of gaining our belief.

I will give you Ctesias's own words, that you may see I do not abuse him, as
he has done Mankind, in most of the Natural History that he has left us; for
as Photij Bibliothec. Cod. 72. de Indicis, p. m. 149, etc.
Photius informs us, Ctesias tells us

(...)

Degere iisdem hisce in montibus homines memorat canino capite, qui ferarum
pellibus vestiantur. Sermon hos nullo uti, canum tantum more latratum edere,
atque ita mutuo sese intelligere. Dentes illis esse quam canibus majores, and
caninos similiter ungues, sed longiores, ac rotundiores. Montes incolere ad
Indum fluvium usque, and color esse nigro, insignesque justitiae cultores,
ceterorum Indorum more, inter quos versentur. Intelligere quoque quae ab Indis
dicantur, licet ipsi loqui minime possint, ut propterea latratu, manibus, atque
digitis signa dent, quemadmodum fere surdi ac muti solent. Vocari hos ab Indis
Calystrios, quod Graeci dicerent (...), id est, Canicipites, [carnibus eosdem
vesci crudis] totiusque gentis capita numerari ad centum and viginti millia.

And a little afterward he adds,

(...) (...)

Narrat insuper hos Cynocephalos in montibus habitantes nullum exercere
opificium; sed de venatione vivere, ferasque quas occiderint ad solemn torrere.
Magnam nihilominus pecoris copiam alere, caprarumque and ovium: quarum quidem
ovium lac atque oxygala pro potu illis sit. Vesci tamen etiam Sipachorae
fructu;e qua, uti dictum est, arbore succinum emanat. dulcem enim illum esse.
Hunc item illos fructum arefactum in corbes constipare, ad eum modum quo uvas
passas Graeci. Eosdem illos Cynocephalos ratem quoque extemporariam construere,
qua impositum hujus fructus onus, ut and purpurae (sed purgato prius ejus
flore) itemque electri, ad ducenta and sexagintatalenta quotannis avehunt;
additis talentis totidem illius Pigmenti, quo infectores puniceum colorem
inducunt. Electri praeterea mill talenta quotannis ad Indorum regem advehere.
Immo and alia plura devehere ad Indos venalia, pro quibus vicissim panes,
farinam, and xylinas vestes accipiant. Habere quoque enses venales, quibus ipsi
ad venatum utuntur, cum arcubus and jaculis. Peritissimos enim esse jaculandi
atque sagittandi: and praeterea ctiam, quod montes habitent altos atque
inaccessos, bello insuperabiles. Regem ipsis pro munere quinto quoque anno
praebere trecenta arcuum, totidemque jaculorum millia; jam peltarum centum
viginti, and gladiorum quinquaginta millia. Nullas item apud hos esse domos,
sed in antris degere. In venatione jaculis potissimum feras, vel sagittis
petere; easdemque persequendo, quod cursus velocitate praestent, etiam assequi.
Horum uxores semel duntaxat per mensem, cum menstrua patiuntur, lavare; alias
nunquam. Neque viros unquam omnino lavare, sed manus tantummodo abluere. Oleo
tamen ex lacte confecto ter saltem mensibus singulis ungi, and pellibus deinde
abstergi. Vest ad haec uti, non villosa, sed e glabris maceratisque pellibus
quam tenuissimis, ipsos aeque atque uxores. Exceptis forte ditissimis inter
eos, and iis quidem paucis, qui lineos gestent amictus. Nec item lectorum
novisse usum eos, qui extemporaneos sibi toros exstruant. Hunc apud eos
ditissimum haberi, qui plurimum habeat pecoris, ac reliquas opes his propemodum
esse similes. Caudam insuper habere omnes, tam viros quam mulieres, supra
clunes, caninae, similem, nisi quod major sit, and pilis densior. Quadrupedes
item hos, canum more, cum mulieribus congredi aliumque congrediendi modum omnem
pro turpi habere. Justissimos eosdem esse, vitaeque reliquos inter homines
longissimae. Vivere namque ad centesimum usque and septuagesimum, nonnullosque
ad ducentissimum quoque annum.

i. e. In these Mountains (says Ctesias) live certain Men, who have Heads like
Dogs, are clothed with Skins of wild Beasts, speak no Language, but bark like
Dogs, and thereby understand one another. They have Teeth larger than Dogs; and
Nails like Dogs, but longer and rounder. They dwell up in the Mountains, as far
as the River Indus; they are black and very just, as are the other Indians with
whom they are mixed; and they understand what is said to them, though they cannot
speak themselves. But by their Barking, and their Hands and Fingers, they
signify their Minds, as Deaf and Dumb Men do. They are called by the Indians,
Calystrij, which in Greek is Cynocephali. The whole Nation is an hundred and
twenty Thousand in number.

These Cynocephali that inhabit the Mountains, do not work, but live upon
Hunting; and when they kill any wild Beast, they roast it in the Sun. They breed
a great many Sheep, Goats and Asses; and drink the Milk and Butter-milk of the
Sheep. They eat likewise the Fruit of the Sipachora Tree, from whence comes
Ambar, the Fruit whereof is sweet, which having dried, they put up in Baskets,
as the Greeks do Raisins. These Cynocephali having made a Boat, they load it
with this Fruit, and with Purpura, the Flower being first picked, and with
Ambar, to the quantity of Two hundred and sixty Talents, which they every Year
ship off, and as much too of the Drug, with which the Dyers dye the Scarlet;
and they carry every Year a Thousand Talents of Ambar to the King of India, and
they take with them other Commodities, which they sell to the Indians; for
which they receive Bread, and Meal, and Cotton Garments. And the Indians sell
them likewise Swords, which they use in taking the wild Beasts; and Bows and
Darts, for they are very skilful Archers and Darters. They are invincible,
because they inhabit very high, and inaccessible Mountains. Every fifth year,
the King bestows upon them Three hundred thousand Bows, and as many Darts: Also
an Hundred and twenty thousand Shields, and Fifty thousand Swords. They have no
Houses, but live in Caves. In hunting the wild Beasts, they use their Bows and
Darts, and pursuing them, they take them; for they run very swift. The Women
bathe only once a Month, when they have their Catamenia, otherwise not. The Men
don't bathe, but only wash their hands; but they anoint themselves three times
in a Month with Oil made of Milk, and rub themselves with Hides. The Clothes
both of the Men and Women are not hairy, but Skins macerated smooth, and made
very thin. The richest of them wear Linen, but those are but few. They have no
Beds, but lie upon Straw or Leaves. He is esteemed the richest amongst them,
who has most Sheep, or such like Substance, They have all, both Men and Women,
Tails on their Rumps, like Dogs, but larger and more hairy; and, like Dogs too,
they lie with their Women on all four, and they think itunbecoming to do
otherwise. They are just, and the longest lived of any Men, for they live an
Hundred and seventy, and some of them Two hundred years.

Had not Ctesias made such a Solemn Asseveration of the Truth of all that he
had wrote, that Apology that Strabo Strabo Geograph. lib. 1. p.m. 29.
makes for the Poets, might excuse him, (...) (says Strabo) (...) i.e. Statim
enim apparet eos fabulas admiscere, non ob verorum ignorationem, sed
delectationis causa, monstra and alia quae esse non possunt, fingentes. For our
Historian had as good a Talent at Fiction as any of the Poets. And though
AEschylus, as the same Strabo there tells us, first invented the Story of the
Cynocephali, or Canicipites, as likewise the Pectoroculati and the Vnoculi, as
Hesiod and Homer did that of the Pygmies; yet I cannot but think he has as far
outdone the Original in what he relates of the Cynocephali, as he did in the
Account he gives of the Pygmies.

These Cynocephali by AElian. Hist. de Animal. lib. 10. cap. 25. p.m. 601.
AElian are called (...), and he gives this Relation of them, as I find him
translated by Conrad. Gesner, who is more faithful in rendering him than Pet.
Gillius, Vltra Oasin AEgypti, solitudo maxima ad septem dierum iter extenditur.
Eam excipit Regio quam Cynoprosopi Homines incolunt, in via AEthiopiam versus.
Vivunt illi Caprarum and Bubalidum venatu. Aspectus iis niger, Caput and Dentes
Canis. Quod Animal, quum referant, non absurda eorum ( quamquam Hominum) hoc in
loco existimanda est mentio. Nam and Sermonis usu carent, and acuto quodam
stridore sonant. Barbam infra supraque os gerunt, Draconum quadam similitudine.
Manus eorum validis and acutissimis unguibus armantur. Corpus omne hirsutum
est, hoc etiam instar Canum. Sunt autem pernicissimi, and aquas Regionis
norunt; atque eam ob causam, difficiles captu.

Now tho AElian calls them here Men, yet where he describes them before, even
out of Ctesias, he plainly tells us they are not Men, but only Brutes, because
they cannot speak, but only bark. I will give you AElian. H^^t. de Animal. lib.
4. cap. 46. p.m. 239.
Gesner's Translation of this Passage: In eodem Indiae tractu, ubi Canthari
These Canthari are that sort of Scaribaeus we call a Lady-Cow, and I have
formerly given a Figure of, in Philosoph. Transact. N. 175. p. 1202. from the
Worm or Chry^alis of which, come the Cochineel, for dying Scarlet, of which
there is a good account here in AElian out of Ctesias.
jam dicti, Cynocephali etiam reperiuntur: quibus a facie and Corporis specie
nomen inditum, caetera fere humana habent: and vestiti pellibus ferarum
ingrediuntur. Justi sunt, Hominum nemini molesti aut injurij, non Sermon sed
ululatu sonant. Indorum tamen linguam intelligunt. Venatione Animalium ferorum
vivunt, quae ut sunt celerrimi, facile consecuti interimunt, and frustatim
divisa ad solemn assunt. Capras etiam and oves alunt, ut ex lacte potu fruantur.
Horum inter Animantes rationis expertes non temere mentionem feci, articulato
enim, discretoque and humano Sermon non utuntur^.

But 'twas for want of Education, it may be, and by their living wild in the
Woods, they lost their Learning and their Speech; for the Egyptians in the
time of the Ptolomies took more care of them; and as the same AElian relates,
they taught them Letters, and to Dance, and to play upon Music: Nor were they
ungrateful to their Masters; for they begged a great deal of Money, which they
carefully put up into a Bag, to reward them for the pains they had taken with
them. For thus, says AElian. Hist. de Anim. lib. 6. cap. 10. p. 331.
AElian, as Gesner translates him; Animalia Disciplinae idonea haec esse
percepi. Regnantibus Ptolomeis Cynocephalos AEgyptij literas, and saltare, and
pulsare Citharam docebant. Tum vero unusquispiam Cynocephalorum mercedem,
Domini nomine sic site tanquam peritus aliquis Mendicus exigebat. Et id quod
dabatur in Marsupium, quod ferebat, appensum, congerebat.

I could not but take the more notice of this passage in AElian, because the
Cynocephali are always represented to be of a fierce and untractable Nature;
which seems their particular Character: For says Aristotle, as I have quoted
him already Vid. page 3. and 7. of the Anatomy.
, (...) i. e. The Cynocephali are of the same shape with Monkeys, but they are
bigger and stronger, and they have a Face more like a Dog's, and are of a
fiercer Nature, and have Teeth more like a Dog's, and stronger. And so Pt^ij
Hist. Not. lib. 8. cap. 54. p. 243.
Pliny, Efferacior Cynocephalis Natura sicut Satyris: And Solini Polyhistor.
cap. 27. p. m. 39.
Solinus, Cynocephali and ipsi sunt e numero simiarum, in AEthiopiae part
frequentissimi: violenti ad saltum, feri morsu, nunquam ita mansueti, ut non
sint magis rabidi. And Diodori Siculi Biblioth. Histor. lib. 3. p.m. 168.
Diodorus Siculus describes them after the same manner: (...) i. e. Qui
Cynocephali (a Canino Capite) dicuntur, Corporis aspectum Hominum deformium
instar habent, quorum vocem mussitatione tantum exprimunt. Apprime ferox est
hoc Animal, nec ullo cicurationem pacto admittit, and vultum a superciliis
austerioribus praefert. Singular quiddam faemellis accidit; quod vulvam
perpetuo extra Corpus projectam habent. And Agatharcides in Photij Biblioth.
Cap. 38. Cod. 250. p.m. 1364.
Photius gives just the same description of them: (...) (says he) (...) (...)
i. e. In Cynocephalo Hominis Corpus, specie turpis, adumbratur. Canina ei
facies, vocem stridori Muris non dissimilem exprimit. Sed immodice ferum est
Animal, nec ullo modo cicuratur: vultumque a superciliis and oculis austerum
prodit. Ita Mas comparatus est. Foemineo generi hoc est proprium, ut uterum
extra Corpus gestet, eoque habitu totam exigat vilam.

Salmasius Salmasij Exercitat. Plinian. Cap. 27. p. 267.
remarks that Agatharcides borrowed this Passage, as he has some others
likewise, from Diodorus Siculus. But that these Relations of Ctesias that are
so extravagant and wild, should be copied from him, by so many and noted
Authors too, seems somewhat strange. Yet we find AElian, Pliny, Solinus, and a
great many others have done it; though they have added by it little Credit to
their Histories, and no doubt much lessened their own Reputation by
transcribing the Errors of their Predecessors. In the History therefore of
Nature we must not depend upon the Authority of the Number of those that only
transcribe the same thing, without duly examining the Matter themselves: For
the Authority here wholly depends on the veracity of the first Relator: And it
what Ctesias says is false, though never so many say the same thing from him,
they must all be in the wrong. Especially in transcribing the Ancients, and
believing their Reports, we ought to be very cautious, since 'twas a common
Practice amongst them to disguise and conceal the Truths they would deliver, in
AEnigmatical and Mythological Representations. Many times there is something of
Truth contained in their Relations, but it is under such Vails, that you will
not discover it, till you have taken them off. And though there are no such Men,
as Ctesias's Cynocephali, and Pygmies; yet there are Apes, and Monkeys, and
Baboons, that afforded him a ground for his Invention.

Now what sort of Monkey these Cynocephali were, I shall not at present
enquire; that they are of the Monkey-kind is evident, because they have Tails:
and Aristotle tells us, that they are bigger and stronger, and therefore I make
them of the Baboon-kind. But not having seen any of them my self, I shall refer
my Reader to the Authors who have wrote about them. It Is sufficient to my
present purpose that they are a sort of Monkeys, and not Men, as formerly
represented.

A Philological Essay Concerning the SATYRS OF THE ANCIENTS.
Of the SATYRS of the Ancients.
TVLPIVS and Bontius indeed think the Orang-Outang to be the Satyr of the
Ancients; but if we enquire into their History, and examine what Opinion the
Ancients had concerning them, we shall find it no less involved in Fables, than
that of the Pygmies; and upon this account several of our Learned Men of late,
have wholly denied them, and look upon all the Stories concerning them to be
only a Fiction of the Poets and Painters, and that there were never any such
Beings in Nature. The Learned Casaubon de Poesi Satyrica, lib. 1. cap. 2.
Casaubon is clearly of this Mind, Quicquid de Satyris legimus (says he) ex
Poetarum Pictorumque fingendi Licentia Originem ducere. Nihil hujus revera in
Rerum Natura existere. So I^ Vossij Comment^d Pompon. Melam. lib. 1. c. 8. p.m.
46.
Isaac Vossius speaking of the AEgipanes tells us, Sane neque in forma hujus
monstri convenient, si tamen monstris accensenda sunt ea, quae sunt mera
Graeculorum Commenta. And the Learned Bocharti Hierozoic. seu de Animal. Sacrae
Scripturae. part. post. lib. 6. cap. 7. p. 829.
Bochartus says, Absit interim ut ex his locis Quisquam colligat, ullos aut
jam exstare, vel unquam extitisse in Rerum Natura Satyros. However, I do not
doubt but to make it plainly appear, that there were such Animals in Africa
which the Ancients called Satyrs. And though they sometimes called them Men, and
for the most part worshipped them as Gods, yet I shall show, that they were
only a sort of Monkeys, and likewise Evince, that the Orang-Outang was not this
sort of Monkey or Satyr of the Ancients.

Having proposed these as the Heads of my ensuing Discourse, it will not be
expected of me to give an Account of ail that has been said on this Argument. I
shall rather apply my self to make out what I have here asserted. And though on
this occasion, it may be, the Poets have Enigmatically represented some Nobler
Secrets of Philosophy, by what they relate under the Fables they have made of
these Satyrs, the Fauni, the Nymphae, Pan, AEgipan, Sylvanus, Silenus, or any
other Name they have given of this sort of Animal; yet I think my self no
farther concerned at present, than to show what might give the first rise to
and occasion of these Inventions: or rather to prove that the Satyrs were
neither Men, nor Demigods, nor Demons; but Monkeys or Baboons, that in Africa
were worshipped as the Gods of the Country; and being so, might give the Poets
the Subject of the Stories which they have forged about them.

The Satyrs therefore are generally represented like Men in the upper Parts,
but with Horns on their Heads; and in their lower Parts or Legs like Goats:
hence they are called Capripedes, or (...), as Herodotus expresses it. And
Pliny (as I shall show) where he describes them as Brutes; and says, they are
sometimes Quadrupeds, sometimes Bipeds, yet tells us, they are Humana Effigy.
Diodorus Siculus Diodorus Siculus Bibliothec. Hist. lib. 1. p.m. 16.
informs us, that when Osiris went into AEthiopia, (...), etc. i.e. Dum in
AEthiopia versatur (Osiris) Gens Satyrorum ei adducitur, quas pilos in lumbis
(Osphye) habere ferunt. Risus enim amator erat Osiris and Musicae Choreisque
gaudebat, etc. Satyri igitur quia ad tripudia, and decantationem Carminum,
omnemque hilaritatem and lusum apti erant, in partem Militiae venerunt. He
makes them likewise the Companions of Bacchus, and for the same reason Diodorus
Siculus ibid. lib. 4. p.m. 213.
, (...) i.e. Ita Satyri ludicris and ad risum compositis gestibus and
actionibus, vitam Dionyso beatam, Gratiisque delibutam, reddunt. And they are
always represented as Jocose and Sportful, but Scurrilous and Lascivious; and
wonderful Things they relate of their Revellings by Night, their Dancing,
Music, and their wanton Frolicks. For thus Pliny Plinij Hist. Not. lib. 5.
cap. 1. p.m. 523.
describing the Parts about the Mountain Atlas in Africa, informs us, Incolarum
neminem interdiu cerni: silere omnia, non alio quam solitudinum horrore: subire
tacitam Religionem animos proprius accedentium, praeterque horrorem elati (sc.
Montis) super nubila, atque in viciniam Lunaris circuli. Eundem noctibus micare
crebris ignibus, AEgipanum, Satvrorumque lascivia impleri, Tibiarum ac Fistulae
Cantu, and Cymbalorum Sonitu strepere. And then adds, Haec celebrati Authors
prodidere. And so Pomp. Mela de situ Orbis, lib. 3. cap. 9. p.m. 63.
Pomponius Mela, Vltra hunc sinum Mons altus (ut Graeci vocant) (...),
perpetuis ignibus flagrat: ultra montem viret Collis longo tractu, longis
littoribus obductus, unde visuntur patentes magis Campi, quam ut prospici
possint, Panum, Satyrorumque. Hinc opinio ea fidem cepit, quod cum in his nihil
culti sit, nullae habitantium Seeds, nulla Vestigia, solitudo in diem Vasta,
and silentium Vastius, nocte crebri ignes micant, and veluti Castra late
jacentia ostenduntur, Crepant Cymbala and Tympana, audiunturque Tibiae Sonantes
majus humanis. Where we may observe that what Pliny calls AEgipanes, Mela calls
here Panes. And the Satyrs being commonly called Fauni, I cannot but think, that
the idle Stories we have about the Fairies, must come from hence: For they
likewise have their Revellings, Dancing, and Music by Night. And as even to
this day, to fright Children, they tell them Stories of Fairies and Hobgoblins,
so the Ancients did use to call any great sudden Fear, as we do now, a Panick
Fear, from this Pan. For as Pausanias in Phocicis.
Pausanias tells us, (...) i. e. Ea nocte Panicus illos incessit terror.
Terrores enim nulla ex causa Ortos ab eo (sc. Pane) immitti aiunt. And so
Euripides in Rhaeso.
Euripides: (...).
Saturnij ( Senis) Panis tremendo flagello ( Ictus) trepidas.
And so Dionysij Halicarnass. lib. 5. cap. 3.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus speaking of the Faunus, says, (...) i. e. Huic enim
Romani Panicos terrores adscribunt, and quaecunque alia Spectra, quae varias
induentia formas in Hominum conspectum veniunt, and Metum ipsis incutiunt, And
Ovid in Phaedra.
Ovid: -- Faunique bicornes
Numine contactas attonuere suo.
How jolly therefore soever and merry the Satyrs may be by night amongst
themselves, with their Dancing and Music: yet they have been frightful to Men
formerly, as the Stories of the Fairies and Hobgoblins are (as I said before)
to Children now; and indeed, the telling Children Stories of this kind, is a
very mischievous Custom; for they are thereby impressed with such Fears, as
perhaps they cannot conquer all their Life time. But the Account that Phurnutus
de Natura Deorum Cap. de Pane, p. m. 70.
Phurnutus gives of these Panick Fears, I think is natural; for he tells us,
(...) i. e. Nihil prohibet quin etiam Panicos tumultus dicamus, qui subito and
sine ratione certa exoriuntur: sic enim interdum armenta and greges terrentur,
dum sonus quidam subitus e Sylva, aut ex Antris aut ex Terrae voraginibus
affertur.

Now Lucretius thinks that all this Music of Pipes, Flutes, Cymbals and Drums,
that is said to be made by the Jollity and Revellings of the Satyrs, Fauni,
Panes, etc. in this dreadful Mountain by Night, is mere Romance and Fiction;
and that it is nothing but the Ecchoing of the whistling boisterous Winds
amongst those hideous Rocks: For speaking of Eccho's, he tells us T. Lucretij
de Rerum Natura, lib. 4. verf. 581.
, Sex etiam, aut septem loca vidi reddere voces
Vnam cum jaceres: ita colles collibus ipsis
Verba repulsantes iterabant dict a refer.
Haec loca Capripedes Satyros, Nymphasque tenere
Finitimi fingunt, and Faunos esse loquuntur;
Quorum noctivago strepitu, Ludoque jocanti
Adfirmant volgo taciturna silentia rumpi,
Chordarumque Sonos fieri, dulceisque querelas,
Tibia quas fundit digitis pulsata canentum:
Et genus Agricolum late sentiscere, cum Pan
Pinea semiferi Capitis velamina quassans,
Vnco saepe labro calamos percurrit hianteis,
Fistula Silvestrem ne cesset fundere Musam.
Caetera de genere hoc monstra, ac Portenta loquuntur,
Ne lo^a deserta ab Divis quoque forte putentur
Sola tenere: ideo jactant miracula dictis
Aut aliqua ratione alia ducuntur, ut omne
Humanum Genus est avidum nimis auricularum.
Which the Ingenious Mr. Creech has thus rendered: -- And I my self have known
Some Rocks and Hills return six words for one:
The dancing words from Hill to Hill rebound,
They all receive, and all restore the sound.
The Vulgar, and the Neighbors think, and tell,
That there the Nymphs, and Fauns, and Satyrs dwell;
And that their wanton sport, their loud delight
Breaks through the quiet silence of the Night:
Their Musick's softest Ayrs fill all the Plains,
And mighty Pan delights the listening Swains;
The Goat-fac'd Pan, whilst Flocks securely feed,
With long-hung lip he blows his Oaten Reed;
The horned, the half-beast God, when brisk and gay
With Pine-leaves crowned, provokes the Swains to play,
Ten thousand such Romants the Vulgar tell,
Perhaps least Men should think the Gods will dwell
In Towns alone, and scorn their Plains and Cell
Or somewhat; for Man credulous and vain
Delights to hear strange things, delights to feign.


Lucretius here attributes the Invention of these Fables to the superstitious
Notions Men had of Deities, and the Itching Ears Mankind generally has for
hearing Novelties and Wonders; and no donbt, the satisfying this Humor put the
Ancients upon inventing most of these Stories. But we may take notice that
Lucretius places together the Satyrs, the Nymphs, the Fauni and Pan; and
generally I observe, where mention is made of them, several are joined
together: As Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 6. verse. 392.
Ovid, Illum Ruricolae, Sylvarum Numina, Fauni
Et Satyri fratres, and tunc quoque clarus Olympus
Et Nymphae flerunt.
The Fauni therefore and Satyrs I find are near akin. And Ovid. Metamorph. lib.
14. verse. 637.
Ovid in another place says, Quid non and Satyri Saltatibus apta juventus
Fecere, and Pinu praecincti Cornua Panes.
Silvanusque suis semper juvenilior annis.
And elsewhere he tells us Ovid. ^.1. Fastorum.
, Panes and in Venerem Satyrorum prona juventus. The Satyrs therefore and Fauni
seem to be young ones, and the elder, the Panes and Silvani, according to that
of Virgil. Georg. 1. 2. verse. 494.
Virgil, -- Deos qui novit agrestes
Panaque, Silvanumque Senem Nymphasque Sorores.
And Plutarch. in Parallelis.
Plutarch tells us that what the Greeks called AEgipan, the Romans called
Silvanus. And Pausan. in Attic. p.m. 21.
Pausanias expressly tells us, that when the Satyrs grow old, they are called
Sileni: (...). And by Virgil's Expression Nymphasque Sorores, it is very
evident, that the Nymphs likewise were of this Family, and nearly related. Ovid
Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 1. verse. 193.
joins them together. Sunt mihi Semidei, sunt Rustica Numina Nymphae,
Faunique, Satyrique, and monticulae Silvani.


Now what difference there is amongst all these, unless as to their Age and
Sex, I will not undertake at present to determine. The Poets and the Painters
of old, if we nicely enquire into them, have been pleased, as their fancy
governed them, to make, or not make a distinction between them. Those that have
a mind to satisfy their Curiosity farther in this Matter, may consult
Salmasius, Bochart, Gerard, and Isaac Vossius, and several others, who have
largely wrote about them. I am apt to think that Pan, AEgipan, Silvanus and
Silenus, were all the same; as were the Satyri and the Fauni; only these were
younger than the former; and the Nymphs were the Females of the Kind. But it is
sufficient to^ my business, if I make it appear, notwithstanding all this, that
the Satyrs were not Men, nor Demigods, nor Demons, but only Brutes of the
Monkeykind; which is plain enough even from the Ancients, who have invented so
many Fables about them.

For Herodot. in Melpomene, p.m. 229.
Herodotus tells us, and he is apt enough oftetimes to be overcredulous, (...)
for they are neither Men, nor have they such Feet. Satyri de hominibus nihil
aliud praeferunt quam figuram, says Solinus Poly^^st. cap. 34.
Solinus. Satyrus praeter Effigiem nihil humani, says P^mp. Mela de situ
Orbis, lib. 1. cap. 8. p. 11.
Mela. Pliny gives us a larger description of them; Sunt and Satyri ( faith
Plinij Hist. Not. lib. 7. cap. 2.
he) subsolanis Indorum montibus (Catharcludorum dicitur Regio)
perniciosissimum Animal: Cum Quadrupedes tum rect^ incedentes, humana effigy,
propter velocitatem, nisi Senes aut aegri, non capiuntur. Choromandarum Geniem
vocat Tauron, Silvestrem, sine voce, stridoris horrendi, hirtis Corporibus,
oculis glaucis, dentibus caninis. You may here perceive they have something of
the shape of Men, but cannot speak, they are hairy, they go sometimes upon all
four, sometimes erect, they have Dogs Teeth, they are wild mischievous Animals.
But AElian is a little more express: Finitimos Indiae montes ( says AE^^^n.
Hist. Animal. lib. 16. cap. 21.
he) transmittenti, ad intimum latus densissimas convalles videri aiunt, and
Corudam locum nominari: ubi Bestiae Satyrorum similitudinem formamque gerentes,
and toto Corpore hirsutae, versantur: atque Equina Cauda praeditae dicuntur.
Eae quum non a venatorilus agitantur, in opacis and spissis Sylvis solent ex
frondibus (and fructibus) vivere. Quum autem Venantium strepitum sentiunt, and
Canum latratus exaudiunt, in Montium vertices incredibili celeritate excurrunt:
nam per montes iter consicere assuetae sunt. Contra eos qui se insequuntur
pugnant, de summis montibus saxa devolventes, quorum impetu saepe multi
deprehensi pereunt. Itaque difficillime capiuntur: Et ex iis nonnullae, sed
aegerrime tandem, aut aegrotantes nimirum, aut gravidae c^mprehenduntur. Illae
quidem propter morbum; hae vero ob gravitatem. Captae autem ad Prasios
deferuntur. AElian here tells us that they have Tails like Horses, therefore
they must be of the Monkey or Baboon kind. And Pausanias, who made it his
Business to enquire more particularly about them, informs us they have such
Tails, but Cannot speak, but are very Lascivious and Lustful, as they are
observed to be to this day. I will give you Pausanias's words; (...) ( says
Pausanias in Atticis, p.m. 21.
he) (...). Which Gesner. de Animal. p. 855.
Conrad. Gesner. I find has thus translated; Caeterum de Satyris, quinam sint,
cum plura quam alij scire laborem, cum multis ea de re sum collocutus: Dixit
autem Euphemus Car, se quum in Italiam navigaret cursu esse excussum vi
ventorum, and ad mare extimum, quod navigari non item soleat portatum. Insulas
autem ibi multas esse ac desertas, and viris agrestibus incoli. Ad alias vero
aiebat nautas deflectere recusasse, quod antea quoque co appulsi, Incolarum
Inhumanitatem essent experti. Tempestatis denique violentia co pervenisse.
Insulas eas a Nautis vocari Satyrias. Incolas inesse rubicundos, and caudas imo
dorso habere, Equinis non multo minores. Hos, ubi senserant, ad navigium
accurrisse, nullamque vocem edidisse, sed mulieribus Navi una advectis manus
injecisse. Nautas vero timore correptos, Barbaram Mulierem in Insulam tandem
Projecisse. Eam Satyros, non solum qua part consuetudo permittat, verum etiam
toto corpore libidinose violasse, referebat.

It appears therefore plainly that the Satyrs have Tails. But that there might
not the least Scruple remain what sort of Animals these Satyrs were, I shall
produce a Passage out of Philostorgij Hist. Ecclesiastic. lib. 3. cap. 11. p.
41.
Philostorgius which is very express, and comes fully up to our Business: For
he tells us, (...) (sc. Satyrus) (...). i.e. That a Satyr is a sort of Ape with
a red face, swift of motion, and having a Tail. Where you may observe that
Philostorgius and Pausanias both agree, that they have a red Face, which may be
some mark, by which to know them again. And Galen. Administr. Anat. lib. 4.
cap. 3. p.m. 94.
Galen has given us another, viz. that their Rostrum or Chin is longer than an
Apes, but not so long as that of the Cynocephalus, as appears in that Passage I
have already quoted Vid. Anat. of the Orang-Outang, page 94.
, viz. That a Man in proportion to his Body has the shortest Chin of any
Animal; next to a Man, an Ape; then the Lynx and Satyrs; and after these the
Cynocephali. Now none of these Marks agree to the Orang-Outang; for it had no
Tail, it had not a red Face, and his Chin was shorter than any other sort of
Apes. So that Bontius was mistaken in calling it a Satyr. And Tulpius was too
hasty in laying down this Conclusion, In summa (says Nic. Tulpij Observe. Med.
lib. 4. cap. 56. p.m. 274.
he) vel Nullus est in Rerum Natura Satyrus: aut si quis est, erit proculdubio
illud Animal, quod in Tabella hic a nobis depictum. Had Tulpius a mind to have
made his Orang-Outang a Satyr, he should not have compared him to a Courtier,
nor instanced in such Niceties as he observes, of his drinking, and going to
bed: For, Efferatior Cynocephalis Natura, sicut Satyris, says Pliny Not. Hist.
lib. 8. cap. 54. p. 243.
Pliny. And in another Place he tells us, Satyris praeter figuram nihil moris
humani Plinj ibid. lib. 5. cap. 8. p.m. 549.
. But the Orang-Outang had very tender Passions, and was very gentle and
loving. Another very remarkable difference that I find between the Satyrs and
the Orang-Outang, is, that the Satyrs have Pouches in their Chops as Monkeys
have; but the Orang-Outang, as I have shown in the Anatomy, had none. Condit
(says Plinij Not. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 72. p.m. 466.
Pliny) in Thesauros Maxillarum Cibum Sphingiorum and Satyrorum genus: mox inde
sensim ad mandendum, manibus expromit: and quod formicis in annum solenne est,
his in dies vel horas. The Orang-Outang therefore cannot be the Satyrs of the
Ancients, as Tulpius, and Bontius, and Dapperimagined.

By what has been said, I think it fully appears that there were such Animals
as the Ancients called Satyrs; and that they were a sort of Monkeys or Apes
with Tails: And this Account that I have given of them, will very well make out
those Texts in Isaih; as Chapter 13. verse 21. But wild Beasts of the Desert
shall lie there, and their Hauses shall be full of doleful Creatures, and Owls
shall dwell there, and Satyrs shall dance there. And Chapter 34. verse. 14. The
wild Beasts of the Desert shall also meet with the wild Beasts of the Island;
and the Satyr shall cry to his Fellow; the Schrich-Owl also shall rest there,
and find for her self a place of rest. For since the Text calls them wild
Beasts, I see no reason why we should fancy the Satyrs here to be Demons, as
the Learned Bochartus and others seem to do. I agree with Bochart, that what is
told us in the Life of St. Paul the Hermit by St. Jerome, and in that of St.
Anthony by St. Anastasius of a Satyr meeting St. Anthony in the Desert, and
discoursing with him, may be fabulous or a Delusion. Non assentior (says
Bochart. Hierozoic. part. poster. lib. 6. cap. 7. p. 829.
Bochartus) narrationi Magni Scriptoris, in qua Satyrus introducitur Antonium
in Eremo rogans, ut prose communem Deum deprecetur, tanquam Salutis in Christo
particeps futurus. Non alios servat Christus, quam quos assumpsit. At non
assumpsit Angelos, multo minus Daemones aut Satyros qui nusquam sunt, sed semen
Abrahae. And though St. Jerome, to confirm this Relation, adds, That in
Constantine's time one of these Monsters was seen alive at Alexandria in
Egypt, and after it is Death, it is Carcass was embalmed and sent to Antioch for
the Emperor to see it; Yet I shall plainly prove that this Satyr was nothing
else but that sort of Monkey I am now discoursing about.

This Story I find often mentioned; but Philostorg. Hist. Ecclesiastic. lib. 3.
cap. 11.
Philostorgius gives us the most particular Account of it, and therefore I
shall insert his own words; (...). i.e. This Ape-form is mixed with other
Species of Animls; and this is plain, serveral being sent over to us; as that
which is called Pan, which in its Head had a Goat's face and Goat's horns, from
it is Loins downwards Goat's Legs; but in it is Belly, Breasts, and Hands was a
pure Ape. Such an one the King of India sent to Constantius. This Animal lived
for some time, and was carried about enclosed in a Cage, being very wild. When
it died, those that looked after it, having embalmed it to make a show of this
unusual sight, sent it to Constantinople. Now I am apt to believe the ancient
Greeks had seen this Animal, and being surprised at the strangeness of the
sight, fancied it to be a God; it being usual for them to make a God of any
thing that they admired or wondered at: as they did the Satyr.

It Is evident therefore by this Relation, that the Satyr is of the Ape or
Monkey-kind: For (...) here is generical, and includes both. But there being
several Species of them, they received a denomination according to the
resemblance they had to other Animals; as in Philostorgius are mentioned
before, the Leontopithecus, the Arctopithecus, the Cynocephalus and
Aegopithecus, which last seems to be our Satyr, from the resemblace it has in
it is Head and Legs to a Goat. That their Legs and Face are like a Goat's, is
easy enough to be believed: but the Horns that they clap upon his Head, seem
to me as an addition of the Poets, or the Painters, or both. But what gave a
foundation to this Invention, possibly may be the largeness of their Ears
standing off from their Head, and which are very remarkable. And this Phurnutus
Phurnutus de Not. De^rum. cap. de Pane. P.m. 71.
gives as the reason of it. Horace Horace Odarum, Lib. 2. Ode 19.
takes notice of their Ears, but ill describes them in making them sharp
pointed, whereas they are round. -- and aures
Capripedum Satyrorum acutas.


But by this Account it likewise appears, that Pan was a Name of this sort of
Monkey; and Philostorgius's Remark at the Conclusion of this Passage, I think
is very just: for it is certain that this Animal was Worshipped in India as a
Deity, as a Dog was by the Egyptians; and 'twas Death for any Body to kill one
of them: For thus says Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth. Hist. l. 20. p.m. 793.
Diodorus Siculus, (...). i.e. Easdem enim domus Simiae quas Homines
frequentant; and pro Diis habentur ap^^illos, ut apud AEgyptios Canes; paratos
etiam in Cellis penariis cibos, quando libet, ^emine prohibente, hae bestiae
sumunt, nominaque ut plurimum a Simiis, ut apud nos a Diis, Parents Liberis
suis imponunt. Qui Animal hoc interfe^erint, in eos, ut nefariae Impietatis
reos, supplicio capitis animadvertitur. Ideo apud nonnullos Proverbij vicem
obtinuit, quod in magnifice se efferentes dicitur; Simiae Cruorem bibisti. And
in another place Diodor. Sicul. Ibid. l. 1. p.m. 16.
Diodorus tells us, that Pan was in the greatest Veneration amongst the
Egyptians, and his Statue was in every Temple. And Juven. Satyr. 15. v. 4.
Juvenal remarks, Effigies Sacri nitet aurea Cercopitheci.

The Superstition of worshipping this Animal obtained not only amongst the
Ancients, but there are Instances likewise of a later date, and what J.
Linschoten apud ^heod^de By Indiae Orient. part. 2. cap. 46. p.m. 111.
Johannes Linschoten relates, is very remarkable. How that in the Year 1554.
the Portuguese having taken the Island of Ceylon, they proposed to rob a Temple
on the top of Adam's Pike; but they found nothing there, but a little Cabinet
adorned with Gold and Jewels, in which was kept the Tooth of an Ape, which they
took away, to the great grief of the Kings of that Place; who sent Ambassadors
to the Portuguese, and offered them Seventy thousand Ducats for the Tooth;
which the Portuguese were willing enough to take, but were distwaded from it by
their Bishop Gaspar, who told them, that it was a Crime, thus to encourage the
Idolatry of the Indians; whereupon he burnt the Tooth, and slung the Ashes into
the River. Joh. Eusebius. Nierembergius J. Eus. Nieremberg. Hist. Not. l. 9. cap.
46. p. 180.
has the same Story, but varies in the Account of some Particulars. And Joh.
Petrus Maffeius Joh. Pet. Maffeij Hist. Indic. lib. 1. p.m. 36.
gives us a Relation of one of their Temples, which for Magnificence, might vie
with any at Rome: His words are these; Sane fanum est Simiae dicatum: Cujus
duntaxat Pecori in victimarum usum custodiendo, Porticus miram in longitudinem
excurrit, Columnarum Septingentarum e Marmore, tantae magnitudinis, ut Agrippae
Columnas, quae in celeberrimo quondam omnium Deorum Templo Romae visuntur, sine
dubio adaequent. Now these Animals being worshipped by the Indians as Gods,
it is natural to believe (as Lucretius suggests) that they would invent and
relate prodigious things concerning them; and no doubt this gave the occasion
to the Poets and Historians of making such fabulous Representations of them.
How far the latter might be concerned in the addition of Horns to the Satyrs
Heads, I shall not at present enquire: I call it an Addition, because there is
no Account from any credible Author, that there were ever observed any of the
Ape-kind to have Horns. Possibly some ancient Statues or Paintings might give
some light into this matter: for ^he ancient Statuaries and Painters were
curious in representing them; and Pliny recommends, as excellent in this kind,
the Satyr of Mylo, of Lucippus, Antiphalus, Protogenes, Ariston, and
Nicomachus, as Pieces admired in those days.

Albertus Magnus Albert. Magnus de Animalib. lib. 22. p.m. 223. Pilosus est
Animal Compositum ex homine superious, and Capra inferius; sed Cornua habet in
front; and est de genere Simiarum; sed multum monstruosum; and aliquotiens
incedit erectum, and efficitur d^mitum. Hoc asserunt in Disertis habitare
AEthiopiae; and aliquotiens captum and in Alexandriam deductum, and mortuum
sale infusum and in Constantinopolin delatum.
who was happier in guessing, than in proving or describing what he meant;
tells us indeed, that the Satyr (whom he calls Pilosus) was of the Ape-kind;
but he makes such an odd Composition of him, that one would take it to be
rather a Chimaera, than a real Being: You may see his words in the Citations.

Of the SPHINGES of the Ancients.
WE come now in the last place to discourse of the Sphinges of the Ancients,
where I shall not relate all that is said of them; nor concern my self with the
Mythology or Interpretation of the several Fables that have been invented about
them; but I propose rather to show, that there were indeed such Animals which
the Ancients called Sphinges; and that they were not Men, but Brutes; and that
they were of the Ape or Monkey-kind.

If we consult the fabulous Descriptions that are given of the Sphinx, we shall
find it a very monstrous Composition. Apollodorus Apoll^dori Bibliothec. l. 3.
c. 5. 8. p.m. 170.
tells us, (...). That Sphinx was the daughter of Echidna and Typho, she had
the face of a Woman, the Breast, Feet, and Tail of a Lion, and the Wings of a
Bird. And Ausonius in Grypho Ternarij.
Ansonius, Terruit Aoniam, Volucris, Leo, Virgo triformis
Sphinx, volucris pennis, pedibus fera, front Puella.
But as their Fancies governed them, so they made their description. Clearchus
(as I find him quoted in Natalis Comes Mytholog. l. 9. c. 18.
Natalis Comes) has outdone them all; At Clearchus (says he) Caput and Manus
Puellae, Corpus Canis, vocem Hominis, Candam Draconis, Leonis ungues, Alas
Avis, illam habuisse scripsit. Palaephatus Palephatus de incredibilibus
Historiis Cap. de Sphinge. p.m. 14.
is somewhat different in his Account, where he tells us, (...) i. e. They say
that the Cadmean Sphynx was a wild Beast, having the Body of a Dog, the Head
and Face of a Virgin, the Wings of a Bird, and the Voice of a Man. But for the
most part they make the Sphinx Biformis with a Maiden's Face and Lion's Feet;
as the Scholiast upon Eurip. in Phaenissis.
Euripides gives it, (...). So the Scholiast upon Aristophan. in Ra^is.
Aristophanes, (...) And Euripides himself, as he is quoted by AElian. de
Animal. l. 12. c. 7.
AElian, makes her to have the Tail and Feet of a Lion, in that Verse, (...)
Caudam remulcens ad Leoninos pedes.
Where we may observe that AElian tells us here that the Egyptian Statuaries,
and the Theban Fables, made the Sphinx to be only Biformis: Biformem nobis
conantur representare, ipsam ex Corpore Virginis and Leonis cum gravitate
compositam architect antes, as Gesner there translates him: But the Greeks
represented the Sphynx with wings; for as AElian. de Animal. l. 12. cap. 38.
AElian in another place tells us, Sphingem quicunque vel Picturae vel
Plasticae operam dant, fingere alatam solent.

But our chief Business is to enquire, how Nature has formed them; and not how
the Poets, Painters, or Statuaries have, according to the Luxuriancy of their
Fancy, feigned or figured them; to show what they really are in themselves,
and not what Hieroglyphically the Ancients might intend or understand by them;
and we shall find, that they are only a sort of Ape or Monkey, that is bred in
AEthiopia and amongst the Troglodytes, of a comely Face, with long Breasts,
thence up to their Neck not so hairy as on the rest of their Body; and are of a
mild and gentle Nature. For thus Plinij Hist. Not. lib. 8. cap. 21. p.m. 168.
Pliny, Lyncas vulgo frequentes, and Sphinges, fusco Pilo, mammis in Pectore
geminis AEthiopia generat. And so Solinus Polyhist. cap. 27. p.m. 39.
Solinus, Inter Simias habentur and Sphinges, villosae comis (Salmasius reads
it villosae omnes) mammis prominulis ac profundis, dociles ad feritatis
obli^^ionem. AElian AElian. de Animal. lib. 16. cap. 15.
places them amongst the wild Beasts of India, when he tells us, Naturali
quodam Ingenio and Prudentia valent etiam apud nos Anima^^^, non totidem tamen,
quot sunt in India: illic enim hujusmodi sunt, Elephantus, Psittacus, Sphinges
and nuncupati Satyri, and Indica Formica. And Artemidorus in Strabo Geograph.
lib. 16. p. 533.
Strabo tells us, that the Sphinges, Cynocephali and Cepi are bred amongst the
Troglodytes. Agatharchides Agatharchides apud Photij Biblioth. p.m. 1362. cap.
38.
confirms the same, and gives us this Account of them; (...). i.e. The
Sphinges, Cynocephali and Cepi are sent to Alexandria from the Country of the
Troglodytes and AEthiopia. The Sphinges are like to what they are painted, only
they are all hairy, and mild and gentle in their Nature: they have a great deal
of Cunning, and a Method of Learning what they attain to, that one would wonder
at their aptness to any thing. Diodorus Siculus Diodorus Siculus Biblioth. lib.
3. p.m. 167.
gives us much the same Relation, and it is likely Agatharchides borrowed his
from him: for he tells us, (...). i. e. Sphinges circa Troglodyticam and
AEthiopiam existunt, forma his non absimiles, quae Art Pictorum exhibentur,
nisi quod hirsutia tantummodo differunt. Placidi illis sunt Animi, and versuti,
artisque quae compendio tradi solet, admodum capaces. But Philostorgius
Philostorgius Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 3. c. 11. p. 41.
is so particular in his Description, and he is the more to be credited,
because he declares he had seen them himself, that I think I need no more
Authorities to prove what I have here laid down, that these Sphinges were only
a sort of Ape or Monkey. I will therefore give you his own words, which are
these; (...). i. e. A Sphinx is a sort of Ape (I shall write what I saw my
self) all the rest of whose Body is ^air(...)ike other Apes. But it is Sternum
or Breast is smooth without hair up (...) the ^hroat. It has Mammae or Breasts
like a Woman; little reddish Pi(...)les like Millet Seeds, running round that
part of the Body that is bare; very prettily suiting with the Flesh color in
the middle. It Is Face is roundish, and resembles a Woman's. It Is Voice is very
much like the Humane, only it is not articulate, but praecipitate; and like one
that speaks unintelligibly through Anger and Indignation. When it is incensed,
it is Voice is deeper. This Animal is very wild, and crafty, and not easily
tamed. And Pierius, as I find him quoted by Phil. Camerarij Operae subcisivae
siv^ Meditat. Hist. Cent. 1. Cap. 71. p. m. 325.
Philip Camerarius, gives us much the same description of one he saw at Verona.
Harum ego unam (faith he) Veronae quum effem vidi; Mammis illi and Glabris and
Candidis, a Pectore propendentibus. Circumducebat eam circulator quidam Gallus,
ex ignotis antea Insulis recens advectam. And a little after adds, Ipsa vero
Sphinx toto erat pectore glabello, facie and auribus humanis proprioribus,
dorso hispido supra modum, fusco and oblongo Pilo, eoque densissimo.

What has been said, I think fully makes out, that the Sphinx is not a mere
Figment of the Poets, but an Animal bred in Africa, of the Ape or Monkey-kind.
It Is different from our Orang-Outang in the color of it is Hair; in the
roundness and comeliness of it is Face; in it is Breasts, being pendulous and
long; and the red Pimples it has on the naked part of it is Body. Pliny tells
us (as I have elsewhere remarked) that the Sphinges have Pouches in their Chops
as Satyrs and Monkeys have; and the Poets describing them with a Lion's Tail,
make me apt to think, that they are of the Monkey-kind.

FINIS.



